                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                   Report No.: ISDSC1348

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Sep-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Tajikistan                        Project ID:       P133327
                            Project Name:       TAJIKISTAN SECOND PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT FOR SUSTAINABLE
                                                AGRICULTURE AND WATER RESOURCES MANAGEMENT PROJECT
                                                (P133327)
                            Task Team           Bobojon Yatimov
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       18-Sep-2012                           Estimated         15-Nov-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: ECSS1                                  Lending           Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector:             Irrigation and drainage (89%), Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and
                                                forestry (8%), Public administration- Other social se rvices (3%)
                            Theme:              Rural services and infrastructure (75%), Rural policies and institutions (19%),
                                                Improving labor markets (3%), Social safety nets (3% )
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                               Amount
                              Borrower                                                                         0.00
                              Global Agriculture and Food Security Program                                    26.79
                              IDA reallocated as a grant                                                      18.00
                              Total                                                                           44.79
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objectives are to (i) provide income transfers to food insecure people
                           through the rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage infrastructure, (ii) increase crop production in
                           response to improved irrigation and drainage infrastructure, and (iii) support the development of
                           improved policies and institutions for water resource management, as a means to improve food
                           availability and food access for low-income people in poor rural areas supported by the project.
                           C. Project Description
                         The repeater project will scale up a $10.1 million emergency food security project (Public
                         Employment for Sustainable Agriculture and Water Management) financed by the European Union
                         and implemented by the World Bank during 2010-2011. A public works program to renovate
Public Disclosure Copy




                         drainage and irrigation infrastructure was the major focus of this project, providing temporary
                         employment to food insecure households in the short-term and increased crop production in the
                         medium-term. Some 402,000 man.days of work were created, which provided around 10,600
                         beneficiaries with an average income of 1176 TJS/person (approx. $250). The infrastructure
                         renovated included 1820 km of irrigation canals, 317 km of collector and drainage canals and the
                         installation of 305 water outlet gates. Approximately 43,300 households benefited from the
                         combined impact of income transfers and improved access to irrigation over 44,300 ha. The project
                         also contributed to the reform of water resource management policies, and the introduction of river
                         basin management as the basis for sustainable management of Tajikistan's water resources. It was
                         implemented in 5 districts of Khatlon, the poorest region of Tajikistan. The Khatlon region has been
                         selected as the project area for two major reasons. First, evidence from surveys consistently show
                         that this is the poorest and most food insecure region in Tajikistan. Second, the region has a high
                         agricultural potential that remains unrealized due in part to the deteriorating irrigation infrastructure.

                         The proposed financing will address Khatlon's pressing needs for rural employment and
                         rehabilitation of its irrigation systems. According to a joint assessment of food security in Tajikistan
                         carried out by WFP, WHO and DFID (2009), approximately 1.4 million people in Khatlon were
                         identified as food insecure with 390,000 of them considered to be "severely" food insecure.
                         Consequently, the IDA and GAFSP financing would enable irrigation improvements to be extended
                         to 12 additional districts of Khatlon. In addition to the long-term benefits provided by the project on
                         irrigation, temporary employment will be provided to around 30%-40% poor rural households in the
                         area. The repeater project has the same general design as the original project.

                         Component I: Public Works and Rehabilitation of Irrigation and Drainage Infrastructure (total Bank
                         funding of USD 34.7 million, from USD 22.2 million GAFSP funds and USD 12.5 million IDA
Public Disclosure Copy




                         funds).

                         Sub-component Ia: Income Transfers to Food Insecure Households through Public Works (GAFSP
                         contribution of USD 8.05 million and IDA contribution USD 2.01 million). Food insecure people
                         from the project districts will be employed for manual cleaning of secondary and tertiary irrigation
                         canals. Expenditure will include payments to beneficiaries, employer contributions to beneficiary
                         social security taxes, social mobilization and labor force administration costs, and the procurement of
                         low-cost tools for manual labor.

                         Sub-component Ib: Mechanized and Other Works (GAFSP contribution of USD 11.15 million and
                         IDA contribution USD 10.15 million). In addition to manual works, rehabilitation will require: the
                         rental and purchase of machinery (excavators, bulldozers and closed drain flushing equipment), the
                         purchase and installation of irrigation gates, irrigation canal and structure repair works, pipeline
                         network repairs and strategic pump station and vertical drainage well repairs.

                         Sub-component Ic: Flood Channel Emergency Works (GAFSP contribution of USD 3.00 million and
                         IDA contribution USD 0.33 million). The project will finance the emergency restoration of a flood
                         channel that traverses and protects the city of Kulyab.

                         Component II: Technical Assistance to Support Policy and Institutional Reform for Water Resource
                         Management (total Bank funding of USD 8.06 million, of which USD 3.2 million GAFSP funds and
                         USD 4.86 million IDA funds). This component will finance technical assistance to the MAWRM/
                         MIWR and other relevant institutions to support the reform of water resource management. Sub-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         components comprise:

                         Sub-component IIa: National-level Policy, Legislative and Institutional Formulation (GAFSP
                         contribution of USD 0.73 million and IDA contribution USD 1.6 million). The project will assist the
                         GoT to (i) further develop the legal basis for integrated water resource management and water sector
                         reform, (ii) transform the MAWRM into a Ministry for Integrated Water Resources (MIWR), (iii)
                         prepare a National IWRM strategy to identify priorities for improving water resource management in
                         Tajikistan, and (iv) establish a Water Resources Information Center.

                         Sub-component IIb: River Basin Planning (GAFSP contribution of USD 0.5 million and IDA
                         contribution USD 0.57 million). The project will assist the GoT to implement river basin
                         management in the Kafernigan river basin.

                         Sub-component IIc: Develop and Strengthen Irrigation and Drainage Institutions (GAFSP
                         contribution of USD 1.97 million and IDA contribution USD 2.69 million). The project will assist
                         the GoT to (i) build independent, financially autonomous irrigation and drainage service providers
                         responsible for the management of off-farm hydraulic assets and for water delivery to water user
                         associations; (ii) support the transformation of existing region and district level institutions into the
                         new institutional framework; and (iii) establish and strengthen water user associations.

                         Component III: Project Implementation. (Total Bank funding of USD 2.02 million, of which USD
                         1.38 million GAFSP funds and USD 0.64 million IDA funds). A project management unit (PMU) to
                         be managed under the World Bank financed Ferghana Valley Water Resource Management project
                         will be the main implementation agency. It will be responsible for: implementation and coordination,
                         financial management and procurement, communication and awareness programs, environmental
                         management and safeguards, and monitoring and evaluation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the                safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented in 10 selected districts of Khatlon region and in 2 districts of DRS,
                         which are located in the south and southwest part of the country and have a territory of more than 52
                         thousand square km. It covers three agro-climatic areas  Vakhsh, Kulyab and Hissar, which are
                         characterized by high temperatures and long-term frost-free periods. Together, the population of
                         Khatlon region and DRS is about 4.3 million people, which is about two-thirds of the country's
                         population. The vast majority of its residents live in rural areas, about 3.7 million people versus
                         about 695,000 urban settlers. Due to deforestation, improper irrigation, and excessive use of
                         agricultural lands combined with unregulated chemical inputs, the region's land resources are
                         affected by salinization, wind/water erosion and water logging. Most of the irrigation and drainage
                         infrastructure is in danger of collapse. The selected districts are located in three river sub-basins: (a)
                         Vaksh Sub-Basin: Yovon, Khuroson, Jomi, Rumi, Bokhtar, Jilikul; (b) Pyanj Sub-Basin: Vose,
                         Hamadoni, Pyanj; and (c) Kafernigan Sub-Basin: Nosiri Khusrav, Rudaki and Hissar.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The overall management responsibility for the project will rest with the Ministry of Amelioration and
                         Water Resources Management (MAWRM) and the Administration of Khatlon Oblast. The Ferghana
                         Water Resource Management Project Management Unit (PMU) will be the leading operational
                           institution for the implementation of the proposed project and carry out all project implementation in
                           accordance with the Operations Manual (OM). The PMU also will ensure that the EMP provisions
                           are fully integrated into implementation of the project, including monitoring and reporting required
Public Disclosure Copy




                           by the World Bank. Proper implementation of the EMP provisions and field monitoring are the main
                           responsibilities of the CPU at the regional level. Contractors will be responsible for implementation
                           of the rehabilitation works in accordance with environmental requirements specified in the bidding
                           documents and the EMP. PCU will work closely with CEP in implementing the EMPs. The existing
                           PMU has previous experience in dealing with safeguards issues as it implemented several WB
                           projects, including the first PAMP. Under PAMP, the WB supervision missions of May and
                           November 2011 found EMP implementation to be satisfactory.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Arcadii Capcelea (ECSS3)
                           Lola Ibragimova (ECSS4)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              This OP is triggered as the project activities
                           BP 4.01                                              (small-scale earth moving, concrete works,
                                                                                cleaning up existing drainage channel
                                                                                structures; rehabilitation/replacement of pumps
                                                                                as well as rehabilitation of pumping stations and
                                                                                of a flood channel in Kulyab city), might
                                                                                generate some environmental impacts: water
                                                                                logging and salinization; soil erosion; dumping
                                                                                of excavated sediments and other materials from
                                                                                irrigation and drainage canals, structures; etc.
                                                                                To address these issues, the borrower will
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                update the Generic Environmental Management
                                                                                Plan for the initial project and based on it, will
                                                                                prepare for each selected irrigation scheme a
                                                                                site-specific EMP, and in accordance with WB
                                                                                and national EA rules and procedures, will
                                                                                disclose and publicly consult in the participating
                                                                                rayons. For each pump station to be
                                                                                rehabilitated as well as for rehabilitation of the
                                                                                Kulyab city flood channel, the client will
                                                                                prepare Checklist EMPs. These EMPs will be
                                                                                used for project implementation.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No               No. As the proposed activities will be located on
                                                                                the existing irrigation areas, none of them will
                                                                                have impacts on protected areas or important
                                                                                nature habitats.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No               No. The project activities will be implemented
                                                                                on irrigation areas with no impacts on forests.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09             No               No. The project activities will not support
                                                                                purchasing and/or usage of pesticides. Secondly,
                                                                 based on previous experience the improved
                                                                 irrigation infrastructure will not lead to changes
                                                                 in the in the crops production which would
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 require usage of more pesticides. The main crop
                                                                 will remain cotton with a limited application of
                                                                 pesticides due to their high costs.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    No. As the proposed activities will be located on
                         BP 4.11                                 the existing irrigation areas, none of them will
                                                                 have impacts on physical cultural resources.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No    N/A

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No    No. The policy is not triggered because: (i)
                         4.12                                    rehabilitation works will be done on existing
                                                                 irrigation/drainage canals and collectors; (ii)
                                                                 rehabilitation works related to upgrade of the
                                                                 pumping station buildings including
                                                                 replacement of pump, when necessary, will be
                                                                 done only on the footprints of existing facilities.
                                                                 The will be no civil works related to
                                                                 construction of new pumping stations. In order
                                                                 the avoid any tree cutting during rehabilitation
                                                                 works, while preparing site specific EMP, the
                                                                 borrower will analyze this issue and in such
                                                                 cases those canals/collectors will be excluded
                                                                 from the project activities. Similarly to the
                                                                 practice of the original project, tree cutting
                                                                 along the canals will be avoided.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No    No
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Projects on International         Yes   The project area covers irrigation network
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                    which draws water from the Amu Darya River
                                                                 through Tajikistan's territory and then flows
                                                                 into the Aral Sea. Thus the project triggers OP
                                                                 7.50. At the same time, the proposed
                                                                 investments under the project are only for
                                                                 renovation of irrigation canals and
                                                                 improvements of drainage infrastructure along
                                                                 with the purchasing agricultural machinery,
                                                                 which are not expected to change the volume of
                                                                 extraction/discharge water or quality of water of
                                                                 these rivers, but rather will lead to more
                                                                 effective irrigation and drainage of the water.
                                                                 Under the first PAMP, an exception to the
                                                                 notification requirement under Paragraph 7(a) of
                                                                 OP 7.50 was granted. Such exception will be
                                                                 also requested under PAMP II.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             N/A
                                 7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 13-Sep-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The borrower has already disclosed the updated GEMP and organized a public consultation with
                                      participation of major stakeholders and interested parties in Dushanbe on August 30, 2012.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Bobojon Yatimov

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 11-Sep-2012
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Dina Umali-Deininger (SM)                                                                                            Date: 12-Sep-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
