                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA1398
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Sep-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Sierra Leone                       Project ID:   P126180
                            Project Name:     Sierra Leone Energy Access Project - Sierra Leone Infrastructure Development
                                              Fund (P126180)
                            Task Team         Elvira Morella
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       11-Sep-2012                          Estimated   13-Dec-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: AFTG2                                 Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector:         General energy sector (100%)
                            Theme:          Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                               Financing Source                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                    0.00
                              Sierra Leone Infrastructure Trust Fund                                     16.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Total                                                                      16.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective are to: : (i) reduce losses in electricity supply in Freetown
                           Capital Western Area; (ii) improve commercial performance of the National Power Authority; and
                           (iii) increase access to electricity in selected rural areas.
                            3. Project Description
                           The Project will consist of three major components:

                           Component I: Rehabilitation of Primary Distribution Network, Loss Reduction and Improvement of
                           NPA's Operational and Commercial Performance. This component envisages multiple investment
                           and technical assistance activities. Part of investments will focus on the rehabilitation of key
                           components of the primary distribution network (33/11kV) in Freetown area, including overhead


                                                                       Page 1 of 7
                         lines and substations, raising its transfer capacity by approximately 8MW and contributing
                         significantly to raise system stability, reliability and quality of supply. In addition, the Project will
                         finance supply and installation of approximately 20,000 pre-paid meters as well as an appropriate
Public Disclosure Copy




                         vending and control system to replace the current aging system. Since NPA currently has no means
                         of precisely locating high loss areas in the network, the Project will also finance supply and
                         installation of a statistical metering and data management system. Finally, an appropriate business
                         information system will be installed to replace manual systems and improve utility management,
                         particularly in the financial, commercial and logistics areas. Investments in each area will be
                         complemented with extensive technical assistance to ensure optimal application of the investment
                         support. Additional technical assistance will focus on strengthening NPA's expertise in two key
                         areas: (i) operations, through focused training on system operation with an emphasis on operating
                         regulations and safety; and (ii) commercial management, by providing support to the implementation
                         of the loss reduction program.
                         Component II: Rural Electrification. This component will launch a pilot program for the installation
                         of PV systems in public buildings in 14 rural villages, to demonstrate applicability of the solar
                         technology for larger deployment. Villages have been selected by the Ministry of Energy and Water
                         Resources and the Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development from each administrative
                         district, based on gender diversity, number of public buildings where the PV systems can be installed
                         and road accessibility. The development of small-scale decentralized solar power supply in rural
                         areas has been included by the GoSL's in the National Energy Policy and Strategic Plan. Also, a
                         roadmap for scaling-up renewable energy technologies (RETs) and markedly solar power has been
                         identified. The pilot installation of PV systems is expected to complement current efforts by other
                         donors as well as to leverage wider donor support to the GoSL's long-term program of rural
                         electrification using solar energy. In the short term, this component promises high returns in terms of
                         improved living standards for the populations of the villages targeted under the Project.

                         Component III: Project Implementation Management. This component has been specifically
                         designed to strengthen project implementation and management capacity. The component will
                         finance external expertise that will support key project management functions.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will apply the Bank's safeguards policies on Environmental Assessment (OP/BP4.01)
                         and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP4.12) specifically for components I and II of the project. An
                         Environment and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) was prepared by the Government of Sierra
                         Leone (GoSL) in July 2012. The ESIA primarily covers the areas surrounding the facilities that will
                         be rehabilitated under Component I (above), including the 33kV/11kV distribution line and
                         substations between the Blackhall Road and the Wellington substations in Freetown Western Capital
                         Area. Reinforcement of the line was initially carried out under the completed IDA-financed Power
                         and Water Project (P087203). A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) was implemented and a RAP
                         Completion Report was disclosed in November 10, 2011. The compensation payments for 29
                         households along the distribution line were finalized in end-October 2011. Additionally, there were
                         five livelihood restoration programs provided for small enterprises, including training workshops for
                         skills and youth employment.

                         A site investigation of the right-of-way (RoW) of the distribution line from Blackhall Road to
                         Wellington was undertaken in February, 2012 to verify the conditions of the project affected persons
                         (PAPs) compensated under the 2011 RAP. Further site investigations conducted during appraisal of
                         the project verified what was reported in February 2012 as follows: (i) two PAPs who received


                                                                       Page 2 of 7
                         payments in 2011 for removing structures within the vertical clearance limit (7 m) had returned and
                         constructed new structures. At the time of appraisal, these were in the process of being removed by
                         an inter-agency committee set up by GoSL to enforce the restrictions on land uses inside the RoW;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and (ii) "new encroachers" in the RoW who had set up structures despite the demarcation enforced
                         by NPA were notified that all structures within the vertical clearance limit would be removed. The
                         NPA and the Office of National Security (ONS) are coordinating the program for removing these
                         structures, following the guidelines and procedures adopted in the 2011 RAP. Over the longer-term,
                         the GoSL will enforce an Action Plan for monitoring the RoW and ensure that further encroachments
                         inside the RoW are effectively managed.

                         The specific locations of the public buildings (e.g. schools, health centers, community centers) on
                         which PV systems will be installed as part of component III of the project are not known. The GoSL
                         has selected some 14 villages for the installation of the solar technology. The installation and
                         maintenance of the solar panels are anticipated to have minimum environmental impacts. No land
                         acquisition will take place since solar facilities will be installed on public buildings.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Maria Concepcion J. Cruz (AFTCS)
                         Moses Yao Duphey (AFTN3)

                         6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              An Environment and Social Impact Assessment
                         BP 4.01                                             (ESIA) was completed and covered the areas
                                                                             where rehabilitation and upgrading of the existing
                                                                             distribution line and substations will take place.
                                                                             The ESIA also covers the proposed sites for
                                                                             installation of solar panels. Guidance on control
                                                                             of pollution and waste management, especially in
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             the substations is included in the ESIA
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No               The distribution line and substations will not
                                                                             pass or even be close to any protected areas or
                                                                             critical habitat, including those with any high
                                                                             biodiversity.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No               The distribution line and substations will not
                                                                             pass through any forested areas hence no impacts
                                                                             on forests are expected.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09             No               No herbicides or pesticides will be used in the
                                                                             maintenance of the right of way of the
                                                                             distribution line.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No               There will not be any earthworks involved.
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No               A social assessment was completed under the
                                                                             completed IDA-financed Power and Water
                                                                             Project. The findings confirmed that there are no
                                                                             Indigenous Peoples in the project area, which is
                                                                             located mostly in peri-urban and urban areas.



                                                                     Page 3 of 7
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       Yes               The status of project affected persons (PAPs)
                            4.12                                                  who were allowed by GoSL to remain within the
                                                                                  vicinity of the Blackhall to Wellington
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                  distribution line was assessed. The results of this
                                                                                  assessment indicated that: (i) some of the
                                                                                  previously compensated PAPs moved back inside
                                                                                  the RoW and constructed new structures that
                                                                                  continued to pose safety issues and thus had to be
                                                                                  moved; and (ii) "new encroachers" have since
                                                                                  moved inside the RoW and are now in the process
                                                                                  of being relocated. Both activities concerning
                                                                                  removal of structures were completed following
                                                                                  guidelines defined in the 2011 RAP (under the
                                                                                  completed IDA-financed Power and Water
                                                                                  project).

                                                                                  For the solar systems, no land acquisition nor
                                                                                  restriction of access will take place since the
                                                                                  beneficiaries are social infrastructures (schools,
                                                                                  health centers, community centers) that are in
                                                                                  state-owned lands.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No                N/A

                            Projects on International        No                     N/A
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                     N/A
                            7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential l arge scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                Activities under component I are expected to have minimal environmental and social impacts,
                              since all distribution network facilities to be rehabilitated are existing and no new construction will
                              take place. Nonetheless, an ESIA has been prepared to ensure that adequate mitigation measures
                              for addressing potential impacts on the environment and surrounding communities are
                              implemented.
                              The ESIA contains the guidelines and procedures for assessing environmental and social impacts
                              throughout the rehabilitation of the distribution lines and substations. For example, standards for
                              controlling pollution and waste management are defined. Guidance on developing a socio-
                              economic database and identifying new encroachers inside the RoW are also included in the ESIA.
                              Institutional arrangements and monitoring and evaluation of the status of the distribution lines and
                              substations are addressed in a separate section of the ESIA.

                              The installation of photovoltaic systems on public buildings in selected rural villages under
                              component II of the Project is also expected to have minimal environmental and social impacts.


                                                                          Page 4 of 7
                           Any potential impacts are covered in the Environment and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA).

                           Given these anticipated impacts, the project is classified as category B (partial environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                           assessment).
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            The project is expected to cause indirect impacts in the following areas: (i) hydrology and water
                           quality; (ii) socioeconomic conditions; (iii) land use and public recreation; and (iv) utilities. Direct
                           impacts on air quality, biological resources, cultural resources, geology, soil, landscape, public
                           health and safety, public services, traffic and transportation, and livelihoods have been also
                           assessed along with mitigation measures.

                           Removing critical distribution capacity bottlenecks along Freetown distribution network will
                           enable expanded, stable and more reliable electricity supply to Freetown residents.
                           In rural areas, the pilot installation of photovoltaic (PV) systems will improve the living conditions
                           of the populations targeted under the project, while supporting the GoSL's long-term program to
                           scale up rural access to electricity using solar energy.

                           Communities living in and around the RoW of the distribution line and in the perimeter of the
                           substations to be rehabilitated under the project may expect to receive electricity services, which
                           are not at a direct output of the project. These expectations will continue to be managed by the
                           project and under ongoing community development programs through intensive communication
                           and consultations.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            The distribution facilities to be rehabilitated under the project are existing and there is no plan to
                           move them to alternate sites. The routing of the distribution line in the Freetown area was set up
                           several decades ago. Although at that time is was designed to avoid densely populated areas, today
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the RoW is occupied by slum settlements. In order to avoid adverse impacts, the project will take
                           into account the existing physical conditions and ensure that repairs and rehabilitation works are
                           conducted in an appropriate manner and consistent with the guidelines defined in the ESIA.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            An inter-ministerial committee has been specifically set up for monitoring the RoW of
                           distribution lines in urban areas and ensuring that encroachments are controlled.

                           The PMU established at the MoEWR is currently staffed with sufficiently trained environmental
                           and social specialists. A safeguard training program was sponsored by the Ministry of Finance and
                           Economic Development (MoFED) in March 2012 and conducted by the Bank's Accra-based
                           safeguards team. The effectiveness of these training sessions were verified during appraisal of the
                           project and found helpful in building in-country staff capacities, especially within the MoEWR.

                           The current PMU personnel have been hired under the Bumbuna Project and their contracts are set
                           to expire soon. A qualified environmental and social development specialist will be hired under
                           the project to oversee environmental and social management. The project also envisages technical
                           assistance to support implementation and update of the ESMP; ensure risk mitigation; and build



                                                                       Page 5 of 7
                           capacity for monitoring of the RoW, with a view to reduce the impacts from encroachments and
                           land uses that may negatively affect the operation of distribution facilities.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             In Freetown area, the project will affect the households currently living in and around the RoW
                           of the distribution line and in the perimeter of the substations to be rehabilitated under the project.
                           In rural areas, the installation of PV systems on public buildings will positively affect the residents
                           of the 14 villages targeted under the project.

                           Consultations on ESIA were undertaken with different stakeholders, including environmental
                           government agencies, local civil society groups, and community leaders. The ESIA results were
                           presented and discussed in several consultations with government and non-government
                           representatives. The NPA organized a community meeting with occupants of the RoW to inform
                           them on the ESIA and the required safety procedures inside the RoW.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                          16-Jul-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                      26-Sep-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                       26-Sep-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                          19-Apr-2004
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                      23-Aug-2004
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                       10-Aug-2004
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         The ESIA has been cleared for full disclosure. The ESIA has been disclosed in the country and
                         submitted to the Bank's InfoShop on September 26, 2012.
                         The RAP was approved and disclosed in 2004. Subsequently, it was updated twice -- in 2007 and
                         2011 -- under the IDA-financed Power and Water Project. In the second RAP update in 2011, a new
                         segment of the distribution line was added for rehabilitation (existing distribution line).
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
                         ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [         ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [       ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information


                                                                       Page 6 of 7
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Elvira Morella
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                    Date: 26-Sep-2012
                            Coordinator:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Meike van Ginneken (SM)                        Date: 12-Sep-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 7 of 7
