                                                                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                            CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC309
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Dec-2011

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                       Tajikistan                               Project ID:                      P126130
                              Project Name:                  Health Results Based Financing Project (P126130)
                              Task Team Leader:              Wezi Marianne Msisha
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 17-Sep-2012                                   Estimated Board Date:            15-Nov-2012
                              Managing Unit:                 ECSHD                                    Lending Instrument:              Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                        Health (60%), Compulsory health finance (40%)
                              Theme:                         Child health (50%), Health system performance (30%), Injuries and non-communicable diseases (20%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                      Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                         0.00
                                   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                               10.00
                                   Health Results-based Financing                                                                                             4.80
                                   Total                                                                                                                     14.80
                              Environmental Category:        C - Not Required
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              B. Project Objectives

                              19. Two formulations of the PDO are currently under consideration:

                              Option 1: To contribute to the improvement of coverage and quality of a basic package of PHC services in rural health facilities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Option 2: (i) To contribute to the improvement of coverage and quality of a basic package of PHC services in rural health facilities through an RBF
                              approach; and (ii) To build the capacity of the Government of Tajikistan and health providers to deliver a basic package of PHC services.

                              C. Project Description

                              21. The project aims to contribute to (i) an increase in coverage of a basic package of PHC services through Results Based Financing (RBF), and
                              (ii) an improvement in the quality of care for this package of PHC services through RBF and traditional input-based support in project-supported
                              rural districts. In this proposed RBF program provider payments (i.e., to health facilities) would be introduced on a fee for service basis with
                              adjustments for technical quality (See Musgrove, 2011). The package of PHC services would be defined based on health sector priorities and
                              would include MCH, communicable and non-communicable disease services that can be delivered at the PHC level. It is expected that a total of at
                              least eight to ten rayons would be included in the project, with the initial focus on implementing a supply side intervention given the more pressing
                              problem of the quality of services. If necessary, the project might later expand to include a demand side intervention as well. The feasibility of such
                              an approach within the context of Tajikistan would be explored during the project preparation phase through a USD 400,000 grant from the Rapid
                              Social Response Trust Fund executed by the World Bank.

                              22. The project would have three components:

                              Component 1: Results Based Financing (USD 10.8 million): This component would support the implementation of RBF in health facilities and
                              would thereby create incentives to improve coverage and quality of care for the incentivized health services.
                              Component 2: Capacity building for PHC (USD 2 million): This component would support capacity building at the PHC level and would contribute
                              to improvements in quality of care.
                              Component 3: Project management (USD 2 million): This component would cover the management costs of the project.
                              More details on the three components are provided subsequently.

                              23. In addition, since Results Based Financing (RBF) is an innovative approach that has not been systematically implemented in the Tajikistan
                              health sector before, a key objective of the project is to undertake a rigorous Impact Evaluation (IE) to determine whether RBF is an effective
                              strategy to improve the coverage and quality of a basic package of primary care services in the Tajikistan context. The IE may also compare the
                              effectiveness of RBF to an alternative strategy (still under discussion). Districts would be randomly assigned to the two study groups (treatment
                              group 1: RBF; control group 2: alternative strategy OR business-as-usual). The primary data source for the IE would be household and health
                              facility surveys to be conducted at baseline (pre-intervention) and end-line by an independent research agency. If funding permits, additional
                              surveys may be conducted in the interim. In addition, the IE would use qualitative methods to probe for explanations on findings observed
                              quantitatively and assess the larger health systems implications of RBF. The IE would be funded through a USD 1.5 million grant from the HRITF
                              and would be executed by the World Bank. This allocation for the IE is separate from the budget envelope of USD 14.8 million for the project.
                         COMPONENT 1:Results Based Financing (USD 10.8 million: USD 6 million from IDA & USD 4.8 million from the HRITF)

                         24. This component would finance RBF implementation in PHC facilities in approximately 4-5 rayons (districts) in Sogd oblast (i.e., region) that are
                         selected to participate in RBF. RBF would be implemented in rural health centers and health houses which are the first level of PHC in Tajikistan.
                         The Government of Tajikistan selected Sogd oblast to be the pilot region for all health financing reforms planned in Tajikistan. Implementing RBF
                         in Sogd oblast therefore presents an opportunity to bring together the benefits of the various health financing reforms that are being tested and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         may eventually be scaled up across the country. Moreover, as Soghd has benefited from capacity building under the World Bank-supported CBHP,
                         there is greater technical capacity in the oblast to respond to the incentives presented by RBF. The final number and list of rayons in which RBF is
                         to be implemented would be jointly agreed with the Ministry of Health.

                         25. Under the RBF program, a basic package of services would be purchased from rural health centers and health houses. The package of
                         services would be defined based on health sector priorities but is expected to include MCH services (such as Ante Natal Care and Post Natal
                         Care), Communicable Disease services (such as treatment for TB and general curative care visits) and Non Communicable Disease services
                         (such as screening and management of hypertension and diabetes). A RBF Co-ordination Unit situated with the Ministry of Health would act as the
                         Performance Purchasing Agency (PPA) for RBF and would enter into performance agreements with rural health centers and health houses to
                         deliver the agreed package of health services. In return, health facilities would receive RBF payments on a quarterly basis. The main parameters
                         for determining health facility payments are likely to include: (i) the verified volume of services delivered; and (ii) verified technical quality of these
                         services. The overall amount would then be adjusted based on the technical quality of care at that facility (see Annex III for an illustration). The
                         project is also exploring mechanisms to adjust payments for factors such as remoteness of the health facility so that especially remote facilities are
                         appropriately compensated for the higher cost of delivering care. At the moment, RBF payments to health facilities would be a supplement to the
                         resources these facilities currently receive through existing channels, and therefore represent a performance-linked source of additional funds for
                         PHC.

                         26. It is proposed that health facilities should have autonomy over the use of RBF payments received, within clear spending rules. Given the
                         importance of incentivizing health workers in Tajikistan a larger proportion of health facility RBF payments would be ear-marked for health worker
                         performance bonuses, while a smaller proportion can be used by health facilities for operating expenses. The spending rules, including guidelines
                         on how performance bonuses may be distributed, would be clearly specified in a RBF Operational Manual, which would detail operational
                         procedures for implementing RBF. The RBF Operational Manual would be a separate document from the Project Operational Manual and would
                         focus specifically on the implementation of RBF.

                         27. Linking facility payments to service volumes and quality may create strong incentives for providers to overstate both services delivered and
                         quality. Independent (i.e., independently of health providers) verification of these results is therefore critical if RBF is to be effective. In the context
                         of RBF implementation therefore RBF payments would only be released after service volumes delivered and technical quality of care have been
                         verified independently each quarter. This quarterly verification would include a facility visit by an independent entity to: (i) check facility records to
                         ensure that the service volumes invoiced are correct, and (ii) directly measure the technical quality of care of services delivered with a quality
                         checklist. The RBF Coordination Unit, which would act as the purchasing agency, would therefore authorize the release of appropriate RBF
                         payments to health facilities once it has received quarterly verification results. In addition, more intensive verification activities would be conducted
                         on at least an annual basis. This round of indepen dent verification would include home visits to a sub-sample of RBF clients to assess whether
                         services have been received as reported, and would also assess beneficiary perceptions of services. Although semi-annual or annual verifications
                         would not be directly linked to RBF payments, clear evidence of falsified reporting would have known and transparent sanctions for RBF facilities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         28. The smooth implementation of RBF requires that many functions be carried out in a timely and effective manner, including quarterly
                         verification, semi-annual (or annual) verification and timely transmission of RBF funds to health facilities. A preliminary concept of how information
                         on services delivered by the PHC facilities could flow to the central level to enable payment of the incentives is shown in Annex IV. The possibility
                         of including a performance component in payments to the entities and/ or individuals carrying out these functions would be explored during the
                         project preparation process. In the case of verification, performance payments may be linked to the timely execution, but not the results, of
                         verification. In the case of transmission of funds, performance payments may be linked to the timeliness and accuracy (with reference to
                         instructions) of payments.

                         29. RBF would be implemented in a phased manner in the project districts. The first phase of RBF implementation would be a 12-month pilot in
                         one rayon which would be purposively selected to represent typical capacity in Sogd oblast. The rationale for the pilot would be to fine-tune RBF
                         design and implementation arrangements to the context of Tajikistan. A qualitative review would be conducted towards the end of the pilot and
                         lessons learned would be used to finalize the design of RBF and to guide the pace of the roll-out across the remaining RBF districts in Sogd.

                         COMPONENT 2:Primary Health Care Quality Improvement (USD 2 million)

                         30. This component would aim to improve the capacity of PHC providers to provide quality services and would cover both the RBF intervention
                         rayons (4 to 5) and the control rayons (4 to 5) in Sogd Oblast. The proposed activities would include training of FM providers in selected rayons in
                         Sogd oblast, training on management of selected MCH and NCD conditions using modern clinical protocols, capacity building for PHC managers
                         and supervisors, and provision of basic medical equipment and supplies to PHC facilities. During the preparation process an assessment of the
                         PHC facilities would be undertaken to ascertain the current level of capacity including the physical infrastructure of the PHC facility, the availability
                         of medical equipment, human resources availability and training. This assessment would also review the type of support and the related costs that
                         would be required to increase the capacity of PHC facilities up to the level required for the use of RBF incentives. Once PHC providers have
                         reached the minimum level of required capacity, they would be eligible to receive the RBF intervention. This component would also support: (i) the
                         review and update, as needed, of clinical protocols for MCH, IMCI, selected
                         NCD➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?Â¢
                         ➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?Ã
                         ?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂ s, other conditions based on the defined service package, and
                         continuous professional training of PHC staff on these protocols; and (ii) the development and introduction of quality assurance mechanisms at
                         PHC level including the raining of rayon, PHC supervisors on quality control.

                         COMPONENT 3: RBF Project Management (USD 2 million)
                           31. This component would support the operational costs of implementing the project, including project coordination, contract management,
                           procurement, disbursement, and financial management. It would also finance: continuous training of administra tors and implementers at every
                           level on the RBF scheme, exchange of lessons and experiences among project participating facilities, fine tuning the operation procedures for
                           implementation of the RBF based on the evaluation of the pre-pilot and first round of the roll-out, annual financial audit of the project accounts,
                           supervision of implementation, M&E activities, office equipment and furniture, and consulting services to provide technical assistance in project
                           management. Detailed institutional arrangement is under discussion with MOH and would be developed during preparation missions.

                            D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Not applicable. No environmental safeguards policies are triggered.


                            E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

                           Not applicable. No environmental safeguards policies are triggered.


                            F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team



                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

                            Safeguard Policies Triggered                      Yes        No       TBD                                  Explanation
                            Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                           ✖
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                   ✖
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                                            ✖
                            Pest Management OP 4.09                                       ✖
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                        ✖
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                 ✖
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                           ✖
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                     ✖
                            Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                     ✖
                            7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                         ✖
Public Disclosure Copy
                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                           A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 14-Sep-2012
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
Public Disclosure Copy




                              should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                Not applicable. It is envisaged that no environmental safeguards policies will be triggered.

                         IV. APPROVALS
                            Signed and submitted by:
                            Task Team Leader:                                Name: Gabriel C. Francis                                                                              Date: 13-Dec-2011
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                 Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                                                                             Date: 27-Dec-2011
                            Comments:
                            Sector Manager:                                  Name: Daniel Dulitzky (SM)                                                                            Date: 03-Jan-2012
                            Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                             form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
