                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC1050

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Aug-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Thailand                       Project ID:      P126225
                            Project Name:      Strengthening Capacity and Incentives for Wildlife Conservation in the Western
                                               Forest Complex (P126225)
                            Task Team          Waraporn Hirunwatsiri
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       02-Oct-2013                       Estimated        09-Dec-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: EASTS                              Lending          Technical Assistance Loan
                                                                              Instrument:
                            Focal Area:        Biodiversity

                            Sector:            Forestry (100%)
                            Theme:             Biodiversity (50%), Climate change (25%), Other environment and natural
                                               resources management (25%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                         29.37
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                           7.34
                              Financing Gap                                                               0.00
                              Total                                                                      36.71
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                             B. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                           To improve management effectiveness at Huai Kha Khaeng-Thung Yai Naresuan-World Heritage
                           Site to protect its important forest ecosystems and the tiger population
                           C. Project Description
                           The three main components of the project are: i) Strengthening On-Ground Conservation Actions
                           and Wildlife Protection; ii) Developing and Promoting Incentives and Sustainable Financing for
                           Community-Based Wildlife Conservation and Sustainable Forest Management/REDD+; and iii)
                         Public Awareness Raising and Project Management.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the             safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project is to strengthen the existing restriction of access in three existing wildlife sanctuaries:
                         Thung Yai East Wildlife Sanctuary (TYE WS), Thung Yai West Wildlife Sanctuary (TYW WS), and
                         HKK WS in the junction area of Tak, Kanchanaburi, and Uthai Thani Provinces of Thailand. The
                         project area (Figure I) includes HKK-TY WS, a buffer area of 5 km outside boundaries of TYE WS
                         and TYW WS, plus an area of around 15 km from the HKK WS boundary to include the 29 villages
                         that influence/impact the HKK WS.

                         The three Wildlife Sanctuaries stretches over an area of 3,888,750 rai (622,200 ha), and were
                         collectively designated as a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 1991, based on the criteria of being
                         biodiversity rich, a watershed area, and harboring rare species. The area consists of mixed deciduous
                         forest, hill evergreen forest, dry evergreen, dry dipterocarp forest, bamboo forest, savanna forest and
                         grassland and harbors key species such as Indochinese Tiger (Panthera tigris corbetti), Gaur (Bos
                         gaurus), Banteng (Bos javanicus), Asian Elephant (Elephas maximus indicus), Muntjac (Muntiacus
                         reevesi), Malayan Tapir (Tapirus indicus), Sambar deer (Cervus unicolor), Wild pig (Sus scrofa).
                         Wildlife Sanctuary is the most strictly protected category of forest type in the Thai system, and is
                         managed under the Wildlife Conservation and Protection Act (and also under the broader Forest
                         Law). This provides the key objectives for Wildlife Sanctuaries as: (1) protection and law
                         enforcement, (2) research, and (3) supporting tourism.

                         Thung Yai East Wildlife Sanctuary (TYE WS) and Thung Yai West Wildlife Sanctuary (TYW WS)
                         were established in April 1974, located in Kanchanaburi and Tak provinces at the southern end of the
                         Dawna Range. The TYE WS covers an area of approximately 157,170 ha, while the TYW WS
                         covers an area of 212,296 ha. The topography is generally mountainous with a network of many
                         permanent rivers and streams dividing the area into valleys and lowland plains. The sanctuary’s
                         distinguishing feature is large central grassland plain. Within the catchment area are four important
Public Disclosure Copy




                         rivers: the Mae Khlong, which flows into the Kwai Yai and feeds into the Sri Nakarind Dam; Kwai
                         Noi, which feeds into Khao Laem Reservoir, and Mae Kasart and Mae Suriat which, respectively,
                         flow into Maekathat and Huang Tharaw rivers in Myanmar. Seven Water Karen (Kalieng) villages
                         are located inside TYE WS. Seven Mountain Karen (Karang) villages are located inside TYW WS.
                         All 14 villages cultivate crops around their villages.

                         Huai Kha Khaeng is located in Uthai Thani and Tak Provinces. It was established in 1972, covering
                         an area of 163,100 ha. The total area has been enlarged to 278,014 ha since 1992. The terrain is
                         generally hilly with many permanent and seasonal streams. The sanctuary comprises the catchment
                         area of the Huai Kha Khaeng, which flows through the middle of the sanctuary into the Kwae Yai
                         and Sri Nakarin Dam in Kanchanaburi province, and much of the upper catchment area of the Huai
                         Thap Salao, which flows into the Sakrae Krang in Uthai Thani province. No villages are inside the
                         WS, but 29 are located in a 15km radius from the eastern boundary. The western boundary is TYE
                         WS, and the northern boundary is Umphang WS.




                         Figure 1: World Heritage Site and Project Area
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Department of National Parks, Wildlife and Plant Conservation (DNP) and relevant Project
                           Implementing Units (PIUs) do not have enough capacity for WB safeguard policies so far. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                           capacity of DNP and PIUs needs to be strengthened to prepare and implement theproject according
                           to WB environment and social safeguard Policies. In order to improve institutional capacity, the DNP
                           agreed to assign specific staff responsible for environmental management and social safeguards,
                           engage experienced environment and social consultant to carry out the environmental assessment
                           (EA) and social assessment (SA) and the Indigenous Peoples Framework and Indigenous Peoples
                           Plan; and also to conduct a training for DNP staff.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Songling Yao (EASCS)
                           Josefo Tuyor (EASPS)
                           Wasittee Udchachone (EASTS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes              The project will support on-ground conservation
                           BP 4.01                                             actions to protect wildlife, and promote
                                                                               incentives to reduce pressure on forest cover
                                                                               and wildlife populations. It aims to improve
                                                                               management effectiveness at HKK-TY WHS to
                                                                               protect forest ecosystems and the tiger
                                                                               population. Hence, it is expected that the project
                                                                               will have a positive impact on the environment
                                                                               in general, especially on biodiversity, forest
                                                                               management and climate change mitigation
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               aspects. However, negative impacts on the
                                                                               environment may be generated from the
                                                                               proposed activities, such as eco-tourism
                                                                               activities (e.g. trail signs, bird observation hut),
                                                                               alternative livelihoods, building ranger stations
                                                                               and renovation of the Regional Tiger
                                                                               Conservation and Research Centre, if activities
                                                                               are not planned properly and mitigation
                                                                               measures are not adequately implemented. Eco-
                                                                               tourism activities may also lead to an increased
                                                                               number of visitors and human activities in the
                                                                               project area, which would lead to environmental
                                                                               and social impacts, if these are not planned and
                                                                               managed properly. The project will not support
                                                                               any major civil works. It will only support the
                                                                               building of additional ranger stations at all three
                                                                               WSs and renovation of the existing buildings
                                                                               within HKK WS to be the Regional Training
                                                                               and Visitor Center.
                                                             The DNP will conduct an environmental
                                                             assessment (EA) based on the current protected
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             area management plans and other ongoing
                                                             activities by the government and other
                                                             development partners. The EA will include the
                                                             following:
                                                             a.       assessment of on-going activities in the
                                                             national parks;
                                                             b.       baseline data relevant to proposed
                                                             interventions that are proposed under the
                                                             project;
                                                             c.       socio-economic impacts not directly
                                                             covered by the two social safeguard policies;
                                                             d.       potential impacts from activities like
                                                             fencing, eco-tourism, alternative livelihood,
                                                             agriculture stabilization, re-zoning and/or
                                                             modifications of the boundaries of the protected
                                                             areas, civil works, etc.;
                                                             e.       public participation approach for
                                                             consultation of the communities and relevant
                                                             stakeholders during preparation and
                                                             implementation of the project.

                                                             The experience in a similar project in Laos
                                                             under GEF 5 will be reviewed to distill some
                                                             lessons learned.
                                                             Given the project focus on improving the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             overall environmental and park management,
                                                             the community-based nature of activities and
                                                             the absence of large civil works, the project is
                                                             assigned as an Environment Category B project.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   The project involves activities to improve
                                                             management effectiveness of HKK-TY-WHS,
                                                             the important habitats for key species in the
                                                             western forest complex. It aims to protect the
                                                             wildlife and its habitats by building capacity
                                                             and strengthening incentives for DNP and local
                                                             communities. The project interventions in the
                                                             protected areas trigger OP 4.04.

                                                             The HKK WS plans to have ecotourism in the
                                                             national forest (i.e. buffer zone) at the area of
                                                             the wildlife breeding and release centre so
                                                             people can see the released animals and do
                                                             home stay in nearby villages. The project will
                                                             support in-situ conservation of keys species
                                                                 such as tiger. The project support to the
                                                                 breeding centre that will compliment in-situ
                                                                 conservation is under consideration.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 The EA that will be conducted for the project
                                                                 will assess the impacts of the project and
                                                                 activities on natural habitats and wildlife and
                                                                 measures will be proposed accordingly which
                                                                 would form part of the ecotourism activities in
                                                                 the EMP. Given the focus of the project is in-
                                                                 situ conservation. It is highly unlikely that the
                                                                 project will adversely affect natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes   The project aims to improve management
                                                                 effectiveness of the protected areas. It is
                                                                 therefore expected to have a positive impact on
                                                                 the environment in general, especially on
                                                                 biodiversity, forest management and climate
                                                                 change aspect. Nonetheless, forest conservation
                                                                 and management activities may affect some
                                                                 people who are dependent on the forests for
                                                                 their food and livelihoods. The EA will assess
                                                                 the impacts of the project on forest and forest-
                                                                 dwelling and dependent communities and
                                                                 ensure as that, as part of the measure, these
                                                                 communities will play an active role in the
                                                                 protected area management.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The project will not lead to the use of pesticides
                                                                 nor will it support purchase of pesticides, be it
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 for vector control or agricultural pest control.
                                                                 The agricultural stabilization activity as part of
                                                                 introducing alternative livelihood, given the
                                                                 small size, is not expected to lead to use or
                                                                 increase usage of pesticides among project
                                                                 beneficiaries.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   The project will only involve minor civil works
                         BP 4.11                                 involving building ranger stations and
                                                                 renovation of the Regional Tiger Conservation
                                                                 and Research Centre and is not expected affect
                                                                 any PCR, as defined under the policy.

                                                                 However, according to the United Nation
                                                                 Environment Program (2012) , "Rings of
                                                                 Stones", so placed to mark the site of buried
                                                                 treasures, are common in some parts of the
                                                                 HKK-WS (e.g. near the Sap Far Pa Guard
                                                                 Station), but none has been investigated by
                                                                 archaeologists. Therefore, the PCR policy is
                                                                marked as TBD. The presence of the PCR will
                                                                be assessed in the EA during project preparation
                                                                and should the results of the EA confirm their
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                presence and negative impacts by the project,
                                                                corresponding measures will be included in the
                                                                EA, including chance find procedures.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    Yes   The DNP advised that seven ethnic minority
                                                                villages are present in TYE WS and seven
                                                                ethnic minority villages in TYW WS. Thirteen
                                                                (13) Hmong villages were moved out from TYE
                                                                WS 15 years ago. There are no villages within
                                                                HKK WS. Some Karen villages were relocated
                                                                from the HKK WS 36 years ago and one
                                                                Hmong village was relocated 26 years ago. The
                                                                mission visited seven villages in TYE WS and
                                                                five villages in TYW WS, and discussed with
                                                                village chief and three random-sampled
                                                                households in each village. The identified IP in
                                                                the area is Karen, with the four characteristics
                                                                defined in the Operational Policy (OP) 4.10. So
                                                                OP 4.10 is triggered, and an IPP for the project
                                                                will be prepared in the next stage, which
                                                                includes documenting the impact on the Hmong
                                                                groups in the livelihood assessment. The
                                                                mission highlighted that the first step regarding
                                                                IP is to conduct free, prior, and informed
                                                                consultation with all affected IPs in the project
                                                                area to see whether or not a broad support from
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                the IPs could be reached, and the broad support
                                                                is a condition for the Bank to move the project
                                                                forward.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes   The project is to strengthen the existing
                         4.12                                   restriction of access in three existing wildlife
                                                                sanctuaries: TYE WS, TYW WS, and HKK
                                                                WS. The proposed project activities mainly
                                                                consist of management mechanism and capacity
                                                                improvement, patrolling capacity building, local
                                                                conservation awareness campaign, ecotourism,
                                                                etc. The project does not involve any acquisition
                                                                of land or other assets such as house, structure
                                                                or infrastructure. The only potential adverse
                                                                impacts from the project relate to restricting
                                                                poaching, hunting and collecting forest products
                                                                in the WSs by the local villagers, including most
                                                                ethnic minority villages. Given this. OP 4.12 is
                                                                deemed triggered, and a Process Framework is
                                                                required, which will be developed on the basis
                                                                                                                                 of extensive consultation with the affected
                                                                                                                                 villagers and other stakeholders.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            There will be no construction of dams under the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 project.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The project will not involve trans-boundary
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            rivers. The policy is not triggered.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project areas are located within Thailand
                                 7.60                                                                                            territory and no disputed boundary was reported.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-May-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Time frame for completing the safeguard-related studies will be in first week of May 2013.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Waraporn Hirunwatsiri

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Vilija Kostelnickiene (RSA)                                                                                          Date: 27-Aug-2012
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Julia M. Fraser (SM)                                                                                                 Date: 23-Aug-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
