                                              INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC3378

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Aug-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 20-Aug-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Colombia                        Project ID:      P144271
                            Project Name:       Forest Conservation and Sustainability in the Heart of the Colombian Amazon
                                                (P144271)
                            Task Team           Adriana Goncalves Moreira
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       25-Nov-2013                         Estimated        27-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: LCSEN                                Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            GEF Focal Area:     Biodiversity

                            Sector(s):          Forestry (74%), Central government administration (13%), Sub-national
                                                government administration (13%)
                            Theme(s):           Biodiversity (54%), Environmental policies and institutions (23%), Participation
                                                and civic engagement (14%), Land administration and management (9%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     40.04                     Total Bank Financing:          0.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                                Financing Gap:                 0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           30.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                            10.04
                              Total                                                                        40.04
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project's global environmental objective (GEO) is the same as the project's development
                           objective (PDO), namely, to improve governance and promote sustainable land use activities in order
                           to reduce deforestation and conserve biodiversity in the Colombian Amazon forests.
                         C. Project Description
                         As a matter of national policy, Colombia has for several decades been constructing an extensive
                         system of protected areas and indigenous reserves in the Amazon, which have proved effective in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         preventing further deforestation. The proposed project is an integral part of this commitment,
                         designed to consolidate and sustainably manage the Protected Areas system in the heart of the
                         Colombian Amazon, whose core is the Chiribiquete National Park. If successful, the project will
                         avoid millions of tonnes of CO² emissions per year, preserve a biological corridor between the Andes
                         and the Amazon, promote sustainable development and improve the livelihoods of local communities
                         and indigenous peoples in the region.

                         In the last ten years, the areas surrounding the Chiribiquete National Park have experienced a sharp
                         increase of interest in oil and gas exploration. The National Hydrocarbons Agency (ANH) has
                         designated extensive areas as reserved exploration blocks for future lease of oil and gas exploration.
                         The area is also a target for the development of road infrastructure, with Colombia's commitment to
                         build the Marginal de la Selva road to unite Ecuador with Venezuela placing increased pressure on
                         the area and causing greater harm to the forest.

                         The proposed project would consist of four components, to help alleviate the above mentioned
                         pressures:

                         Component 1 -Protected Areas. This component will seek to (i) improve management effectiveness
                         in new and existing PAs and (ii) increase funding to meet total expenditures required for
                         management.

                         Component 2 - Improved forest governance, management, and monitoring. This component will seek
                         to (i) increase institutional capacity of national, regional and local environmental authorities, as well
                         as of indigenous authorities, including financial sustainability, for sustainable landscape
                         management, monitoring and enforcement of the Amazon forest frontier, (ii) enhance institutional
Public Disclosure Copy




                         capacity to account for GHG emission reductions in alignment with the National Forest and Carbon
                         monitoring system, (iv) reduce deforestation in the project area compared to the Amazon subnational
                         reference forest emission level for Colombia, and (v) guarantee conservation of at least 95% of the
                         carbon stock by the lifetime of the project of (1,164 M tons of Co2 eq ) of Chiribiquete National
                         Park barring natural disturbances.

                         Component 3 – Sectoral programs for sustainability and land management. This component will seek
                         to (i) improve cross-sectoral coordination and policy coherence in critical sectors to achieve long
                         term reductions in deforestation (e.g. cattle ranching, agriculture, mining and forestry), (ii) adopt
                         sectoral programs in critical sectors (e.g. cattle ranching, agriculture, mining and forestry) improve
                         practices that reduce pressures on forests and biodiversity, restore ecosystems and reduce GHG
                         emissions while improving livelihoods, (iii) develop and implement land management practices
                         developed and implemented for restoration and to control main drivers of deforestation in identified
                         priority areas, and (iv) benefit local population from sectoral programs by improvements in their
                         livelihoods.

                         Component 4 - Monitoring and evaluation. The component will seek to improve monitoring of
                         management effectiveness of protected areas, institutional strengthening, and non-carbon benefits of
                         land management practices and sectoral programs.
                         The proposed project is consistent with the GEF focal areas of Biodiversity (BD), Climate Change
                         Mitigation (CCM), and Sustainable Forest Management/REDD+ (SFM). Consistent with the “GEF 5
                         Focal Area Strategies? document, synergies of BD, CCM and SFM are explored to generate multiple
Public Disclosure Copy




                         global environmental benefits, as well as social and economic ones. The proposed project will
                         include gender specific activities and mechanisms to monitor gender related impacts.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         This project will be implemented in the Colombian Amazon, which includes the entire Amazon
                         Forest Reserve Area and the Chiribiquete Land Use Planning Area. This is an extremely remote
                         region with many areas that have not been fully explored. There are approximately 55,000
                         indigenous peoples that live in more than 200 legally titled resguardos. In addition, there may also be
                         un-contacted indigenous peoples or those living in voluntary isolation that will require special
                         protection measures.

                         PAs are not isolated in landscapes and the land-use planning of large conservation spaces is
                         becoming a priority in Colombia. The Colombian Amazonia is the leading case to demonstrate how
                         PAs conservation can track other large scale management regime involving the territory beyond the
                         PAs boundaries. Although the rate of deforestation in Colombia is much lower than in adjacent
                         countries, about 22,260 km² of Amazon rainforest has been lost from 1990 to 2010, at rates between
                         80,000 and 120,000 hectares per year. Most of these areas have been converted to pasture for
                         livestock. Between 2005 and 2010, deforestation in Colombia generated 12.75 million tons of CO²
                         per year. Preliminary projections indicate that by 2030, if current trends continue, an additional
                         13,000 km² of rainforest will be lost in the Colombian Amazon, completely losing the connectivity
                         between the Andean and Amazonian forests in the country. Deforestation in the Colombian Amazon
                         has several causes. The main driver is extensive cattle ranching, followed by rural migration of
                         peasants fleeing from conflict areas. In addition, the projected expansion of oil and mineral
                         exploitation and construction of road projects in the Amazon, will lead to the development of other
                         infrastructure, rapid population growth and thus increased negative pressures on the forest.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The situation is further complicated due to lack of land use planning, land titling and zoning of the
                         Amazon Forest Reserve. Due to its remoteness and the historical lack of a strong governmental
                         presence, the Amazon Forest Reserve in particular has had limited land use planning, land titling and
                         zoning. This uncertainty has made it vulnerable to illegal activities and incursions by migrants from
                         conflict zones as well as economic migrants from other parts of the country.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The Borrower has institutional capacity and a proven track record in implementing the Bank’s
                         environmental and social safeguard policies. However, the Implementing Agency, the Ministry of
                         Environment and Sustainable Development (MADS), will need to increase their project execution
                         capacity in the area of safeguards. After the separation into the two new ministries, MADS retained
                         the staff responsible for execution of Bank projects. This staff has experience with Bank procedures
                         and policies, including environmental and social safeguards. Parques Nacionales, the other
                         implementing partner, has important experience with another Bank-financed project, GEF Mosaics,
                         as well as other GEF projects implemented by different international agencies. The institutional
                         capacity to implement Bank safeguards for this specific project will be assessed during the
                         preparation phase of the grant. Given the complexity of this project and the risks associated with
                         working in a remote region, support will be provided to all actors involved in the future
                         implementation of the project.
                           In terms of natural habitats formal conservation and management, Colombia has been constructing an
                           extensive system of Protected Areas (18 National Parks and Natural Reserves encompassing 7.9
Public Disclosure Copy




                           million hectares) and Indigenous Reserves (189 in total with 25.6 million hectares) in the Amazon.
                           The passage of Act 2 of 1959, declared the vast majority of the Colombian Amazon forest an
                           Amazon Forest Reserve Area, providing a basic degree of protection for seven forest reserve zones.
                           However, it is necessary to create more stringent land protection categories in the region. The
                           consolidation of Colombia’s Protected Areas is considered a priority in a number of environmental
                           policies in Colombia. The 1996 Colombian National Policy on Biodiversity set the stage for
                           conservation, knowledge, and sustainable use of biodiversity through in-situ conservations. In 1997,
                           the Government of Colombia adopted the Policy for the Creation and Consolidation of a Protected
                           Areas System. Furthermore, the Government of Colombia’s National Development Plan 2003-2006
                           defined the need to consolidate a National Protected Areas System in areas of high biodiversity and
                           strengthen the National Natural Parks Authority. These national commitments are also reflected in
                           the National Strategy for Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD+).
                           More recently, Colombia’s Ministry of Environment released a manual for a national biodiversity
                           offset scheme, which establishes clear procedures for identifying and quantifying measures for
                           offsets in terms of biodiversity loss. The aim is to help the Government and the private sector create
                           parallel measures for how each site affected by biodiversity loss should be compensated; ensuring
                           that impacts of large infrastructure projects on the environment will be mitigated and compensated
                           appropriately for any loss of biodiversity. Overall, this project will tend to strengthen the country
                           capacity for natural habitats management.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Abdelaziz Lagnaoui (LCSEN)
                           Kristyna Bishop (LCSSO)
                           Marcelo Hector Acerbi (LCSEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              This is a category “B? operation. The proposed
                           BP 4.01                                              investments seek to protect critical natural
                                                                                habitat through significantly expanding an
                                                                                existing protected area and supporting
                                                                                governance (institutions, zoning, action plans,
                                                                                dialogue and policies) for the entire area. While
                                                                                the project will not finance civil works or other
                                                                                activities with a physical footprint, the activities
                                                                                of protected areas management, land use
                                                                                planning and forest management have many
                                                                                important social and environmental
                                                                                implications.
                                                                                The project is designed to generate positive
                                                                                environmental impacts through protection of
                                                                                critical natural habitats and improved land-use
                                                                                planning. Nevertheless, the expansion of the
                                                                                protected area as well as activities in the buffer-
                                                             zone through improved enforcement, changes in
                                                             land-use provisions, and promotion of financial
                                                             mechanisms linked to PES and REDD could be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             sensitive from a social standpoint.
                                                             The project preparation will include the
                                                             development of an environmental and social
                                                             management framework (ESMF) that will
                                                             describe in detail the process and criteria to
                                                             establish the expanded protected area, land-use
                                                             plans in buffer-zones, development of
                                                             enforcement capacity, and establishment of
                                                             offset programs. The ESMF will also analyze
                                                             gaps in existing systems, best practices in
                                                             different sectors and how can sustainability
                                                             practices be improved.
                                                             The ESMF will also address any livelihood
                                                             activities to be supported through the GEF or
                                                             counterpart funded activities when they go
                                                             beyond activities included within the Process
                                                             Framework for restrictions in access. The
                                                             ESMF will also incorporate robust consultation
                                                             processes with private sector, ranchers, and
                                                             indigenous communities among others. During
                                                             preparation the project will seek consistency
                                                             and coordinate with the activities surrounding
                                                             the FCPF/REDD+ process in Colombia
                                                             presently supported by the Bank.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   This policy is triggered given that the decisions
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             made in terms of land management planning
                                                             will affect critical natural habitats. Policy, land-
                                                             use and enforcement activities could accelerate
                                                             deforestation processes if not approached
                                                             correctly with proper social engagement and
                                                             consultation. The ESMF will include a
                                                             description of the process to engage with the
                                                             different stakeholders during the project to
                                                             avoid or minimize any conversion or
                                                             degradation that may result from human activity
                                                             induced by the project.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes   This policy is triggered given that the decisions
                                                             made in terms of land management planning
                                                             including forest management plans will affect
                                                             forests. The ESMF will include the process for
                                                             development of sustainable management plans
                                                             and other forestry-related policies or
                                                             enforcement activities. The ESMF will also
                                                             review the MOFOR regulations in light of the
                                                                 Bank policy requirements for sustainable forest
                                                                 management.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           TBD   Livelihood activities might include sustainable
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 agriculture or reforestation activities that may
                                                                 require pest management. This will be
                                                                 confirmed during preparation. If this is the case,
                                                                 the policy will be triggered and the necessary
                                                                 provisions to meet policy objectives will be
                                                                 incorporated in the ESMF.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   This policy is triggered as the project will
                         BP 4.11                                 support changes in the acceptable use and
                                                                 access to areas with potential cultural
                                                                 significance (sacred sites) for communities
                                                                 living within and around the protected areas and
                                                                 management zones. The principles of this Policy
                                                                 will be fully integrated into the planning
                                                                 processes described in the ESMF.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   This policy is triggered as Indigenous peoples
                                                                 with the four characteristics outlined in the
                                                                 Policy live within the project area and could
                                                                 potentially be affected both positively and
                                                                 negatively from project activities. The Project
                                                                 will address the distinct interests and concerns
                                                                 of Indigenous peoples living within and outside
                                                                 of collective territories (resguardos) as well as
                                                                 Indigenous peoples living in voluntary isolation.
                                                                 A social assessment and process of free, prior
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 and informed consultation with indigenous
                                                                 peoples (with the exception of those living in
                                                                 voluntary isolation) will be carried out during
                                                                 project preparation. Once the Bank team has
                                                                 further information on the processes already
                                                                 carried out by the government with Indigenous
                                                                 peoples, a final decision will be made regarding
                                                                 the most appropriate instrument and its scope
                                                                 (IPP or IPPF) that will be developed during
                                                                 preparation. The project will in no way affect or
                                                                 change the collective territorial rights of
                                                                 Indigenous peoples or alter their rights or access
                                                                 to the natural resources within those territories.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   This policy is triggered as the project’s activities
                         4.12                                    imply both the enforcement of existing and the
                                                                 introduction of new restrictions of access to
                                                                 protected areas. A process framework will be
                                                                 prepared that describes the process for
                                                                 identifying affected communities, assessing the
                                                                                                                                 impacts of the restrictions in access and the
                                                                                                                                 participatory processes that will be carried out
                                                                                                                                 to define and support alternative livelihoods and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 practices to compensate or mitigate these
                                                                                                                                 impacts. The process framework will include
                                                                                                                                 specific indicators and mechanisms to monitor
                                                                                                                                 impacts and benefits on communities affected
                                                                                                                                 from restrictions in access. Any mitigation
                                                                                                                                 measures or support for alternative livelihoods
                                                                                                                                 found to be necessary will be financed under
                                                                                                                                 Component 2. This will be confirmed during
                                                                                                                                 project preparation.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            This project will not finance any dams nor will
                                                                                                                                 rely on the operations of existing dams.
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            This project will not finance activities that
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            impact any international waterways as defined
                                                                                                                                 by the policy.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             This project will not finance activities in
                                 7.60                                                                                            disputed areas as defined by the policy.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Dec-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Safeguard related studies would be ready in draft by the Project's quality enhancement review.
                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Adriana Goncalves Moreira

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name:                                                                                                                      Date:
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Robert H. Montgomery (SM)                                                                                            Date: 20-Aug-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
