                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA2404
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Mar-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Apr-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Ghana                            Project ID:    P119063
                            Project Name:     GH-GAMA Sanitation and Water Project (P119063)
                            Task Team         Ventura Bengoechea
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         11-Mar-2013                      Estimated   30-Jul-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    AFTU2                            Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Sanitation (40%), Water supply (30%), Sub-national government administration
                                              (15%), Central government administration (10%), Other s ocial services (5%)
                            Theme(s):         Urban services and housing for the poor (85%), Infrastructure services for
                                              private sector development (10%), Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support
                                              (5%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     150.00           Total Bank Financing:              150.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                       Financing Gap:                       0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                    Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                     0.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                            150.00
                              Total                                                                                150.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2.


                            3. Project Description


                                                                     Page 1 of 8
                         The proposed project will be structured as a Specific Investment Loan (SIL) to be followed by other
                         operations, given the long term engagement required to increase access to water and sanitation in low
                         income areas of GAMA and to attain an efficient and sustainable operation and management of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         services.

                         The proposed project, SIL, would have the following four components:

                         Component 1 - Provision of environmental sanitation and water supply services to priority low
                         income areas of the GAMA (US$ TBD million). The objective of this component is to increase the
                         access to environmental sanitation and water supply services in low income areas of the GAMA. The
                         MMDAs will propose priority low income communities to benefit from the project based upon
                         agreed selection criteria including population density, environmental health conditions, and degree of
                         access to alternative sanitation and water services. The type and level of sanitation facilities and
                         water supply will be identified and agreed with each community through a participatory process. The
                         participatory process, which will be financed by Cities Alliance in an initial phase, encompasses a
                         comprehensive approach aimed at designing the most appropriate environmental sanitation and water
                         supply solutions from a technical, economic, environmental and social point of view. The objective
                         is to select and develop options that best suit residents’ needs, while taking into consideration the
                         specific physical conditions of each community, such as: soil characteristics, topography, and space
                         availability, among others.

                         Component 2 – Improvement and expansion of the water distribution network in the GAMA (US$
                         TBD million). The objective of this component is to improve and expand the water distribution
                         network in order to provide piped water to the targeted people living in low income communities in
                         the GAMA. The location and priority of the interventions will be determined with the assistance of a
                         hydraulic model for the GAMA to be developed during project preparation. This component will
                         support investments required to improve and expand the existing network. These investments include
                         the installation of transmission mains, booster pumps and any other facilities required to ensure that
Public Disclosure Copy




                         water reaches the targeted low income areas. This component would also support the acquisition and
                         installation of water meters and other equipment, as well as the provision of services, aimed at
                         improving water demand management and reducing non-revenue water.

                         Component 3 – Improvement and expansion of wastewater and septage collection, transportation,
                         treatment and disposal) in the GAMA (US$ TBD million). The objective of this component is to
                         improve and increase wastewater and septage collection, transport and treatment. This component
                         would finance the establishment of collection, transportation, treatment and disposal services for
                         wastewater and septage generated by the targeted low income areas (to be served under Component
                         1) and other areas in the GAMA. Thus, facilities will be sized to treat the existing and newly
                         generated waste flows that currently end up untreated into drains, or directly discharged into the sea.
                         Facilities supported by this component may include, among others: (i) tertiary (i.e. upstream) and
                         limited secondary drainage; (ii) sewerage, including condominial and other types of simplified
                         sewers; (iii) wastewater and septage treatment plants, such as those tentatively planned for Achimota
                         and Teshie Nungua, although the project may also finance small plants at the community level,
                         where no other option is available; and, (iv) solid waste collection and transfer services, where these
                         are required to make the local drainage system function properly.

                         Component 4 – Institutional Strengthening (US$ TBD million). This component will provide
                         technical assistance (TA) to municipal, metropolitan and national institutions, including the


                                                                      Page 2 of 8
                         promotion of private sector initiatives and capacity building of 40 public health engineers to be
                         engaged for the MMDAs.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis (if known)
                         The project would be implemented in the Greater Accra Metropolitan Area for the 11 Metropolitan,
                         Municipal and District Assemblies (MMDAs) within the GAMA.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Moses Yao Duphey (AFTN3)
                         Beatrix Allah-Mensah (AFTCS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes               The project includes large scale civil works such
                          BP 4.01                                             as the construction of water and sewage pipes,
                                                                              pumping stations, waste water and fecal sludge
                                                                              treatment plants, and other water and sewage
                                                                              infrastructure. Most of these works are of a
                                                                              routine nature and do not have large scale, long
                                                                              lasting environmental impacts, or such impacts
                                                                              which would reach beyond the immediate project
                                                                              area. Most impacts would be restricted to the
                                                                              construction phase and can be readily mitigated
                                                                              with available and well-tested, standard
                                                                              techniques and measures.
                                                                              The project's main environmental risk is
                                                                              associated with the construction or expansion of
                                                                              treatment plants for wastewater, sewage and fecal
                                                                              sludge. The key environmental risk associated
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              with the treatment plants is their diligent, long
                                                                              term operation. If not operated diligently
                                                                              treatment plants may turn into polluters of
                                                                              significant scale, negatively affecting ground and
                                                                              surface water quality, spreading waterborne
                                                                              diseases, and causing nuisances to the adjacent
                                                                              population by odors and vectors.
                                                                              The diligent management of treatment plants
                                                                              depends on several factors, such as skilled
                                                                              personnel, a constant stream of sufficient
                                                                              operational budget, simple and robust technology
                                                                              and sufficient long term plant capacities.
                                                                              These are known issues and will be duly
                                                                              considered in project design and the overall
                                                                              operational planning, including technical,
                                                                              financial and organizational robustness. A careful
                                                                              analysis of current and future demand and the
                                                                              resulting required capacities will ensure sufficient
                                                                              dimensioning of the plants, to accommodate the



                                                                      Page 3 of 8
                                                                         predicted rapid increase of wastewater, sewage
                                                                         and fecal sludge quantities. Currently, since the
                                                                         specific sites are not known, the project has
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         prepared Environmental and Social Management
                                                                         Framework (ESMF) and a framework EMP. The
                                                                         frame work EMP is specific on the nature of
                                                                         mitigation measures, but generic on the location
                                                                         and dimensions of project activities since these
                                                                         would not be known during project preparation /
                                                                         before appraisal. The ESMF provides clear
                                                                         guidance for the preparation of site-specific EIAs
                                                                         and EMPs during project implementation when
                                                                         specific environmental and social issues will be
                                                                         analyzed in detail and a comprehensive
                                                                         environmental and social impact assessment
                                                                         (ESIA) developed, as well as ESMPs with a long
                                                                         term operational planning perspective
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes             This is triggered on cautionary basis. During
                                                                         project activity implementation, if need be, the
                                                                         borrower, advised by the Bank, will prepare the
                                                                         required instruments and actions to address any
                                                                         such impacts.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes             The project triggers the OP 4.12 as there is
                         4.12                                            likely to be land take due to the expansion and
                                                                         improvement in existing networks for water
                                                                         distribution. The proposed expansion in the
                                                                         sewerage network, the development of new
                                                                         wastewater and fecal sludge, the construction of
                                                                         institutional toilets in schools, public areas and
                                                                         health centers will all require land which may
                                                                         result in restriction of access and involuntary
                                                                         resettlement. Thus, activities proposed under 3 of
                                                                         the 4 project components will have impacts on
                                                                         land and possible restriction of access and access
                                                                         to assets. Although, the expansion works may
                                                                         take place within existing right of Ways (RoWs)
                                                                         for the utilities- Ghana Water Company Limited
                                                                         (GWCL), given the nature of urban settlements,



                                                                 Page 4 of 8
                                                                                 these RoWs may have been taken over by people
                                                                                 who may not have any legal right to the sites but
                                                                                 who may be occupying them for domestic or
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 economic reasons. The project has prepared a
                                                                                 Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) which has
                                                                                 been disclosed in country and at the World Bank's
                                                                                 InfoShop before appraisal. The preparation of the
                                                                                 RPF is proposed due to the fact that, at project
                                                                                 preparation, it will not be possible to identify
                                                                                 specific sites for any project activity likely to lead
                                                                                 to involuntary resettlement. The RPF developed
                                                                                 by the Government of Ghana (GoG) will be used
                                                                                 to guide the preparation of Resettlement Action
                                                                                 Plans (RAPs) or Abbreviated Resettlement
                                                                                 Action Plans (ARAPs), where required, after
                                                                                 screening of project activities and sites for
                                                                                 particular activities are done. RAPs/ARAPs
                                                                                 would then be properly reviewed, cleared and
                                                                                 disclosed as required prior to implementation.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               Although, this is a category A project, there are no long term impacts anticipated. The
                              environmental and social impacts are expected to be, site-specific and can be managed to an
                              accepted level. Potential environmental impacts have been identified in regards to the activities
                              under components 1, 2 and 3 which will include provision of sanitation and water facilities,
                              improvement or extension of existing facilities and installations of transmission lines. These
                              activities will involve air and dust emissions, noise and vibration, open pits/trenches, disposal of
                              construction waste and public safety/health concerns. Other impacts include interruption of natural
                              drainage/hydrological patterns, water contamination, improper waste water disposal (boreholes)
                              and sludge/fecal matter disposal (latrines). All these environmental impacts are manageable and
                              could be contained. The key environmental risk associated with the treatment plants is their
                              diligent, long term operation. If not operated diligently treatment plants may turn into polluters of
                              significant scale, negatively affecting ground and surface water quality, spreading waterborne
                              diseases, and causing nuisances to the adjacent population by odors and vectors.

                              The diligent management of treatment plants depends on several factors, such as skilled personnel,
                              a constant stream of sufficient operational budget, simple and robust technology and sufficient
                              long term plant capacities.

                                                                         Page 5 of 8
                           An ESMF has been prepared to give guidance on mitigation and management of these impacts.
                           From the social side, the project will require pieces of land for the construction of the sanitation
Public Disclosure Copy




                           facilities and the water systems as described above. This may temporarily affect peoples’
                           livelihoods, assets and access. For this reason the borrower has prepared a resettlement policy
                           framework that will serve as the guide to address any involuntary resettlement issues related to the
                           project. It is however expected that there will be no major issues and possible cases would be
                           easily addressed.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             One possible effect of the project is that it might result in lowering the water table significantly,
                           particularly if there are several boreholes/wells that draw on the same aquifers. It is important for
                           an assessment to be done to ensure that the water table can support the investment. From the
                           social perspective, there is likely to be contestation on site selection which may have implications
                           for land acquisition. Again, given the fact that in the targeted communities, one major challenge is
                           available space, acquiring land for the facilities could have challenges. This can be addressed
                           through the options that will be offered and also through the guidance by the RPF, which will be
                           reference point to address any such cases. On the other hand, the project is likely to lead to
                           expansion of economic activities and opening up of the respective local economies. The positive
                           social, health and economic impacts and influence of lifestyles can be considerable especially for
                           women, children and other vulnerable groups.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.

                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            In response to all the policies triggered, the GOG has developed an Environmental and Social
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Management Framework (ESMF) which has an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for the
                           project. This considers institutional arrangements required to implement the environmental
                           actions, as well as a presentation of some monitoring indicators. The EMP also provides basis for
                           the identification and costing of mitigation measures against adverse impacts of sub-projects. All
                           subprojects will have to meet environmental standards as described in the POM, ESMF. The
                           ESMF has been reviewed, and disclosed 120 days prior to appraisal on March 11, 2013 both in
                           country and at the World Bank infoshop.

                           On social safeguards, a resettlement policy framework RPF sets the framework for addressing any
                           potential involuntary resettlement regarding land acquisition, livelihoods impact, and restriction of
                           access and what type of compensation or support a particular type of affectation can receive. The
                           RPF therefore assesses the existing legal and administrative framework, clarifies the principles
                           underlying the policy OP 4.12. it also considers the different types of possible impacts and their
                           corresponding mitigation measures, consultation processes and an outline for a resettlement action
                           plan (RAP) should that become necessary during project implementation. One important aspect of
                           the RPF is a mechanism for grievance redress and identification of training requirements for the
                           implementing agency staff.

                           Mitigation measures will be enforced through contractor performance monitoring and evaluation
                           as well as the overall implementation of the ESMF with participatory supervision from the MMAs,


                                                                       Page 6 of 8
                           the affected persons and in collaboration with the EPA. Environmental Health Officers will help
                           to ensure that proper clearances and approvals are obtained for sanitation sub-projects. The
                           GAMA will also sensitize low income communities on the environmental aspects of their
Public Disclosure Copy




                           subprojects, and if needed train them to understand their roles and responsibilities. The approach is
                           meant to incorporate environmental concerns into the project design and focuses on
                           environmentally sound criteria for water facilities, wastewater disposal techniques, and appropriate
                           on-site location of sanitation facilities. Overall, identified staff will be responsible for the
                           safeguards which will be monitored and reported on as part of the projects periodic reporting.
                           These measures will help to identify environmental and social impacts way ahead and institute
                           measures to address them effectively and timely.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             In the course of the preparation of the RPF and ESMF, there was considerable consultation with
                           metropolitan assemblies, communities, the EPA, Ministry of Local Government and Rural
                           Development and other stakeholders. The RPF and the ESMF details out the level of
                           consultations and issues raised during these consultation processes with a broad spectrum of
                           stakeholders including community leaders and institutional representatives. Some of the concerns
                           raised and which have been incorporated into the final documents included issues on land
                           acquisition, community sensitization and engagement with potential project affected people.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         17-Dec-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      19-Dec-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive         01-Mar-2013
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Ghana                                                               19-Dec-2012
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         20-Feb-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      07-Mar-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [       ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?

                                                                      Page 7 of 8
                            OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                             If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
Public Disclosure Copy




                             project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Ventura Bengoechea
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name:                                                   Date:
                            Coordinator:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Alexander E. Bakalian (SM)                        Date: 26-Apr-2013




                                                                        Page 8 of 8
