                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA2581
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Apr-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Jan-2013, 04-Apr-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Vietnam                            Project ID:    P117394
                            Project Name:      Fostering Innovation through Research, Science and Technology (FIRST)
                                               (P117394)
                            Task Team          Suhas D. Parandekar
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       10-Jan-2013                           Estimated   29-May-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: EASHE                                  Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector:           Tertiary education (100%)
                            Theme:            Education for the knowledge economy (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        110.00               Total Bank Financing:           100.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                              Financing Gap:                     0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                             10.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                   100.00
                              Total                                                                         110.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective is to support science, technology and innovation in Vietnam by
                           improving the utilization of global scientific and research networks, enhancing the effectiveness of
                           project-aided Research and Development (R&D) institutions, and encouraging the development of
                           innovative technology enterprises.
                            3. Project Description
                           The proposed Project consists of the following three components: (i) Knowledge Policy


                                                                        Page 1 of 7
                         Development, (ii) Supporting Government Research Institute (GRI) Reform and Enterprise
                         Innovation, and (iii) Project Management and Policy Research Program on Project Activities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Knowledge and Policy Development

                         Subcomponent 1 (a): Research on and Pilot Implementation of Policies to Attract Overseas Talented
                         Experts – This subcomponent includes carrying out research on, and developing and piloting the
                         implementation of policies intended to attract talented experts residing abroad, in order to conduct
                         scientific research and foster innovation in Vietnam, through: (i) reducing the information barriers
                         and connecting scientific and innovation networks abroad with GRIs and innovation driven
                         enterprise in Vietnam networks; and (ii) provision of Foreign Talents Science, Technology and
                         Innovation (STI) Grants to selected scientific researchers and/or public or private research
                         institutions interested in liaising/interacting with scientific and entrepreneurial talents overseas.

                         Subcomponent 1 (b): Strengthening Results Measurement in Science, Technology and Innovation –
                         This subcomponent comprises upgrading and modernizing the collection, dissemination, and use of
                         science and technology and innovation statistics from enterprises and research institutions, including:
                         (i) carrying out of research and development, and innovation surveys based on international
                         standards; (ii) publishing yearbooks on science, technology and innovation statistics; (iii) develop a
                         monitoring and evaluation framework to measure the effectiveness and efficiency of research and
                         development institutions in both public and private sectors; (iv) strengthening the National Agency
                         for Scientific and Technological Information's (NASATI’s) institutional capacity to conduct
                         technology mapping exercises and technology innovation gap analyses for selected productive
                         sectors; and (v) setting up a national science, technology and innovation database.

                         Component 2: Supporting Government Research Institutes Reform and Enterprises Innovation

                         Subcomponent 2 (a): Supporting Government Research Institutes Reform – This subcomponent will
                         provide approximately fifteen (15) GRI STI Grants to selected GRIs in selected Priority Sectors, in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         order for them to implement their GRI Conversion Plans to evolve from traditionally managed
                         organizations towards autonomous market-driven institutions. The GRIs will be selected from four
                         priority sectors identified in Law 21/2008/QH12 on High Technology: (i) information and
                         communications technology (ICT); (ii) bio-technology and agriculture; (iii) advanced materials; and
                         (iv) mechanical manufacturing and automation.

                         Subcomponent 2 (b): Enterprises Innovation – This subcomponent will provide: (i) New Enterprises
                         STI Grants to competitively selected, recently established technology enterprises for the
                         implementation of New Enterprises Proposals; (ii) Research and Innovation Consortium STI Grants
                         to selected enterprises, research institutes and universities (“Phase I – Research and Innovation
                         Consortium STI Grant?), or consortia thereof (“Phase II - Research and Innovation Consortium STI
                         Grant?), for the development and implementation of Consortia Project Proposals.

                         Subcomponent 2 (c): Establishment of the National Core Technology Laboratory for Mechanical
                         Manufacturing Automation and Embedded Technology – This subcomponent will develop the
                         architectural designs, and carrying out the civil works for the construction and habilitation of national
                         laboratory for mechanical manufacturing automation and embedded technology in Hoa Lac High-
                         Tech Park (HHTP) in order to pioneer a government-owned-privately-operated public-private
                         partnership arrangement.



                                                                       Page 2 of 7
                           Component 3: Project Management and Policy Research Program on Project Activities

                           Subcomponent 3 (a): Project Management – This subcomponent will strengthen the institutional
Public Disclosure Copy




                           capacity of the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST) in order to implement the Project and
                           comply with the fiduciary, monitoring and evaluation, and reporting requirements thereunder.

                           Subcomponent 3 (b): Policy Research Program on Project Activities – This sub-component will carry
                           out policy research programs on Project activities.
                            4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project location is nationwide since proposed activities can take place anywhere in Vietnam.

                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Nghi Quy Nguyen (EASVS)
                           Thuy Cam Duong (EASVS)

                            6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes
                            BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09            No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No
                            BP 4.11
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               Environment:

                             OP/BP 4.01. Environmental Assessment. OP/BP 4.01 is triggered by the proposed project. The


                                                                       Page 3 of 7
                         following two project activities under Component 2 have the potential for adverse environmental
                         impact: (i) the construction of the building that will house the National Core Technology
                         Laboratory for Mechanical Manufacturing Automation and Embedded Technology (VINALAB-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         MAMET) at Hoa Lac High Tech Park (HHTP); and (ii) subproject activities to be undertaken by
                         project-supported Government Research Institutes (GRIs) and enterprises. The project may cause
                         potential adverse environmental impacts including the generation of dust, noise, solid waste and
                         wastewater as well as issues relating to traffic and labor safety management. However, these
                         impacts are expected to be localized, varying from moderate to low levels and manageable through
                         good design, appropriate mitigation measures and close monitoring during implementation and
                         operation. In addition, the operation of the laboratory may create some long-term impacts such as
                         the generation of domestic/industrial wastewater and solid waste. These, again, can be mitigated
                         by waste disposal management.

                         Subprojects to be implemented by grant recipient GRIs and private enterprises also have the
                         potential for minor environmental impacts. These subprojects will support Research and
                         Development (R&D) activities at each of the grant receiving organizations and can include
                         equipment purchase and rehabilitation/upgrading of facilities. In the case of rehabilitation and
                         equipment purchase, potential small-scale impacts include the generation of dust, noise, solid
                         waste, and wastewater.

                         The potential adverse environmental impacts are not significant or of large scale, consequently the
                         project is classified for environmental impact as a category ‘B’ project.

                         OP 4.09 Pest Management. OP 4.09 is not triggered by the proposed project as it was determined
                         during appraisal that the project will not finance the procurement of harmful chemical pesticides
                         nor will the project encourage the use of such pesticides. However, it is noted that the project will
                         provide grants for as yet unidentified GRIs, university research departments and enterprises. It is
                         also noted that agriculture and bio-technology sectors are identified as one of the five identified
                         priority sectors for the project, therefore grant receiving institutes or enterprises may be involved
Public Disclosure Copy




                         in agricultural research. Said agricultural research may involve experimentation in a laboratory
                         setting that could involve the use of pesticides by technical staff for research purposes. The project
                         implementing agency will ensure that any such limited use of pesticides will be in accordance with
                         an integrated pest management (IPM) approach and national regulations and will not pose any
                         significant health or environmental risk.

                         Social:

                         OP 4.10 Indigenous People. OP 4.10 is not triggered by the proposed project. An early screening
                         was conducted by the Bank’s social specialist and the MOST team. The screening included a
                         meeting with the HHTP Management Board, a series of site visits and review of relevant
                         documents. The screening concluded that there are no ethnic minority communities present in the
                         project area.

                         OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement. OP 4.12 is not triggered by the proposed project. Since one of
                         the project activities includes the construction of a building to house VINALAB-MAMET, the
                         Bank’s social specialist reviewed the social assessment regarding the acquisition and clearance of
                         the land for the laboratory. The social assessment, conducted by a qualified specialist, found that
                         VINALAB-MAMET is planned to be established on a small parcel of land, approximately 2 ha,
                         which will be within the R&D Section (229ha) of HHTP. The assessment concluded that the land

                                                                    Page 4 of 7
                           planned to be used for the VINALAB-MATMET was cleared in the period 2008-2010 and there
                           are no legacy issues regarding resettlement or compensation left over from that period.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                           in the project area:
                            Environment:

                          The potential minor long-term environmental impacts include the generation of waste water and
                          solid waste from the VINALAB-MAMET during its operation, and from beneficiary GRIs and
                          enterprises’ subprojects, which involve research activities. Beneficiary organizations will be
                          required to comply with relevant national requirements on waste management and good
                          management practices as described in the Word Bank Group’s Environmental, Health & Safety
                          (EHS) General Guidelines.

                          Social:

                           The project has no direct, indirect and long-term social impacts in the project area.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.

                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            Environment:

                          As part of the project preparation, the Project Preparation Unit (PPU) under MOST has developed
                          an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to ensure that activities during
                          implementation and operation shall be in compliance with the World Bank safeguard policies and
                          national environmental management regulations. The ESMF is in accordance with the Bank
Public Disclosure Copy




                          safeguard policies and requirements, as well as with the national regulations on environmental
                          assessment and management. The ESMF has been approved by MOST and included in the Project
                          Implementation Manual to ensure that the environmental issue will be considered together with
                          other requirement during project implementation. The ESMF covers: (i) a screening process to
                          exclude ineligible activities/subprojects; (ii) impact assessment and development of mitigation
                          measures, including the Environmental Codes of Practice (ECOPs) for construction/minor
                          construction activities; (iii) safeguards documentation preparation and clearance; (iv) safeguard
                          implementation, supervision, monitoring, and reporting; (v) institutional arrangement and budget
                          for safeguard implementation; and (vi) institutional strengthening and capacity building programs
                          for the safeguards implementing entities. The ESMF also includes an Environmental Management
                          Plan (EMP) with generic guidelines and requirements to manage potential impacts associated with
                          the establishment of VINALAB-MAMET during design, construction and operation. It also
                          includes standardized ECOPs which describe measures for impacts associated with construction/
                          minor construction activities. The ECOPs and other subproject site specific mitigation measures
                          will be included in the bidding documents and contracts and closely monitored by subproject
                          owners and supervision engineers.

                          The Central Project Management Unit (CPMU) will have the overall responsibility for safeguard
                          implementation including providing guidance regarding safeguards requirements and carry out
                          environmental monitoring to ensure that GRIs and enterprises adequately meet safeguards


                                                                   Page 5 of 7
                           compliance. In addition, the CPMU and HHTP will be responsible for implementing safeguards
                           requirements related to the establishment of the VINALAB-MAMET. GRIs and enterprises will
                           be responsible for implementation of safeguards requirements of subprojects and activities under
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Component 2. As FIRST is the first World Bank financed project to be carried out by MOST, the
                           capacity of the CPMU and GRIs and enterprises regarding compliance with Bank safeguards
                           policies therefore is considered limited. The Project will require the allocation of qualified staff
                           under the CPMU to oversee environment and social safeguard issues, and training will be provided
                           as necessary to strengthen the capacity of the CPMU and grant recipients regarding the
                           implementation of safeguard requirements.

                           Social:

                           A qualified consultant with experience and knowledge on the Bank’s requirements was selected by
                           MOST to conduct the social assessment to inform the project design. The social assessment
                           concluded that there are no legacy resettlement issues in the construction of VINALAB-MAMET,
                           which is the only project activity involving civil works.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The key stakeholders for safeguard implementation include CPMU under MOST, beneficiary
                           GRIs and enterprises. Other stakeholders include local authorities, the management body of HHTP
                           and contractors for construction and equipment supply.

                           During the social assessment, consultation with relevant stakeholders, including government
                           officials, researchers, and potentially affected households were conducted in the form of focus
                           group discussions or in-depth interviews where participants could express their views on the
                           project’s impacts as well as design.

                           During the preparation of the ESMF, meaningful consultations with related stakeholders were
Public Disclosure Copy




                           conducted twice: (i) once before the term of reference (TOR) for the ESMF was prepared; and (ii)
                           once when the draft ESMF was finalized. Consultation with beneficiary GRIs and enterprises
                           could not be conducted as grant recipients have not yet been identified. In addition, the
                           VINALAB-MAMET is located on the vacant land in HHTP and there are no identified potential
                           affected people. Therefore, at project level, the public consultations of the ESMF were conducted
                           with MOST, the management body of HHTP and local consultants. The concerns and feedback
                           during the consultations were taken into account and reflected in the final ESMF.

                           Prior to appraisal, the ESMF has been disclosed locally in Vietnamese at the PMU office and at
                           the Department of International Relations in MOST and at the Vietnam Information Development
                           Center (VIDC) in Hanoi. In addition, the ESMF has been disclosed in English in the InfoShop in
                           Washington, D.C.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                         16-Jan-2013
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                      17-Jan-2013
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                            "In country" Disclosure
                              Vietnam                                                          16-Jan-2013
                              Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Suhas D. Parandekar
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Luis Benveniste (SM)                         Date: 04-Apr-2013




                                                                       Page 7 of 7
