                                                                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                            APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSA119
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Mar-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                       Vanuatu                                 Project ID:                      P112611
                              Project Name:                  Vanuatu: National Adaptation Project (P112611)
                              Task Team Leader:              Samuel G. Wedderburn
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 26-Mar-2012                                  Estimated Board Date:            12-Jul-2012
                              Managing Unit:                 EASNS                                   Lending Instrument:              Specific Investment Loan
                              Focal Area:                    Climate change
                              Sector:                        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (60%), Flood protection (40%)
                              Theme:                         Climate change (100%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                      Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                        0.00
                                   Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                                                         2.58
                                   EC EUROPEAID Agency                                                                                                       2.75
                                   Financing Gap                                                                                                             0.46
                                   Total                                                                                                                     5.33
                              Environmental Category:        B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Global Environmental Objective(s)

                              The project development objective is to improve the resilience of Vanuatu smallholders and communities to the impact of climate variability and
Public Disclosure Copy




                              change on food and household water security as well as livelihoods.

                              3. Project Description

                              The project will have the following four components:

                              Component 1: Improved Agricultural Resilience. The specific objective of this component is to increase smallholder access to improved
                              (genetically diversified) planting material and technologies to protect rural production from impact of climate change and extreme weather related
                              events. The strategy is to develop more climate resilient crop lines that will continue to produce under adverse conditions and to build the capacity
                              of service providers to assist in their adoption.

                              Component 2: Rural Water Supply.        The activities under this component would support and strengthen the national rural water supply program
                              already under way with RWS and NGO support. The project would support the expansion of rainwater harvesting and storage and also increase
                              the capacity of the Rural Water Supply Department to ensure that water supply systems being implemented by NGOs and other donors meet basic
                              national standards.

                              Component 3: Strengthening Adaptive Capacity in Coastal Areas
                              Activities under this component would support participating coastal communities to undertake Vulnerability and Adaptation (V&A) Assessments,
                              prepare community-based integrated adaptation plans, and provide community grants to address priority risks identified in these plans.

                              Component 4: Project Coordination. Overall high-level coordination of the project would be the responsibility of the recently created National
                              Advisory Board for Disaster Risk Management and Climate Change. Day to day project management responsibility would be under the
                              responsibility of a PMU located in the VMGD.

                              4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                              The project will be implemented in Shefa, Penama and Tafea provinces though the specific communities have not yet been selected.


                              5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                              Josefo Tuyor (EASPS)
                              Victoria Florian S. Lazaro (EASPS)

                                                                                                                                                                        Page 1 of 4
                         6. Safeguard Policies                       Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01         Yes          The project is small in scale and comprises soft activities (policy changes,
                                                                                  institutional arrangements, preparation of codes and guidelines, building and
                                                                                  strengthening capacity), and some activities linked to increasing water storage
                                                                                  capacity (such as rainwater harvesting) in coastal communities and possibly also
                                                                                  to changing cropping patterns using mostly indigenous crop varieties and cultivars
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                  to take into account changing climate. All of these activities are small in scale
                                                                                  done at the individual farmer or fisher or household level, which have been
                                                                                  assessed to have minimal and localized impacts. The purpose of these activities is
                                                                                  to mitigate the negative impact of climate variability and climate change, thus, they
                                                                                  are expected to have a positive impact on the environment and target
                                                                                  beneficiaries.

                                                                                   An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been
                                                                                  prepared by the Government of Vanuatu as part of project preparation. The ESMF
                                                                                  basically (i) assesses the likely environmental and social impacts of the proposed
                                                                                  project activities; (ii) proposes measures imbedded into each of the activity to
                                                                                  minimize the expected impacts; (iii) formulates the steps, process and procedures
                                                                                  for screening environment and social impacts of any activities to be supported by
                                                                                  the project, including coming up with a negative list of subprojects; (iv) proposes
                                                                                  the institutional arrangements for carrying out the ESMF, including monitoring,
                                                                                  training and capacity building.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                 No           Livelihood activities are not expected to take place in or around natural habitat
                                                                                  areas, which would be clearly stated in the implementation manual. Any activity
                                                                                  that would have negative impacts on natural habitats is included in the negative list
                                                                                  in the ESMF.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                          No           Integrating climate risk management into farmer's livelihood activities will be done
                                                                                  in farm areas that are already existing, which mostly, if not all, pertain to adoption
                                                                                  and/or expansion of agro-forestry activities in existing farmer fields. No new areas
                                                                                  for agricultural production would be opened and any activity that would involve
                                                                                  expansion and clearing of forests or forested areas is included in the negative list
                                                                                  of subprojects in the ESMF. In addition, the plantation of indigenous species in
                                                                                  coastal areas mainly serves the purpose of erosion control, and ultimately
                                                                                  contributes to wetland restoration. It will not affect the health or quality of existing
                                                                                  plantation/forest areas, or affect the rights or welfare of people who depend on/use
                                                                                  forest resources. Having said this, the overall impact of the project on forest would
                                                                                  be positive through expansion of agro-forest areas and indigenous coastal
                                                                                  vegetation.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09                     No           Component 1 of the project on increasing smallholder access to improved
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                  (genetically diversified) planting material and technologies to protect rural
                                                                                  production from impact of climate change and extreme weather related events is
                                                                                  not expected to result to the use or increase of pesticides and fertilizers among
                                                                                  farmers. The strategy is to develop more climate resilient crop lines that will
                                                                                  continue to produce under adverse conditions and to build the capacity of service
                                                                                  providers to assist in their adoption. The use of pesticides and fertilizers among
                                                                                  farmers in Vanuatu is almost non-existent and the project is not expected to
                                                                                  support the use of or reliance on pesticides by farmers. Instead, the project will
                                                                                  focus on the promotion and adoption of disease resistant varieties, climate-resilient
                                                                                  crops and intercropping with legumes. The use and/or purchase of pesticides
                                                                                  under the project is in the negative list as per the ESMF.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11      No           The project will not involve civil works and any activity is expected to take place in
                                                                                  existing areas already in use by farmers and fishers, hence impacts on physical
                                                                                  cultural resources are not expected.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10               No           The indigenous people of Vanuatu, the Ni-Vanuatu, account for some 95% of the
                                                                                  population. They are located predominantly in the rural areas where most project
                                                                                  activities would occur. As such an Indigenous Peoples Development Plan is not
                                                                                  required.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12         No           Physical works for project activities would not require land acquisition because
                                                                                  these will be done within the willing farmers' property. In the unlikely event that
                                                                                  involuntary land acquisition becomes necessary a Land Acquisition Framework is
                                                                                  formulated for the project. This Framework also includes a protocol for confirming
                                                                                  the voluntary use of farmer's land for project activities.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                   No           The project involves increasing water storage capacity through rainwater collectors
                                                                                  installed at individual household level and through the tapping of existing sources
                                                                                  of water. No dams will be constructed.
                         Projects on International Waterways OP/BP   No
                         7.50
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60       No


                                                                                                                                                              Page 2 of 4
                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                   The project is not expected to have any large scale, irreversible or significant impacts. The project activities comprise soft activities (policy
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 changes, institutional arrangements, preparation of codes and guidelines, building and strengthening capacity), and some activities linked to
                                 increasing water storage capacity (such as rainwater harvesting) in coastal communities and possibly also to changing cropping patterns using
                                 mostly indigenous crop varieties and cultivars to take into account changing climate. All of these activities are small in scale done at the
                                 individual farmer or fisher or household level, which have been assessed to have minimal and localized impacts. The purpose of these activities
                                 is to mitigate the negative impact of climate variability and climate change, thus, they are expected to have a positive impact on the
                                 environment and target beneficiaries.

                                 As activities are done in existing farms, land acquisition and involuntary resettlement are also not expected.
                               2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                                  Long terms impacts from the project are expected to be positive such as the adoption of climate-resilient crops, resistant varieties that do not
                                 entail use of pesticides, adoption and expansion of agro-forestry as an adaptation measure, expansion of endemic coastal vegetation as
                                 erosion control measure in coastal areas and increased capacity of farmers and fishers to adapt to the impacts of climate variability and
                                 change.
                               3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                                  Considering the high vulnerability of Vanuatu to climate variability and change, there is no other alternative but to institute adaptation
                                 measures at the individual farmer and fisher level.
                               4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                                  and implement the measures described.
                                  An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared by the Government of Vanuatu as part of project
                                 preparation. The ESMF basically (i) assesses the likely environmental and social impacts of the proposed project activities; (ii) proposes
                                 measures imbedded into each of the activity to minimize the expected impacts; (iii) formulates the steps, process and procedures for screening
                                 environment and social impacts of any activities to be supported by the project, including coming up with a negative list of subprojects; (iv)
                                 proposes the institutional arrangements for carrying out the ESMF, including monitoring, training and capacity building.

                                 The environment and social safeguards capacity of the Implementing Agency is weak. The project will the train the Implementing Agency, the
                                 farmers and fishers on the use of ESMF and how the measures can be integrated into individual farmer-fisher activity. The Implementing
                                 Agency will hire an Environmental Specialist who will train the IA and beneficiaries on the use of ESMF, in coordination with the Government
                                 Agency that has the EIA mandate.

                                 Despite the fact that land acquisition is not expected, the borrower has prepared a Land Acquisition Framework LAF) in the unlikely event that
                                 involuntary land acquisition becomes necessary. A negative list which includes the relocation and or demolition of any houses or business is
                                 also part of the ESMF for the project. The borrower capacity to manage social safeguards is perceived low. Fortunately said expertise is not
                                 required for this project. Training sessions on the use of the Protocol for confirming validity of voluntary use of private land within LAF together
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 with the ESMF shall be done in preparation for unavoidable events that may require this.
                               5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                                  on potentially affected people.
                                   The borrower has conducted a series of discussions through workshops, and community dialogues with the various stakeholders of the project
                                 to engage their participation in the planning of the project. Those consulted included goverment agencies, civil society andpotential farmers
                                 groups.

                               B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                               Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                                 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                               Yes
                                 Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                  22-Mar-2012
                                 Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                              23-Mar-2012
                                 Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                               23-Mar-2012
                                 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                                 Directors
                               If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                               disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                               If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                               C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                               OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                                 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                   Yes [     ]       No [    ]        NA [    ]

                               The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information


                                                                                                                                                                           Page 3 of 4
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?              Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language      Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for   Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?              Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard    Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same        Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Task Team Leader:                    Samuel G. Wedderburn
                            Approved By:
                            Sector Manager:                      Name Charles M. Feinstein (SM)                                           Date: 22-Mar-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                                               Page 4 of 4
