                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                  Report No.: ISDSC769

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-May-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            South Asia                        Project ID:      P128275
                            Project Name:       Third Phase of the APL on Strengthening Regional Cooperation for Wildlife
                                                Protection in Asia (P128275)
                            Task Team           Sumith Pilapitiya
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       26-Jun-2012                           Estimated        09-Oct-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: SASDI                                  Lending          Adaptable Program Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector:             General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (70%), General public
                                                administration sector (30%)
                            Theme:              Biodiversity (80%), Environmental policies and institutions (10%), Other trade
                                                and integration (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                              Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                              0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                    28.00
                              Total                                                                          28.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The long-term vision of the regional program is to stabilize and, if possible, increase the population
                           and habitats of critically endangered animals in Asia. Since wildlife and habitats cross
                           administrative boundaries and because knowledge and capacity vary widely across and within
                           countries, a regional approach is needed to address cross-border issues, build synergies, share skills,
                           knowledge and experiences and build regional collaboration for the conservation of critical habitats
                           and ecosystems.

                           The project development objective (PDO) is to assist the participating governments of India and
                           others to build or enhance shared capacity, institutions, knowledge and incentives to collaborate in
                         tackling illegal wildlife trade and other selected regional conservation threats to habitats in border
                         areas. The project will focus on a selected set of country-specific initiatives as well as key mutually
                         agreed regional activities that are crucial to attaining the regional strategic goals.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Project Description
                         The third phase of the regional project focuses on two main areas: (i) strengthening the capacity of
                         institutions in India to allow the country to take the lead on wildlife conservation in South Asia; and
                         (ii) capacity building to address the illegal wildlife trade in cooperation with other countries in the
                         region participating in the APL. The project interventions would enhance the capacity of the
                         Wildlife Division (WD) of India’s Ministry of Environment and Forests (MOEF) to steer its
                         neighboring countries toward adopting wildlife conservation policies and strategic management
                         initiatives, thereby improving trans-boundary conservation. Moreover, the project would strengthen
                         the Wildlife Crime Control Bureau (WCCB) to effectively address wildlife trafficking in the region.
                         The countries participating in the first and second phases of the regional project have common
                         borders with India. Hence, India’s participation in the regional project and its leadership are critical
                         for building and sustaining cross border cooperation in wildlife conservation and crime control.

                         The landscape approach to management of cross-border ecosystems among the countries
                         participating in this regional project is essential to the long-term conservation of charismatic and
                         flagship species, like the Royal Bengal Tiger, Asiatic Lion, Indian Elephant, One Horned Rhino,
                         Asiatic Black Bear and Red Panda (to name a few) because these wildlife require vast roaming
                         spaces. Compatible management policies and introduction of cross-border corridors would ensure
                         landscape level connectivity that is essential to the survival of flagship species. It is critical that
                         these species are managed effectively not only in the designated PAs within India but also along the
                         corridors that link ecosystems across India’s boundaries. The conservation of flagship species would
                         lead to improved natural habitats for all species and, ultimately, healthy ecosystems for Asia.

                         India’s participation represents the third phase of the regional project with Bangladesh and Nepal
                         participating in the first phase and Bhutan joining in the second phase. At the November 2010
Public Disclosure Copy




                         meeting of conservation officials from Bangladesh, Bhutan, India and Nepal, the participants
                         discussed the project’s regional issues and agreed to adopt specific mechanisms for collaboration in
                         addressing the threats to wildlife and habitats. At that meeting, the officials conveyed their
                         commitment to join the Regional Policy Steering Committee (a regional governance structure under
                         the project) for ensuring regional coordination as soon as the Committee is established and work
                         towards institutionalizing regional cooperation in wildlife conservation in South Asia.

                         Component 1: Capacity building for wildlife conservation and cooperation for addressing the illegal
                         trans-boundary wildlife trade (US$21.6 million)

                         Component 1 aims to bring about regional harmonization and collaboration in cross border wildlife
                         conservation and management, combating wildlife crime through strengthened legislative and
                         regulatory frameworks, well-equipped specialized agencies and systems, as well as relevant training
                         and awareness programs for staff across the range of agencies that contribute to the enforcement of
                         wildlife laws and regulations. This component will support strengthening the capacity of WD/MOEF
                         for undertaking policy development and analysis.

                         Additionally, the project will strengthen MOEF’s leadership role and strategic approach to regional
                         coordination in wildlife conservation. This role will be supported by implementing agencies under
                         MOEF’s jurisdiction, such as WCCB. Targeted interventions are envisaged under the project for
                         WCCB which has the national mandate for the control of illegal wildlife crime and trade. The
                         interventions under this component are aimed at bolstering WCCB’s role as South Asia’s leader in
                         wildlife crime and trade control.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Two broad areas are identified for support: (i) technical assistance in monitoring and evaluation
                         (M&E), policy analysis and development to build WD/MOEF’s leadership in regional wildlife
                         conservation and management; and (ii) assistance to WCCB to carry out the effective control of
                         illegal wildlife crime and trade in cooperation with the other countries. Under these two broad areas,
                         specific activities that would enhance India’s role in regional capacity building, cooperation and
                         coordination will be carried out.

                         Sub-component 1.1: Technical assistance to WD/MOEF on policy analysis and research and M&E
                         (US$ 9.1 million). The activities under this sub-component would enhance the capacity of WD/
                         MOEF to discharge its mandate on policy development, regulation and M&E as well as to take the
                         lead in regional efforts on conservation and ecosystem management. This will be achieved through:
                         (i) technical assistance for carrying out policy studies, strengthening regulation and developing M&E
                         systems; (ii) support for modern field, research and IT equipment; (iii) staff training and capacity
                         building, including study tours and exchange programs with regional and international conservation
                         agencies; and (iv) support for institutionalizing regional coordination of wildlife protection and
                         conservation.

                         Sub-component 1.2: Capacity building and training for WCCB (US$12.5 million). GOI established
                         WCCB – through the 2007 amendment to the Wildlife (Protection) Act – in response to the
                         increasing incidence of wildlife crime. Its mandate includes facilitating coordinated universal action
                         against wildlife crime and ensuring India’s compliance with relevant international treaty obligations.
                         India is well placed to play a prominent role in the South Asia region in this regard. India proposes
                         to assist other countries in South Asia in curbing wildlife crime through improved information,
                         communications and coordination, better legal frameworks, judicial awareness and reforms. WCCB
                         has a unique advantage since no other neighboring country has an institution dedicated to wildlife
Public Disclosure Copy




                         crime control. Yet, at present, WCCB remains a fledgling institution. To strengthen WCCB, GOI
                         approved an increase of over 300 new staff for WCCB. This sub-component will strengthen WCCB
                         in fulfilling its mandate through institutional development and comprehensive capacity building
                         programs. Equally important, WCCB will support capacity building of wildlife crime control units
                         in neighboring countries as part of those programs under this sub-component.

                         Component 2: Promoting wildlife conservation in Asia (US$4.6 million)

                         Sub-component 2.1: Virtual Regional Center of Excellence (VRCE) for wildlife conservation (US
                         $0.5 million). GOI’s formal request to participate in the APL specified India’s intent to develop and
                         exchange knowledge on conservation and crime control with the other participating countries. To
                         that end, the VRCE would fill crucial knowledge and information gaps in addressing regional threats
                         to conservation. This sub-component entails the creation of VRCE that would include a network of
                         scientists and practitioners whose mission would be to expand the scope and quality of research in
                         wildlife conservation needed to develop a common response against illegal wildlife trade in and
                         outside the region and to address other regional conservation and landscape level issues to be agreed
                         by the participating countries. For all participating countries to benefit from knowledge sharing
                         efforts, VRCE could sponsor the creation of a local networking forum in each participating country
                         to facilitate the exchange of research information, collaboration and coordination of country level
                         institutions involved in wildlife conservation research. Indeed, the formal request from GOI on
                         joining the APL specified India’s intent to develop and exchange knowledge on conservation and
                         crime control with the other participating countries. Coordination of the forum in India would be
                         facilitated by WD/MOEF.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         VRCE would provide the first (and only) coordinated, institutional response for research and
                         knowledge dissemination on wildlife conservation in South Asia with possible links to analogous
                         efforts in East Asia. The exclusive focus will be on either promoting a conservation-related regional
                         public good or addressing a regional public bad. Given the existence of national institutions with
                         expertise in this area already, it is critical for VRCE to bring value-added and not duplicate existing
                         efforts. By playing the role of coordinator and facilitator of knowledge and expertise, VRCE could
                         become a vehicle for promoting dialogue and good practices as well as disseminating knowledge.
                         Because VRCE will be virtual and will have no central physical facility, it will rely heavily on state-
                         of-the-art information and telecommunication technology (ICT) to conduct its business and to attain
                         its objectives. A Regional Operational Steering Committee (ROSC) would assist in the development
                         of VRCE’s overall program and objectives.

                         VRCE would build on existing regional and global environmental initiatives and benefit from
                         established experience, mechanisms and operating procedures. It would draw on strategic
                         partnerships with renowned wildlife conservation institutions in the region and elsewhere. It would
                         develop an active knowledge dissemination program and the key outputs would include: i)
                         Publication of research and pilot project results; ii) Sponsorship of workshops, lectures and seminars;
                         iii) Special seminars aimed at decision makers in the participating governments (legislators,
                         administrators and policy makers); iv) Training modules and teaching materials for wildlife
                         managers; v) Development of operating procedures for informing policy and wildlife managers in the
                         field.

                         Sub-component 2.2: Innovative research and pilot projects with a regional dimension (US$4.1
                         million). To sharpen incentives, promote demand-driven interventions and encourage attention to
                         regional conservation benefits, this sub-component would support innovative research and pilot
Public Disclosure Copy




                         projects that would contribute towards more effective conservation at the national and regional
                         levels. A competitive, demand-driven approach to reward innovation and efficiency of the staff of
                         WD/MOEF, WCCB and other agencies under MOEF’s jurisdiction, would be applied in selecting the
                         activities that would receive support under this sub-component. A transparent review and approval
                         process for proposals submitted for funding will be developed and implemented. The eligibility
                         criteria (including a negative list of activities) will be specified in the Operational Manual (OM) to be
                         finalized prior to disbursement. In line with the request of GOI, no field based activities within PAs
                         will be supported under this sub-component. Since the precise activities to be supported under Sub-
                         component 2.2 would be identified only during the preparation of the funding proposals, a typical list
                         of potential activities can be assumed at this time. WD/MOEF has prepared an environmental and
                         social management framework which will be used to ensure that the activities to be funded will have
                         no adverse environmental and/or social impacts.

                         Component 3: Project coordination and communication (US$3.8 million)

                         Sub-component 3.1: Project management and monitoring (US$0.8 million). This sub-component
                         would focus on project management and monitoring. MOEF will be responsible for overall project
                         implementation although specific components/activities will be implemented by WD/MOEF and
                         WCCB. MOEF will create a National Project Steering Committee (NPSC) responsible for overall
                         project oversight at the country level. Day-to-day project management will be undertaken by a
                         project management unit (PMU) within WD/MOEF. The PMU will be responsible for
                         implementation of WD/MOEF activities as well as the coordination and monitoring of WCCB-
                         implemented activities. In turn, a Project Implementation Cell (PIC) will be established within
Public Disclosure Copy




                         WCCB for day-to-day implementation of its activities.

                         Sub-component 3.2: Project communications (US$3.0 million). The project will adopt a multi-
                         pronged approach to communications in order to meet regional and local challenges. In addition to
                         relying on the regular communication mechanisms of WD/MOEF and WCCB, the project would
                         support a public awareness campaign targeted at illegal wildlife crime and wildlife conservation.
                         Additionally, a wide range of consultations with various stakeholder groups will be conducted at the
                         national and local levels. It is expected that rolling consultations will continue throughout the project
                         cycle. The communications sub-component will be developed and implemented in collaboration
                         with World Bank specialists in external relations. Implementation will be coordinated, as needed,
                         with GTI in view of the latter’s broader geographic mandate to engage in demand side management.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the              safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is being coordinated at the national level and specific project areas within the country
                         will be determined only during implementation. Most of the project activities are in the form of TA
                         and are applicable for most of the country. However, some of the pilot activities under Sub-
                         component 2.2 will focus on the protected and forest areas contiguous with Bangladesh, Nepal and
                         Bhutan.

                         India’s North East Region, constituting 5.2 per cent of the total geographical area, represents the
                         transition zone between the Indian, Indo-Malayan and Indo-Chinese bio-geographical regions as well
                         as being a meeting point of the Himalayan mountains and peninsular India. The North East is thus
                         the biogeographical 'gateway' for much of India's fauna and flora and also a biodiversity hotspot. A
                         diverse set of habitats coupled with long-term geological stability has allowed the development of
                         significant levels of endemism in all animal and plant groups. The Eastern Himalaya comprise Nepal,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Bhutan, states of East and North-East India, and a contiguous sector of Yunnan province in South-
                         Western China.

                         Geographically, apart from the Brahmaputra, Barak and Imphal valleys and some flat land between
                         the hills of Meghalaya and Tripura, the remaining two-thirds of the area is hilly terrain interspersed
                         with valleys and plains. The altitude varies from almost sea-level to over 7000 metres above mean
                         sea level (MSL). The region's high rainfall averaging around 10000 millimetres and above creates
                         problems of eco system, high seismic activity and floods. The states of Arunachal Pradesh and
                         Sikkim have cold, snowy winters and mild summers.

                         The 39 million people of Northeast India constitute only about 3.8 per cent of the total population of
                         the country (2001 census). Over 68 per cent of this population (26.64 million) lives in the state of
                         Assam alone. Mizoram has the lowest population of less than a million, i.e. only 0.891 million. The
                         population density varies from 13 per sq. kilometre in Arunachal Pradesh to 340 per sq. kilometre in
                         Assam. The predominantly hilly terrain in all the states except Assam is host to a large proportion of
                         tribal population ranging from 19.3 per cent in Assam to 94.5 per cent in Mizoram. The region has
                         over 160 Scheduled Tribes and over 400 other sub-tribal communities and groups. It is
                         predominantly rural with over 84 per cent of the population living in the countryside. According to
                         2001 census, the total literacy rate of the population in the region at 68.5 per cent, with female
                         literacy rate at 61.5 per cent, is higher than the country's average of 64.8 per cent and 53.7 per cent
                           respectively. Of course, there are significant variations in the literacy rates among different states
                           with Assam, Arunachal Pradesh and Meghalaya below the national average. The economy in the
                           entire Northeast India is agrarian in nature, although little land is available for settled agriculture.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The inaccessible terrain has made rapid industrialization difficult in the region. Along with settled
                           agriculture, jhum (shifting cultivation) is still practiced by a few indigenous groups of people.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Environment safeguards capacity: The borrower has a good track record of implementing World
                           Bank financed projects and a demonstrated capacity for implementing and monitoring safeguards.
                           Project preparation and implementation will be carried out by the Wildlife Division (WD) of India’s
                           Ministry of Environment and Forests (MOEF), which will also have oversight responsibilities for
                           environmental safeguards. As such, there will be no dearth of environment expertise and input to the
                           project.

                           India has a comprehensive policy and regulatory framework for natural resource management and
                           conservation, which are implemented at a fairly reasonable level. Therefore, it is believed that the
                           capacity of the implementing agency and the enabling legal environment are adequate for the
                           purpose of planning and implementing this project.
                           Except for the establishment of a forensic laboratory, the specific activities that will be supported
                           under the pilot project in sub-component 2.2 of the project will not be known at appraisal (other than
                           knowledge of typical activities that may be funded under the project). The demand responsive nature
                           of the process that will be adopted makes it difficult to identify exact geographic locations of project
                           interventions, and therefore it is not possible to undertake a project specific EA by appraisal.
                           Therefore an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared by the
                           client for the project prior to appraisal, in lieu of an Environmental Assessment (EA), which will
                           identify all potential environmental impacts of typical project activities, positive and negative, and
                           clearly lay out procedures for mitigating/enhancing and monitoring of such impacts. The ESMF will
                           serve as a template for undertaking activity specific environmental and social impact assessments of
                           project activities. All physical activities undertaken in sensitive areas will be subjected to
Public Disclosure Copy




                           appropriate environmental assessments/analysis and activity specific environmental management
                           plans, prior to implementation. If needed, capacity building will be carried out as part of project
                           implementation to ensure that procedures will be applied consistently.
                           Social Safeguards Capacity: The project is expected to have positive social impact and little negative
                           social impacts. The potential adverse social impacts, as anticipated at this stage, would largely result
                           from changes to landuse to address issues such as human wildlife conflict, which will be avoided or
                           kept at an absolute minimum. Since the exact location of project interventions are not know at this
                           stage, and may not be known at appraisal, WD will prepare a framework for managing social issues
                           including mainstreaming gender dimensions and managing impacts to tribal people. This relates in
                           particular to issues of community involvement, equity and conflict.
                           Overall, where necessary training will be provided to staff of WD to manage environmental and
                           social safeguards that are in compliance with GOI policy and regulatory requirements and World
                           Bank operational policies triggered by the project.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Darshani De Silva (SASDI)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?        Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes   Although project activities are expected to be
                         BP 4.01                                 environmentally beneficial in the long-term,
                                                                 implementation of certain activities will have
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 the potential to trigger environmental impacts
                                                                 which are not irreversible and are likely to be
                                                                 localized and can be easily mitigated. Since the
                                                                 project will operate in areas of high ecological
                                                                 sensitivity and vulnerability, great care will be
                                                                 taken to address environmental issues at the
                                                                 earliest stage possible in order to minimize their
                                                                 potential impacts. However, significant adverse
                                                                 social and environmental impacts are not
                                                                 expected as physical interventions are to be
                                                                 focused on conservation and safety of people.
                                                                 The ESMF that will be prepared will ensure the
                                                                 framework is in place in managing
                                                                 environmental and social safeguards including
                                                                 any potential impacts to natural habitats and
                                                                 forests.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes   The proposed project’s objective reflects that of
                                                                 OP 4.04 where the project will not entail any
                                                                 conversion or degradation of natural habitats. It
                                                                 is highly unlikely that the policy will be
                                                                 triggered in its full force as the project will not
                                                                 directly affect natural areas in an adverse way.
                                                                 Aside from EA documentation that may be
                                                                 required for pilot projects under Sub-component
                                                                 2.2, there is no free-standing document that is
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 automatically required by triggering OP 4.04 as
                                                                 it applies to the project.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes   Some impacts are possible due to pilot projects
                                                                 under Sub-component 2.2. Compliance of OP
                                                                 4.01 will ensure possible impacts to forests are
                                                                 managed within an acceptable level to the GOI
                                                                 and the World Bank.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    NA

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    NA
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   Since the sites of pilot projects under Sub-
                                                                 component 2.2 are unknown, the presence or
                                                                 absence of Indigenous People (IPs) and impacts
                                                                 on them are unknown at this stage of the
                                                                 project. However, OP 4.10 will be triggered to
                                                                 ensure a culturally appropriate Indigenous
                                                                                                                                 Peoples Plan (IPP) will be prepared following
                                                                                                                                 meaningful consultation with the affected IPs.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           The proposed project will not permit any
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 4.12                                                                                            involuntary resettlement and involuntary land
                                                                                                                                 acquisition. However, Sub-component 2.2 pilot
                                                                                                                                 projects are likely to affect land use patterns of
                                                                                                                                 the communities. This will likely have an
                                                                                                                                 impact on their livelihoods. Hence, OP 4.12 will
                                                                                                                                 be triggered, and a Resettlement Policy
                                                                                                                                 Framework (as part of ESMF) establishes the
                                                                                                                                 process by which members of potentially
                                                                                                                                 affected communities will be consulted and they
                                                                                                                                 will participate in the design of the sub-projects
                                                                                                                                 and mitigatory/compensation measures.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            NA

                                 Projects on International        No                                                             NA
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             NA
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 25-May-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      ESMF will be finalized and disclosed by June 11, 2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Sumith Pilapitiya

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Sanjay Srivastava (RSA)                                                                                              Date: 15-May-2012
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Maria C. Correia (SM)                                                                                                Date: 07-Jun-2012




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
