                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC443

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Dec-2011
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-Apr-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Vietnam                         Project ID:      P117394
                            Project Name:      Fostering Innovation through Research, Science and Technology (FIRST)
                                               (P117394)
                            Task Team          Suhas D. Parandekar
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       10-Jan-2013                        Estimated        30-May-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: EASHE                               Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Tertiary education (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for the knowledge economy (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        110.00              Total Bank Financing:          100.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                             Financing Gap:                   0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           10.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                 100.00
                              Total                                                                       110.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project will be aligned with the higher level objective of strengthening the National Innovation
                           System of Vietnam to achieve greater competitiveness and growth for transition to MIC status. The
                           specific objective of the proposed project is to support technology development and innovation in
                           Vietnam, through improving the national policy framework for S&T, enhancing the capacity of R&D
                           institutions, and strengthening linkages between supply and demand.
                           C. Project Description
                         The Project will be aligned with the higher level objective of strengthening the National Innovation
                         System of Vietnam to achieve greater competitiveness and gr                                    owth
                         for transition to middle income country status. The specific objective of t
Public Disclosure Copy




                         he proposed Project is to support technology development and innovation in Vietn
                         am, through improving the national policy framework for science and technology
                         (                                 S&T), enhancing the capacity of research and development (R&D)
                         institutions, and                                 strengthening linkages between supply and demand.

                          The proposed Project will include three main components aimed at improving the national policy
                         framework for S&T, supporting demand-driven R&D institutions, and
                         supporting technology intermediaries to improve linkages with industry. The fol
                         lowing are the proposed components under the Project:

                          Component 1: Strengthening the National Innovation System
                          This component will support key aspects of the Vietnamese National Innovation System. It is
                         composed of four sub-components that address priorities identified a
                         nd expressed strongly by the government:

                         A. Improving the policy framework for innovation

                          There is a strong need to improve over time the formulation, coordination, and implementation of
                         policies related to innovation. We have seen above that due to                                     the
                         large number of actors and overlapping responsibilities, the innovation syst
                         em is deeply fragmented and in need of improvements. This sub-component will add
                         ress in detail through technical assistance the recommendations of the World Ban
                         k-OECD innovation policy review currentlyin its initial phase. The review will o
                         ffer a comprehensive examination of the innovation system and presents detailed
                         recommendations in a way that stimulates discussion at the highest policy
Public Disclosure Copy




                         levels                                  . It will also analyze how other countries have overcome
                         challenges in their inn                                   ovation systems and how Vietnam can
                         customize their approaches to address its ow                                    n unique situation. It is
                         expected that completing the policy and legal framewor                                     k for the
                         successful implementation of GRI reform (GRI conversion) will focus on addressing tax, labor, IPR,
                         financing and other legal inconsistencies. B. Stren gthening the capacity of national, regional, and
                         provincial S&T managers

                          The vast majority of S&T managers at all levels do not possess the knowledge or skills to guide,
                         manage, and lead Government Research Institutes (GRIs) toward a
                         utonomous status or, more generally, help develop effective technology transfer
                         mechanisms. Along this line, while the current Intellectual Property Rights
                         (IPR                                  ) law is clear, implementation in terms of protecting intellectual
                         property is w                                  eak due to an insufficient number of and inadequately
                         trained government officia                                  ls. To address these gaps, a number of
                         training activities focusing on business                                  development and
                         administration, networking with enterprises, market analysis, le                                   gal,
                         tax, and IPR policies and procedures, financing mechanisms, financial manag
                         ement, and personnel recruitment and compensation, among others may be organized
                         under this sub-component to enhance key skills. The desired result is the devel
                         opment of staff that not only performs managerial functions but in some cases be
                         come entrepreneurs in their own right.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Supporting strategic financing mechanisms for S&T

                          Financing for S&T is still too low, heavily dominated by the State budget, and is allocated
                         inefficiently. The Government is aware of these constraints and plan
                         s to reform this approach by diversifying and increasing resources while using t
                         hem to support better performance. Although the overall strategy still needs to
                         defined, some mechanisms are already under discussion and appear promising such
                         as: the Technological Innovation Fund, to be managed by Ministry of Science and
                         Technology / State Agency for Technology and Innovation (MOST/SATI), which the G
                         overnment is planning to introduce; and a competitive funding mechanism to be ap
                         plied to the converted GRIs. The first mechanism would work as a pooled fund wit
                         h contributions from all enterprises (though income taxes) to finance applied R&
                         D and technology related activities. The second would work as a matching grant m
                         echanism which would rewardGRIs for resource mobilization from enterprises as we
                         ll as other indicators of good performance. Both types of mechanisms as well as
                         a possible National Higher Education Innovation Fund (NHEIF) or technology incub
                         ation fund for universities, are new for Vietnam and, beyond a good design, will
                         require strong credibility, legal arrangements, management and communication ca
                         pacity, and solid monitoring and evaluation capacity to be successful. This sub- component will
                         support these activities through technical assistance and training as well as explore other funding
                         arrangements.

                          D. Strengthening the country's capacity to collect, analyze, and disseminate S&T statistics and
                         indicators

                          Although some efforts have been undertaken by MOST, Vietnam does not currently measure and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         benchmark systematically its S&T performance. As the basis of monitor
                         ing and evaluating both the impact of S&T on a macro level and within individual
                         research institutes and firms, and being able to incorporate findings into prog
                         rams to improve future performance, it is imperative for Vietnam to bolster its
                         ability in this area. Building on the results of the OECD-WB innovation review w
                         hich will provide a diagnostic of STI data, and identify critical STI policy rel
                         evant indicators and related methodology to generate them, this sub-component wi
                         ll support R&D and innovation surveys and develop through training activities th
                         e capacity of MOST, especially staff at the National Agency for Science and Tech
                         nology Innovation (NASATI), to improve data collection and analysis using OECD g uidelines and
                         publish S&T statistics on a regular basis.

                          Component 2: Supporting demand-driven R&D Institutions
                          This component will supportthe implementation of two pillars of the Government's S&T strategy,
                         which have been jointly identified as both critical and high valu                            e-
                         added by the World Bank and the Government. It is composed of two sub-componen
                         ts:

                         A. Supporting the transition of GRIs to increased autonomy
                          Transition to self-sustained status as per Decrees 80 and 115 will be difficult for the majority of the
                         selected 465 applied research institutes and in response                                   the
                         component will support the design of a roadmap that will inform and prepare
Public Disclosure Copy




                         GRIs during the transition towards autonomy and higher responsiveness to the ne
                         eds of the private sector, as well as its implementation. The roadmap will inclu
                         de specific guidance on key aspects of establishing and operating an independent
                         GRI, including governance arrangements (management, boards, etc.), financial su
                         stainability, business development, legal issues, and performance monitoring. Su
                         pport will be in the form of capacity building, support services, and selected f
                         acility improvements (no civil works, only goods and equipment, some of them for
                         laboratories). The challenges faced by the GRIs having already made a transitio
                         n, in particular in the Ministry of Industry and Trade, could usefully be examin
                         ed here, as well as successful transitions such as the one completed by Korea. W
                         hile the roadmap itself would be general, support to its implementation could be
                         focused on GRIs in some national priority areas. These areas may include 1-2 su
                         b-sectors in manufacturing, agriculture, and services such as biotechnology, inf
                         ormation technology, automobiles, and specific export commodities.

                         B. Supporting the higher education-firms technology nexus

                          Vietnam's higher educationsystem is still not a source of technological capability and innovation as
                         it is in other countries. It is timely for Vietnam#s univer                               sities to
                         leave behind their state of isolation and start engaging the private s
                         ector world in a more strategic and systematic way. In line with this objective,
                         this sub-component will support selected leading universities to establish grea
                         ter and deeper linkages with enterprises, by developing support services (e.g.,
                         business development, marketing, applying for patents, legal advice, networking,
                         IT, training, etc.) and, as appropriate, business technology incubators. The ca
                         ses of Taiwan, China, Hong Kong, SAR China and China will be particularly useful
Public Disclosure Copy




                         to look at when developing incubation services in universities. The specific un
                         iversities will need to be identified on the basis of rigorous criteria, includi
                         ng quality, capacity for research, field of expertise, existing and potential st
                         rategic role in industrial development, and extent of current linkages with firm
                         s, etc.

                          Component 3: Supporting technology intermediary organizations to improve linkages to industry
                          This component will address the demand side of research by diagnosing and supporting key
                         intermediary organizations working at different levels of the system to
                         help diffuse knowledge. It is composed of two sub-components:

                         A. Supporting technology intermediary organizations

                          Organizations that provide support in management and technical training, business development,
                         information technology (IT), and marketing are few and often poor                               ly
                         qualified. Similarly, while there are some intermediary services to support i
                         ncreased demand for technological upgrading by firms through creating awareness
                         of technological needs, available technologies and role and potential of R&D ins
                         titutes, their capacity and scope is still limited. In this context, this sub-co
                         mponent will focus particularly on the experience of existing organizations that
                         facilitate linkages between supply and demand and promote the adoption of globa
                         l and local knowledge, including the centers for promoting technological transfe
                         r and information under the DOST offices, the State Agency for Technology Innova
Public Disclosure Copy




                         tion (SATI), the Vietnam Chamber of Commerce (VCCI), the Vietnam association of
                         small and medium enterprises (SMEs), technology transfer support centers, techno
                         logy business incubators, agricultural promotion centers, etc. and support furth
                         er development of some of these organizations through technical assistance, trai ning, networking,
                         exchange programs, and other varying support services. Particular focus will be put on establishing
                         through the intermediaries stronger linkag                                  es in rural areas and to
                         SMEs. Due to its current success in launching new busin                                     esses within
                         the country and its potential impact in the future, the role of the
                         Vietnamese diaspora will also be explored. The sub-component will interface clo
                         sely with Financial and Private Sector department's inclusive innovation project
                         to maximize synergies and collaboration and address related challenges identifi
                         ed by the WB-OECD innovation policy review, the Technology Foresight study curre
                         ntly being prepared by UNIDO, and studies on SMEs launched by the Innovation Par
                         tnership Program.

                          Further discussions have confirmed that, to improve links between demand and supply, this sub-
                         component will also focus on piloting the Technology Innovation Fu
                         nd. Piloting technology innovation fund will include the following activities:
                         (                                 a) Matching grants for a demand-driven technology development
                         and/or transfer ac                                 tivity, to be matched by the applicants (targeted to:
                         GRI/university and SMEs/ f                                     armers in a consortium on technology
                         development and transfer, and GRIs-universi                                    ty collaborative
                         partnerships on technology development and transfer); (b) Capac                                     ity
                         building for fund administrators; (c) Additional services: sub-sector specif
                         ic consultative multi-stakeholder platforms; and (d) Selectedgoods/equipment for
                         the pilot fund.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         B. Supporting science parks

                          This sub-component will provide technical assistance and training to the high-tech sector, a key
                         priority for Vietnam, by supporting the design and management o                                   f
                         science parks, especially Hoa LacHigh Tech Park (HHTP). HHTP, which focuses on
                         R&D based on national priority areas, is designed to serve as platform to imple
                         ment GOV's S&T policies and to push the S&T agenda further. It is also designed
                         to function as a one-stop shop that will offer the entire range of services and
                         infrastructure desired by investors. Technical assistance will be essential to f
                         urther design the master plan for the park, introduce international experience a
                         nd expertise on such topics as technology incubation and investment promotion, a
                         ndstrengthen the capacity of management within the park.

                          Further update confirms that the project would only support development oforientation, planning,
                         and road-map for the development of the Hoa Lac R&D Quarter. Th
                         is activity is likely to entail support in the design of laboratories and other
                         R&D facilities (but not the overall infrastructure of the park).

                         Component 4: Project management
                            This component will support the operations of the project committee and implementation units.
                           Most importantly, it will support any technical assistance needed                              in
                           project monitoring and evaluation and fiduciary requirements.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           N.B. The project will not accommodate the borrower's request for more infrastructure.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Vietnam (nationwide)

                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Borrower's capacity for safeguard policy should be satisfactory, in particular for this project which
                           has limited safeguard implications. MOST has experience in
                           managing laboratories and their environmental implications.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Thanh Quy Nguyen (EASVS)
                           Thuy Cam Duong (EASVS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              Op/BP 4.01 is triggered because the project
                           BP 4.01                                               includes some laboratory design and laboratory
                                                                                 research which involve waste management
                                                                                 issues. An EMP with generic guidelines and
                                                                                 risk mitigati                                   on
                                                                                 measures on laboratory design and waste
                                                                                 management will be prepared.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No               The project will not convert or degrade any
                                                                                 protected area, known natural habitats or
                                                                                 established critical protected habitats. Thisis
                                                                                 clear from project design
                                                                                 which will not entail civil works and only
                                                                                 support existing institutions and sc
                                                                                 ience parks within existing premises built in
                                                                                 urban or peri-urban areas (none of
                                                                                 which protected or a natural habitat as verified
                                                                                 with the Ministry of Science      and
                                                                                 Technology).
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No               The project will not affect the health, quality or
                                                                                 management of forests, forested areas or tree
                                                                                 plantations. This is clear from project design
                                                                                 which will not
                                                                                 entail civil works and only support existing
                                                                                 institutions and science parks wit
                                                                                 hin existing premises built in urban or peri-
                                                                                 urban areas.
                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                                                         The project is unlikely to trigger OP 4.09.
                                                                                                                                 However this requires further verification that
                                                                                                                                 any demand-driven test or pilot laboratory
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 research under component
                                                                                                                                 3.A will not involve chemicals/pesticides. This
                                                                                                                                 cannot be confirmed yet and as
                                                                                                                                 such a TBD is put at this stage.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No                            The project will not adversely affect known
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         sites with archeological, paleontological,
                                                                                                                                 historical, religious, or unique natural values.
                                                                                                                                 This is clear from proje
                                                                                                                                 ct design which will not entail civil works and
                                                                                                                                 only support existing institutio
                                                                                                                                 ns and science parks within existing premises
                                                                                                                                 built in urban or peri-urban areas
                                                                                                                                 (none of which cultural or historic sites as
                                                                                                                                 verified with the Ministry of Science and
                                                                                                                                 Technology).
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            The project does not involve any regional
                                                                                                                                 component nor target any particular community.
                                                                                                                                 No indigenous community, as per OP/B4.10,
                                                                                                                                 will be affected by the proje
                                                                                                                                 ct.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            The policy on involuntary resettlements is not
                                 4.12                                                                                            triggered. No civil works are involved. Support
                                                                                                                                 to the design of facilities will only be provided
                                                                                                                                 in one science
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 park which has already been established within
                                                                                                                                 fixed premises with no resettlem
                                                                                                                                 ents therefore involved.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project will not include activities involving
                                                                                                                                 dams.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             No project components involve international
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project is not located in any known
                                 7.60                                                                                            disoputed area as defined under the policy.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Jan-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Environmental assessment: September 2011-May 2012
                         IV. APPROVALS




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Task Team Leader:   Name: Suhas D. Parandekar

                         Approved By:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Regional Safeguards Name:                         Date:
                         Coordinator:
                         Sector Manager:     Name: James A. Stevens (SM)   Date: 13-Dec-2011
Public Disclosure Copy
