                                                                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                            CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC457
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-Mar-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        Ghana                                   Project ID:                       P129769
                              Project Name:                   Natural Resources and Environmental Governance Technical Assistance (P129769)
                              Task Team Leader:               Flavio Chaves
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 04-Apr-2012                                   Estimated Board Date:             24-May-2012
                              Managing Unit:                  AFTEN                                   Lending Instrument:               Technical Assistance Loan
                              Sector:                         Forestry (60%), Other Mining and Extractive Industries (40%)
                              Theme:                          Environmental policies and institutions (40%), Climate change (30%), Other environment and natural resources
                                                              management (30%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                       Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                          0.00
                                   IDA Grant                                                                                                                   5.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                       5.00
                              Environmental Category:         B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              B. Project Objectives

                              The Development Objective of the proposed TA operation is to increase the knowledge base and to strengthen capacities at Government and local
                              level to support the policy reforms under the NREG Program.

                              The proposed Technical assistance will complement the second series of DPOs supporting the NREG program. While the first series of DPOs
                              mainly contributed to setting up a framework, the second series is intended to operationalize it. As such, the TA will contribute to further deepen
Public Disclosure Copy




                              the policy reform program and help translate reforms into the activities on the ground. The proposed TA will help the government identify methods
                              and tools and suitable institutional arrangements to help them better embed the reforms in their development programs to improve sustainability
                              and foster impacts.

                              C. Project Description

                              This Technical Assistance (TA) operation is intended to assist the Government of Ghana in designing and implementing the second series of
                              Development Policy Operations (DPOs) in support of Ghana’s Natural Resources and Environmental Governance (NREG) Program. The
                              proposed Technical Assistance (TA) operation has three technical components and a provision for project management as described below.

                              Component 1: Forestry (1,710,000 USD). The overall aim of this component is to finance studies and consultations in support of policy reforms and
                              capacity building activities in the forestry sector in the following themes:

                              Sub-Component 1.1: Tree tenure regime: There is widespread consensus that the existing tree tenure system is among the most important drivers
                              behind the high deforestation rates in the country. However, despite extensive consultations conducted earlier, there is no consensus yet on the
                              most appropriate three tenure arrangements to address the deforestation issues or on the reforms needed.

                              The TA will support the GoG: (1) to hold further consultations on three tenure arrangements; and (2) to design tree tenure pilots (to be discussed
                              with relevant stakeholders) to be implemented at the local level.

                              Sub-Component 1.2: Timber Supply/Demand for the domestic market: In a context of growing local timber demand, it is important to create a
                              conducive environment for private operators to invest in alternative timber supply (including plantation) to alleviated pressure on natural forests.

                              The proposed TA will support the GoG: (1) to update forest inventories (multi-resources inventories to account for wood production, biodiversity,
                              and carbon stocks) and to deepen the analysis on the potential for forest landscape rehabilitation. The former activity will be closely coordinated
                              with the recently approved $8 million grant from the Japanese Cooperation aimed at equipping and providing satellite imagery to run the forest
                              inventory exercise; (2) to assess potential social impacts of forest plantation development, and identify mitigation measures; (3) to assess the
                              timber local demand (current and future) and in processing capacities; and (4) to assess constraints for private sector investments in forest
                              plantation and eventually proposed reforms if the constraints are in the public sector sphere.

                              Sub-Component 1.3: Statistical data and robust M&E system for evidence based policy making in the forestry sector: Lack of data undermines the
                         capacity of the Government to properly monitor the forestry sector as well as to inform the necessary decision-making process in this sector.

                         The TA will support the Government: The TA will support the Government to initiate the first step for the design of a robust and comprehensive
                         M&E system for the forestry sector. It will inter alia: 1) support the user needs assessment (including consultation with various stakeholders) and 2)
                         data collection on key priority area s (e.g. the domestic market).

                         Component 2: Mining (1,140,000 USD). The mining component will (i) strengthen capacities and develop procedures to better manage the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         artisanal and small scale mining; and (ii) strengthen capacities and develop tools to increase the socio-economic contribution of mining to Ghana.

                         Sub-Component 2.1: Strengthen institutional capacity to manage of artisanal and small scale mining (ASM) sub-sector: The Government of Ghana
                         is one of the few countries that has regularized small scale mining and that provides support and extension services to improve production
                         techniques and reduce negative impacts. However, a number of challenges still need to be addressed.

                         The TA will support the Government: to better understand the social dimensions of the ASM sub-sector (including the potential social impacts of
                         policy reforms). Specific activities will include: (1) additional analytical work (building on the PSIA) and wider consultations with affected
                         communities, miners themselves, ASM associations, etc; and (2) capacity building and training to strengthen capacity for monitoring, oversight,
                         and training of ASM in the MC and EPA District Offices; (3) updating of regulations and guidelines; and (4) work with Banks and other support
                         organizations to enhance access to finance for ASM miners.

                         Sub-Component 2.2: Increasing mining sector socio-economic contribution to Ghana: This component will support strengthening of mineral tax
                         administration and development of instruments and capacities to increase local procurement by the mining industry.

                         The TA will support the Government to: (1) Strengthen mineral tax administration: This sub-component will focus on strengthening capacities and
                         ability to collect revenues from mining companies according to contractual obligations; and (2) Increase local procurement by the mining industry:
                         This activity will focus on developing capacities to enforce the new regulations related to local procurement, and the development of manuals to
                         monitor and verify reporting by the mining companies.

                         Component 3: Environmental Management and Climate Change (1,150,000 USD). The overall aim of this component is to finance studies and
                         consultations in support of policy reform and capacity building activities in environmental management and climate change in the following themes:

                         Sub-Component 3.1: Mainstreaming environmental concerns in sector policies: Ghana has made significant progress in developing the Strategic
                         Environmental Assessment (SEA) as a policy instrument to assist in the mainstreaming of environmental concerns in sectoral policies, notably
                         under the first phase of the NREG program.

                         The proposed TA will support the EPA to: (1) draft SEA guidance, ensuring a consistent approach in carrying out sector and regional SEA in
                         Ghana; (2) strengthen EPA capacity to monitor the environmental impacts (including of large infrastructure projects) through the establishment of
                         procedures, information systems and resources to monitor compliance with environmental permits schedule; and (3) Assessment of current
                         grievance structures in environment sector, including grievance flow.

                         Sub-Component 3.2: Strengthening multi-sector coordination on natural resources and environmental management. In order to provide cross-
                         cutting policy direction and promote cross-sector coordination on matters related to environmental and natural resources management GoG
                         established the Environment and Natural Resources Advisory Council (ENRAC).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed TA will support the EPA to: (1) carry out an organizational and needs assessment to understand the gaps needed to improve
                         ENRAC’s impact; 2) provide resources to ENRAC for strengthening its coordination capacity.

                         Sub-Component 3.3: Increasing Ghana capacity to manage climate change and access climate financing: Enhanced knowledge on key climate
                         vulnerabilities is necessary to inform sectoral policy formulation, allowing the mainstreaming of climate change in the country development
                         strategy, and to identify institutional gaps related to climate change activities.

                         The proposed TA will support the Government with: (1) the establishment of a sound and efficient institutional framework to handle climate change
                         challenges; (2) the development of investment plans (e.g. transport, agriculture, coastal management) to address the challenges of climatic
                         variability in the different economic sectors; and 4) the preparation of “bankable? proposal to help the Government tap into the climate financing
                         opportunities to invest in climate change adaptation and mitigation. Activities will be designed in close coordination with DFID teams in order to
                         ensure complementarities and synergies with a parallel DFID grant on climate change.

                         Component 4: Supporting Project Management and Program Coordination (500,000 USD) This component will support costs related to day-to-day
                         project management, including handling of procurement and financial management. This Component will support both the Ministry of Finance and
                         Economic Planning in its role as NREG coordinator and project implementing agencies in charge of the implementation of the TA activities.


                         The Ministry of Finance will be responsible for the project fiduciary aspects and overall coordination of the NREG program. The proposed project
                         components will be implemented by the Ministry of Lands and Natural Resources, the Minerals Commission, the Forestry Commission, and the
                         Ministry of Environment and Science and Technology as per respective mandates.

                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         The proposed Technical Assistance project will support consultations, analytical work, and capacity building to strengthen Ghana's natural
                         resources and environmental management institutions in support of the parallel implementation of a series of Development Policy Operations
                         under the Natural Resources and Environmental Governance Program (NREG). As such, there will be no specific on-the ground project locations.

                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

                         National Institutional Capacity for the implementation of safeguards is adequate. Staff from the Environment Protection agency in Ghana have
                               experience in the application of national environmental and social safeguards, as well as World Bank safeguard policies as part of past and
                               ongoing lending operations across different sectors.

                               F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

                               Moses Yao Duphey (AFTEN)
                               Angela Nyawira Khaminwa (AFTCS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

                                Safeguard Policies                                                 Triggered?           Explanation (Optional)
                                Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                                Yes                    This Technical Assistance operation will not finance concrete investment
                                                                                                                        activities on the ground that could have direct environmental or social impact.
                                                                                                                        Instead this TA operation will accompany a series of Development Policy
                                                                                                                        Operations (DPOs) and support operationalization of the policy reform
                                                                                                                        processes intended under the DPOs, through provision of analytical work and
                                                                                                                        consultation with stakeholders. More concretely, the TA operation will finance
                                                                                                                        activities that strengthen institutional capacity in the NRM and environment
                                                                                                                        management sectors, improve institutional processes, generate and diffuse
                                                                                                                        knowledge and guidance tools, and support consultation under the policy reform
                                                                                                                        process in NRM sectors financed by the matching DPO. The TA operation will
                                                                                                                        promote active stakeholder participation in the NRM reform process anticipated
                                                                                                                        in Ghana.
                                                                                                                        The TA will not have any direct environmental and social impacts: however,
                                                                                                                        some analytical work that will be conducted under the TA (i.e. on tree tenure,
                                                                                                                        timber supply, artisanal mining, etc.) might have indirect, second-generation
                                                                                                                        environmental and social impacts. Terms of reference of relevant pieces of
                                                                                                                        analytical work (that will be further defined during the preparation of the TA
                                                                                                                        operation) will have to be prepared by appraisal, reviewed by the Bank to ensure
                                                                                                                        that they are consistent with the Bank's safeguard Policies, and disclosed.
                                Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                        No

                                Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                 Yes                   As stated above, the ToRs for the forests and other studies will be disclosed
                                                                                                                        before appraisal.
                                Pest Management OP 4.09                                            No

                                Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                             No

                                Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                      No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                                No

                                Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                          No

                                Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                          No
                                7.50
                                Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                              No



                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Mar-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
                                  should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                    Not applicable.

                         IV. APPROVALS
                                Task Team Leader:                                Name: Flavio Chaves
                                Approved By:
                                Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                 Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                     Date: 06-Mar-2012
                                Sector Manager:                                  Name: Idah Z. Pswarayi-Riddihough (SM)                                                                Date: 25-Feb-2012




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
