                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA1207
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Sep-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Croatia                            Project ID:   P127308
                            Project Name:     Second Science & Technology Project (P127308)
                            Task Team         Paulo Guilherme Correa
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         05-Oct-2012                        Estimated   17-Jan-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    ECSPF                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector:           General industry and trade sector (85%), Central government administration
                                              (15%)
                            Theme:            Infrastructure services for private sector development (33%), Education for the
                                              knowledge economy (33%), Micro, Small and Medium Ent erprise support
                                              (17%), Technology diffusion (17%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                               Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      5.38
Public Disclosure Copy




                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        26.88
                              Financing Gap                                                                 0.00
                              Total                                                                        32.26
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           The development objective of the proposed project is to prepare Croatia's R&D and innovation sector
                           to efficiently absorb EU structural funds by building capacity in selected organizations and
                           developing a pipeline of public and private projects that could be financed by structural funds.
                            3. Project Description
                           STP II will have a dual approach, combining a) TA to the public sector, and b) financing of risk-
                           sharing programs supporting R&D in SMEs (sub-financing), using these instruments with a focus on
                           preparing Croatia for efficient absorption of EU funds for R&D.


                                                                       Page 1 of 7
                         Project consists of the following components:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component A: Technical Assistance (EUR6.0 million)

                         The component of the proposed STP II aims to build capacity in the public sector to ensure
                         absorption of structural funds, including preparation of a pipeline of project applications by the
                         public sector.

                         A.1. Preparing selected Institutions of National innovation system for EU Funds and improving
                         management of national resources of research, development and innovation (EUR1.5 million)

                         This activity will provide technical support for capacity building in selected institutions in order to
                         strengthen the governance of the country's National Innovation System; provide technical support for
                         development of database of projects, technologies and competences, evaluation of the public research
                         institutes network and assist the Government by issuing strategic recommendations for the network
                         further development including the strategic planning, financial management, and preparation of
                         performance-based contracts between MSES and Public Research Institutes, in line with the
                         objectives of the new legislation; enhance governmental and institutional support to increase the
                         absorption capacity for the new EU's Framework Program for Research and Innovation HORIZON
                         2020, assist in building capacity of MSES, BICRO and Croatian Science Foundation to adjust their
                         operational procedures to usage of structural funds (ERDF & ESF).

                         A.2. Developing R&D grant schemes and infrastructure projects applications for EU funds (EUR4.5
                         million)

                         Preparation of new, adjusted R&D Grant Schemes for ERDF and ESF (BICRO, MSES and UKF)
                         and consistent with the envisaged ST Strategy and the Research Infrastructure Roadmap, this
                         component will finance training for preparation, along with the full preparation of three selected
Public Disclosure Copy




                         projects, including feasibility studies, cost-benefit analysis and technical documentation.
                         Infrastructure projects will be selected in close consultation with MSES.

                         Component B: Sub-financing (EUR 14.0 million)

                         This component will help maintain and increase the pool of SMEs that could apply to the upcoming
                         EU funded risk-sharing programs, ensuring the existence of a sound pipeline of private projects. The
                         specific activities under this component are listed below.

                         B.1. Maintain and expand the pool of SMEs eligible for EU funded risk-sharing programs (EUR7.5
                         million).

                         BICRO would continue having the role of upgrading the innovation and technological capabilities of
                         SMEs by providing financial support for technology-based companies, R&D centers and incubators
                         and fostering links between the R&D community and industry. STP II would support the
                         development of three of BICRO's programs: RAZUM, SPREAD and Proof of Concept Grant Fund.
                         Some funds will be reserved for running pilot of programs under the structural fund guidelines.

                         The objective of the Innovation Commercialization (RAZUM) program is to support the
                         development of knowledge-based SMEs through conditional loans covering up to 70 percent of new

                                                                       Page 2 of 7
                         product development costs. STP II contribution would focus on ensuring a sustainable increase in the
                         number of knowledge-based technology-driven SMEs, by financing additional 10-15 companies (out
                         of estimated 80-100 applications), while further developing procedures and visibility.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The SPREAD (Sponsored Research and Development) Program has the main objective of supporting
                         collaboration of R&D activities between SMEs and the public R&D sector and help the latter expand
                         their industry network and outreach. Funding is provided on the basis of 50:50 matching grants. As
                         part of STP II, the program would enhance its activities through intense collaboration with TT
                         offices, and finance roughly an additional 15 projects (out of estimated 100-120 applications).
                         Key objectives of the Proof of Concept Grant Fund are to provide innovative companies and
                         researchers an opportunity to verify and validate commercial viability of research results and
                         establish an appropriate strategy for continued commercialization. The program is administered by
                         BICRO's TEHCRO centers and provides grants on a competitive basis of up to 75 percent of total
                         project costs, supporting external expenditures on pre-commercialization proof of concept activities.
                         As part of STP II, the Proof of Concept program will further develop its procedures and visibility,
                         while financing additional 70-80 projects (out of estimated 200 applications).

                         B.2. Strengthening human resources, research excellence and commercialization (EUR6.5 million)

                         The Unity through Knowledge Fund (UKF) will continue supporting excellent collaborative research
                         with Croatian scientists living abroad and leading international scientific institutions; fostering
                         professional advancement of young researchers (at doctoral and postdoctoral level), fostering
                         industry and academia collaboration as well as improving conditions in private and public R&D
                         sector to raise absorption capacity for EU funds, especially Structural and Horizon 2020.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The STP II project will through different programs (grant schemes and programs) include: a) sub-
                         financing of R&D projects supported by BICRO and UKF; and b) preparation of individual project
Public Disclosure Copy




                         applications for EU financing, in the form of the grant schemes for which there is a need to show a
                         solid pipeline of sub-projects to be eligible for EU funds when Croatia joins EU, and in the form of
                         stand-alone infrastructure R&D project proposals. The eligible applicants can come from any part of
                         Croatia.

                         The project is not expected to finance infrastructure R&D (such as physical facilities for R&D
                         support), it will solely support preparation of infrastructure R&D project proposals for EU funds.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Natasa Vetma (ECSEN)

                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes
                          BP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No

                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No




                                                                      Page 3 of 7
                            Pest Management OP 4.09             No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential l arge scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               Environmental Assessment Policies will apply to the proposed project.
                              The project triggers Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01). The design of the project calls for
                              FI environmental category, as Ministry of Science (Borrower) will intermediate the funds
                              throughproject beneficiaries (BICRO, UKF and MSES), which will finance eligible subprojects.

                              The project will not have any potential large, significant or irreversible impacts. Only EA
                              Category B and C sub-projects will be eligible, and projects having large scale impacts (Category
Public Disclosure Copy




                              A) are excluded. The environmental due diligence procedures identified in the EMF will comply
                              with both Croatian national and WB environmental safeguards procedures.

                              Environmental due diligence will be applied through the procedures for the selection and
                              implementation of investments agreed between the Bank, the Borrower and Project Beneficiaries
                              (PBs). An environmental management framework (EMF) document was prepared for the project
                              to outline the guiding principles of environmental screening, assessment, review, management,
                              and monitoring of sub-loans as well as to describe roles and responsibilities in carrying out the
                              environmental work in the course of the project implementation.

                              Land acquisition is not expected under this project and no potential beneficiaries can participate in
                              the project if they would need land acquisition for activities supported. Rehabilitation and
                              reconstruction of existing buildings within the same footprint would be permissible, although are
                              also not expected. Under these restrictions in place, the project does not trigger OP / BP 4.12
                              Involuntary Resettlement.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                               The project will support wide range of sub-projects in science and research and it is not expected
                              that any proposed activities will cause multiple, significant, irreversible, and long-term adverse


                                                                         Page 4 of 7
                          environmental and/or health impacts. The screening procedures specified in the EMF are designed
                          to eliminate any sub-projects which present these types of risks.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           As the project will finance scientific research sub-projects, cancerogenic, mutagenic agents might
                           be used, as well as trace radioactive materials and practices with ethical issues like testing on
                           laboratory animals. The Croatian national legislation is aligned with the EU acuis, therefore
                           handling of agents and issues will be in line with the EU legislation. The EMF calls for detailed
                           description of procurement, supply, use, handling, storing and disposal of such agents and testing
                           animals. Description of these practices should be submitted with all relevant permits in the sub-
                           project application period. These projects will be prior reviewed by team in MOES and WB
                           environmental specialist.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             Despite a low likelihood of occurrence, sub-projects which would qualify for environmental
                           Category A are excluded from the activities eligible for the project support.
                           Sub projects categorized as Category B may vary on their potential impacts and therefore are
                           divided in two sub categories:

                          B+ mainly related to new construction of research infrastructure, which is recognized as one that
                          might have significant, negative and/or short term environmental impacts, of the magnitude of
                          which are difficult to determine at the sub-project identification stage and/or it correlates with
                          annex 2 and 3 of National legislation on EIA; and

                           B - involving smaller research investments, which may have intermediate levels of regular and
                           accidental emissions and typical simple construction related impacts.
                           Approval of higher risk Category B sub projects (B+) will require prior review by PIU and WB
                           environmental specialist. The status of environmental compliance will be reported by each PB to
                           PIU on regular basis and the PIU will provide this information to the Bank as a part of general
Public Disclosure Copy




                           progress reporting.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            As part of the project Operational Manual the Borrower- MSES, more specifically PIU has
                           prepared an environment section, which serves as the Environmental Management Framework and
                           defines the environmental screening and assessment procedures for the project and sub-projects.

                          Environmental screening of sub-project proposals will be essential to ensure that sub-projects are
                          properly categorized and respective environmental review is carried out for them. This mechanism
                          of environmental screening, review, approval, and supervision of sub-projects, including roles and
                          responsibilities of all agencies involved in the process, is described in the EMF and included in the
                          Operations Manual of the project. According to the established EMF, sub-project applicants will
                          be required to carry out adequate type of environmental assessment of the proposed sub-projects
                          according to the WB safeguards procedures and to obtain environmental permits as prescribed by
                          the national legislation.

                          PBs will be responsible for environmental screening of sub-loan applications, assigning relevant
                          environmental categories to them, reviewing environmental assessment reports submitted by sub-
                          loan applicants, approving them, and carrying out environmental supervision and monitoring in
                          the course of sub-project implementation. PIU will assist PBs and prior-review more complexes

                                                                     Page 5 of 7
                           project that fall under B+ category.

                           Depending on the assigned environmental category, the sub- project application package would
Public Disclosure Copy




                           include one of the following: a) EIA and EMP; b) EMP alone; c) simplified (checklist) EMP
                           alone; d) material EMP; and e) explanation why no EA or EMP is required.

                           Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) will be developed to provide guidance on the
                           application of mitigation measures and a system of monitoring will be introduced to ensure
                           compliance of sub-project implementation with EMPs.

                           The First Science and Technology Project, with a very similar concept was declared
                           environmental category C. Nevertheless, the project did comply with the national environmental
                           legislation. MSES, BICRO and UKF have long experience in financing and assessing the projects
                           according to the national and EU legislation. Nevertheless the capacity regarding WB safeguards
                           procedures needs to be strengthened.

                           According to OM and EMF, each PB will have person in charge for the environmental issues.
                           Several members of PIU already participated in the WB organized Safeguards Training in
                           Belgrade 2011. For all PBs and first round of applicants, WB environmental specialist will
                           organize workshop prior to effectiveness on environmental compliance and implementation of
                           EMF. The bank environmental specialist will closely monitor screening process to support the
                           client.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The key stakeholders are the MSES, BICRO, UKF, the Ministry of Finance, and scientific and
                           research community. The implementation agency is MSES, however the environmental screening
                           will fall under PBs responsibility.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           EMF for STP II, as well as the invitation to a public consultation have been published on July 20,
                           2012 on the official web pages of the MSES; Business  Innovation Agency of Croatia (BICRO)
                           and Unity through Knowledge Fund (UKF). In addition to public announcement, the invitation
                           was sent directly to e-mail addresses of over thirty relevant people from the Croatian scientific,
                           business and public sector.
                           Public consultation was held on August 3, 2012 in MSES. Comments were reflected in the slightly
                           revised EMF and the document was again published on the above mentioned web-pages for
                           additional public commenting.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      21-May-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  20-Jul-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   03-Sep-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.


                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:

                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Paulo Guilherme Correa
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                             Date: 26-Sep-2012
                            Coordinator:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Lalit Raina (SM)                                Date: 02-Oct-2012




                                                                       Page 7 of 7
