                                                                     INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                              CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                            Report No.:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Sep-2011

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                       Chile                                    Project ID:                      P126500
                              Project Name:                  Chile Rural Infrastructure for Terrirtorial Development (P126500)
                              Task Team Leader:              Veronica Ines Raffo
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 24-Jan-2012                                   Estimated Board Date:            22-Mar-2012
                              Managing Unit:                 LCSTR                                    Lending Instrument:              Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                        Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (60%), General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (20%),
                                                             General energy sector ( 10%), Telecommunications (10%)
                              Theme:                         Rural services and infrastructure (29%), Rural policies and institutions (29%), Administrative and civil service reform
                                                             (14%), Infra structure services for private sector development (14%), Participation and civic engagement (14%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                       Amount
                                   Borrower                                                                                                                  70.00
                                   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                                     30.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                    100.00
                              Environmental Category:        B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              B. Project Objectives

                              The project development objective is to increase the effective and productive use of sustainable rural infrastructure services by poor rural
                              communities, in order to contribute to productivity growth and sustainable rural development. Infrastructure services include transport (roads,
                              bridges, and port works), water supply, sanitation, ICT, and electricity (with emphasis on renewable technologies).
Public Disclosure Copy




                              On a broader level, the project will also support the decentralization agenda of the Borrower, as a way to increase ownership, accountability, and
                              social inclusion responsiveness to local needs. Improving mechanisms for identifying local investments and increasing public investment efficiency
                              are priorities of the decentralization agenda that is being undertaken by SUBDERE (#Revoluci Descentralizadora#).

                              C. Project Description

                              The Second PIRDT is envisaged to have 4 components, with a total cost estimated at US$100 million, of which US$70 million constitutes the
                              GoCs counterpart financing. The lending instrument being proposed is a Specific Investment Loan (SIL).

                              Component 1: Participatory Territorial Planning. The objective of this component is to provide territories with Territorial Development Framework
                              Plans (PMDTs), allowing them to identify and assess investments under an integrated approach. However, as proved with the First PIRDT, a
                              strong training and dissemination program is needed for the new regions to be able to implement the new methodologies. Considering the new
                              aspects of the Second PIRDT, under this component, the project will: (i) extend the preparation of the PMDTs to the 15 regions; (ii) pilot the
                              preparation of PMDTs by other local agents or institutions (nucleo gestor) different from the Regional Governments (GORE). These could be for
                              example municipalities or associations of municipalities (mancomunidades). In any case, the project will ensure a more proactive role for the
                              municipalities covered by the project; and (iii) institutionalize and formalize the processes for the preparation of the PMDTs.

                              Component 2: Infrastructure Service Delivery. This component will finance: (i) the infrastructure investments identified in the PMDTs, (ii) pre-
                              investment such as feasibility and designs studies for the projects identified in the PMDTs; (iii) supervision for the execution of these projects, and
                              (iv) studies, technical assistance or support for the establishment and strengthening of local service providers to operate and maintain the
                              infrastructure provided. The investments will include rehabilitation of roads, bridges and port works, and construction, rehabilitation, and expansion
                              of rural water, sanitation, electricity and ICT infrastructure. The PIRDT funds come from a provision within the Fondo Nacional de Desarrollo
                              Regional [1] (FNDR). However, it is important to note that the Regions have also access to additional funds from the FNDR to finance the projects
                              identified in the PMDTs. Under this component, the Second PIRDT will continue supporting the pilot of new technologies for the provision and
                              sustainability of the rural infrastructure services.

                              Component 3: Development of Productive Potential. The proposed operation will include, on a pilot basis, a component aimed at financing
                              productive projects. This has been a request from the regions participating in the First PIRDT. In addition, and as in the previous operation, the
                              project will seek to coordinate with other national programs on the field (such as Chile Emprende, CORFO and SERCOTEC).

                              Component 4: Institutional Strengthening. This component will support: (i) project coordination at the national level within SUBDERE, and at the
                              regional level, through the Unidades de Gerenciamiento Regional (UGR); and (ii) studies and capacity building for strengthening policies and
                         institutions in the areas of territorial planning and the provision of rural infrastructure. In this regard to enable new regions to participate in the
                         project (to plan and invest in infrastructure with a territorial focus) this component will finance a strong training program on using the planning
                         methodology of the PMDTs for all governmental agencies involved in project implementation (e.g. GOREs, SEREMIs, SERPLACs). This
                         component will continue financing personnel in sectoral agencies at the regional or national level needed to ensure project implementation.

                         FOOTNOTE
                          [1] The FNDR is the main direct mechanism for distributing resources to municipalities, territories and regions. Since 1975, the FNDR has
Public Disclosure Copy




                         functioned as a public investment program for compensating disadvantaged territories and for targeted infrastructure financing. Funds are
                         distributed to the regions which channel them to the municipalities to finance local investment needs in a broad range of fields, including education,
                         health, sanitation, roads, electric power, rural telephone services, embankment and fisheries. Funds are allocated among regions according to
                         socio-economic criteria and particular territorial handicaps following a formula that includes several socio-economic indicators (population in
                         poverty conditions and indigence in absolute and relative terms) as well as regional indicators (such as size of the region and the difference in the
                         cost of paving and construction). The nation#s annual budget law establishes the objectives and regional distributions of each FNDR budgetary
                         allocation. The regional government determines the concrete projects to be financed. There are two forms of FNDR: #FNDR of free disposition#
                         which relies on the regional government to select the projects and Provisiones. Which give regional governments less control over the project and
                         over the territory within the region to which these investments will be allocated. The project funds have been channeled through a provision for
                         Rural Infrastructure for Territorial Development.

                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         The project will be implemented nationwide in the 15 regions; no specific area has been targeted within each region.

                         Component 1: Participatory Territorial Planning. This project has the potential for mainstreaming environmental and social aspects, for instance
                         sustainable land management and globally important biodiversity conservation issues, into the participatory territorial planning processes to be
                         supported under this component. Having this in mind, Terms of Reference have been recently prepared between the Bank and SUBDERE to
                         gather information from the PMDT process in the first PIRDT to facilitate mainstreaming of social and environmental issues in future PMDTs to be
                         prepared under this component. The following tasks will be undertaken:

                         (i)       Review PMDTs and analyze the extent to which social and environmental issues were included in this instrument.
                         (ii)      Make recommendations to improve treatment of social and environmental issues in future PMDTs. This will include an assessment of
                         planning tools (e.g. SEA) to inform and support the process of regional planning.
                         (iii)     Prepare a check list with typical social and environmental issues that should be taken into account during the PMDT preparation.
                         (iv)      Identify lessons learned in the PMDT process.

                         Based on information on (i)-(iv), Terms of Reference for preparation of future PMDTs will have to be reviewed/updated before appraisal and
                         subsequently included as a constituent part of the Operations Manual.

                         Component 2: Infrastructure Service Delivery. The project does not foresee any major or irreversible environmental impacts due to the small
                         nature and simple technical characteristics of the interventions to be supported under this component. Temporal and reversible negative
                         environmental impacts might be associated with: (i) dust generation during rehabilitation of rural roads and bridges, and rural water infrastructure,
                         (ii) nuisances, (iii) solid and liquid wastes from construction materials, machinery and replacement of pipelines, and (iv) removal of shrubs and
                         vegetation. Positive environmental impacts will be mainly associated to improved health conditions due to access to water and sanitation services.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 3: Development of Productive Potential

                         Specific pilot productive activities have not been defined yet. However, if forestry and agricultural activities were selected as pilot productive
                         initiatives, then safeguards OP 4.36 on Forest and OP 4.09 on Pest Management would have to be triggered. Also, the Environmental Assessment
                         report prepared for the first PIRDT would need to be reviewed and updated to include an Environmental Management Framework for forestry and
                         agricultural pilot productive activities.

                         Component 4: Institutional Strengthening

                         There are a number of central, regional and local public entities responsible for supervising compliance with Chilean environmental and social
                         regulations. These entities include, for instance, municipalities responsible for supervising implementation of environmental management plans by
                         contractors, Ministry of Public Works# Executive Secretariat for Environmental Management and Territory (SEMAT), Ministry of the Environment#s
                         regional offices, and Ministry of Education#s National Monuments Council. Coordination and communication among project coordination at
                         SUBDERE and the aforementioned institutions will be strengthened.

                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

                         SUBDERE institutional capacity for reporting subprojects's performance regarding compliance with the World Bank environmental and social
                         safeguards and national regulations in subprojects needs to be strengthened. Current practices for reporting compliance with national
                         environmental regulations and the World Bank social and environmental safeguard policies can be improved, as well as the systems for gathering
                         environmental and social information from relevant public agencies at the central, regional and local levels.

                         An evaluation of the effectiveness of the various instruments for environmental and social management will be carried out. The evaluation will look
                         at the results of the application of these instruments and will make recommendations to improve them.

                         ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL PERFORMANCE OF THE FIRST PIRDT

                         A total of 31 PMDTs have been prepared and 114 subprojects (mostly rural roads and rural water systems) have been completed to date as part of
                         the First PIRDT. Of the 31 PMDTs, 10 include indigenous communities as potential beneficiaries. These PMDTs identified 74 possible subprojects
                         in indigenous communities in the regions of La Araucan, B B, and Los Lagos, with a total number of potential beneficiaries estimated at 55,000.
                         To date, the PIRDT has completed with loan funds 10 subprojects in indigenous communities and 2 more are in execution, benefiting over 12,000
                         people.
                           According to a Safeguards Note on the First PIRDT produced by Bank staff in December, 2008, based on the Medium-Term Review of this project,
                           the environmental and social performance of the project was satisfactory. There were no major environmental issues in subprojects. The
                           Safeguards Note confirmed that the Project had complied with Bank policy on Indigenous Peoples and that no resettlement had been required.

                           Infrastructure needs in the territories under the PIRDT were identified with the participation of local communities and stakeholders, according to the
                           methodology for preparing the PMDTs. The lessons learned from the first 18 PMDTs were incorporated in the design of a new project evaluation
Public Disclosure Copy




                           methodology, which is being used by MIDEPLAN in the second generation of PMDTs. The planning and participatory methodology for preparing
                           the PMDTs was also modified taking into account the lessons learned in the first generation of PMDTs. The methodology includes measures to
                           manage the expectations of the community and stakeholders more effectively.

                           The findings of the Bank' s supervision missions carried out in 2009 and 2010 were consistent with the findings of the Safeguards Note. In the last
                           Bank mission, on April 2011, a resettlement case was found in a road rehabilitation project carried out in the Araucan region. This subproject did
                           not displace houses or commercial structures, but required the expropriation of narrow strips of land adjacent to the road. SUBDERE was unaware
                           of the expropriation and has requested information on this case to the Ministry of Public Works.



                           As part of the preparatory work for the second operation, an independent evaluation of the environmental and social performance of the Project
                           will be carried out. The evaluation will look at the results of the application of the various instruments for environmental and social management
                           used in the first project and will make recommendations to improve them, based on the experience accumulated to date. Specifically, the
                           independent evaluation will (i) examine the methodologies used for consulting with and promoting the participation of Indigenous Peoples during
                           the preparation and implementation of PMDTs and subprojects that affected them; and (ii) evaluate the mechanisms that were used for receiving
                           and addressing grievances during the first PIRDT; and (iii) analyze the cases of expropriation associated to road subprojects and the application of
                           the Resettlement Policy Framework in such cases. The recommendations of the independent evaluation are expected to inform the preparation or
                           revision of safeguard instruments for the Second PIRDT, the strengthening of grievance redress mechanisms, and the development of plans for
                           consulting project beneficiaries, including Indigenous Peoples.

                            F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

                           Raul Tolmos (LCSEN)
                           Jose Vicente Zevallos (LCSSO)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

                            Safeguard Policies Triggered                     Yes        No        TBD                                  Explanation
                            Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                ✖                          The interventions to be supported under Components 2 and 3 are
                                                                                                          likely to have potential adverse environmental impacts that will need
                                                                                                          to be avoided, minimized and managed. The investments that will be
                                                                                                          made under Component 2 (rehabilitation of roads, bridges and port
                                                                                                          works, and construction, rehabilitation, and expansion of rural water,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                          sanitation, electricity and ICT infrastructure) are small-scale
                                                                                                          investments with minor potential adverse impacts, such as dust and
                                                                                                          waste generation during the construction phase. The productive
                                                                                                          projects to be supported under Component 3 have not been defined,
                                                                                                          but they will be small-scale projects that are not likely to have major
                                                                                                          adverse environmental impacts. The Environmental Assessment
                                                                                                          report prepared for the First PIRDT will need to be updated to reflect
                                                                                                          the types of subprojects to be financed under the Second PIRDT.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                            ✖      The project is likely to support interventions in Los Lagos region and
                                                                                                          other regions characterized by critical and pristine natural habitats
                                                                                                          that might be affected. The Environmental Assessment report
                                                                                                          prepared for the first PIRDT will need to be updated and include
                                                                                                          screening measures to review potential impacts and a negative list
                                                                                                          for those activities that are more sensible from an environmental and
                                                                                                          social standpoint.
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                     ✖      Forestry activities may be selected as pilot productive initiatives.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09                                                ✖      Agricultural activities may be selected as pilot productive initiatives.
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11             ✖                          The interventions supported in rural areas could impact known
                                                                                                          physical cultural resources. The Environmental Assessment report
                                                                                                          prepared for the first PIRDT will need to be updated to include
                                                                                                          actions that will be taken to minimize and manage these impacts.
                                                                                                          Also, chance find procedures will be included in all works contracts
                                                                                                          and updated in the Operations Manual.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                      ✖                          The project is likely to support interventions that will benefit
                                                                                                          Indigenous People. The project will be implemented nationwide
                                                                                                          and, therefore, could deliver benefits in any of the 15 regions of
                                                                                                          Chile, including the regions where the indigenous population is
                                                                                                          concentrated, such as the Araucan, Maule and B B. Also, some
                                                                                                          infrastructure investments, such as road rehabilitation projects, may
                                                                                                          have minor adverse impacts on indigenous families and
                            Safeguard Policies Triggered                                      Yes           No           TBD                                             Explanation
                                                                                                                                    communities. Therefore, the Social Assessment prepared for the
                                                                                                                                    First PIRDT will need to be reviewed and updated and an
                                                                                                                                    Indigenous Peoples Framework will need to be prepared, taking into
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                    account the experience accumulated during the implementation of
                                                                                                                                    the First PIRDT.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                                 ✖                                   Some interventions planned as part of Component 2, such as road
                                                                                                                                    rehabilitation, may require the expropriation of small strips of land.
                                                                                                                                    However, it is important to note that because of the nature of the
                                                                                                                                    works, no actual relocation of individuals or families is expected.
                                                                                                                                    However, given the possibility of land takes for certain subprojects,
                                                                                                                                    the Resettlement Policy Framework prepared for PIRDT will be
                                                                                                                                    reviewed and improved, taking into account the experience
                                                                                                                                    accumulated during the implementation of the First PIRDT.
                                                                                                                                    Component 1 (Participatory Territorial Planning) will not entail any
                                                                                                                                    zoning or restrictions in access to parks or protected areas.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                                        ✖                      The interventions to be supported by the project do not include
                                                                                                                                    construction or rehabilitation of dams.
                            Projects on International Waters OP/BP 7.50                                      ✖                      The interventions to be supported by the project are not located in
                                                                                                                                    international waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                                            ✖                      The interventions to be supported by the project are not located in
                                                                                                                                    disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                           A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 09-Jan-2012
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
                              should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS would be prepared: January 2012.

                         IV. APPROVALS
                            Signed and submitted by:
                            Task Team Leader:                                Name: Licette M. Moncayo                                                                              Date: 15-Sep-2011
                            Approved By:
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                 Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                                                                           Date: 19-Sep-2011
                            Comments:
                            Sector Manager:                                  Name: Eric R. Lancelot (SM)                                                                           Date: 28-Sep-2011
                            Comments:




                            1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                             form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
