                                                                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                            APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA184
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Dec-2011

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                       China                                    Project ID:                      P121289
                              Project Name:                  Ningxia Desertification Control and Ecological Protection Project (P121289)
                              Task Team Leader:              Ulrich K. H. M. Schmitt
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 15-Dec-2011                                   Estimated Board Date:            01-May-2012
                              Managing Unit:                 EASCS                                    Lending Instrument:              Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (90%), Irrigation and drainage (10%)
                              Theme:                         Other environment and natural resources management (80%), Rural services and infrastructure (10%), Water
                                                             resource management (10%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                      Amount
                                   Borrower                                                                                                                  30.00
                                   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                                     80.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                   110.00
                              Environmental Category:        B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              The project development objective is to control desertification and degradation and protect key farmland and infrastructure in strategically selected
                              locations in Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region.

                              3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                              The project will be implemented over a period of five years. Desertification control and ecological restoration activities will cover an approximate
                              total area of 72,000 hectares. The project will include three components, as follows:

                              Component 1: Controlling Desertification and Degradation. This component will address the main drivers of desertification and degradation which
                              relate to moving sand through wind erosion dynamics and unsustainable land use practices. The component includes three sub-components:
                              (a) Moving Sand Stabilization: The objective of this sub-component is to halt the movement of shifting sand dunes and prevent encroachment of
                              shifting sand onto agricultural land, settlements and infrastructure. It will support the planning, detailed design, and establishment of straw checker
                              boards combined with the seeding and planting of indigenous shrub and grass on about 19,000 hectares of moving and semi-moving sand dune
                              areas. These activities will be complemented in the selected sites by supporting investments in fire control measures, including the construction of
                              fire breaking tracks and passage routes, watch towers, and small buildings for technical staff and workers, and project information campaigns and
                              boards and signs.
                              (b) Degradation Control and Re-vegetation. The objective of this sub-component is to control and reverse degradation of arid and semi-arid
                              shrubland and steppe areas caused by unsustainable land use, mainly from grazing, and to restore a natural protective vegetation cover. Some
                              42,000 hectares of degraded arid and semi-arid areas will be closed, protected, and managed for natural re-vegetation and supplemented by
                              shrub planting and assisted vegetation restoration. An additional 4,600 hectares will be planted with trees and shrubs. The sub-component will
                              also support construction of limited access tracks serving also as fire breaks, watch towers and other infrastructure required to manage and
                              monitor the rehabilitated areas.
                              (c) Integrated Land Management. The objective of this sub-component is to complement sub-components 1(a) and 1(b) and mitigate any potential
                              negative impacts on land users from desertification control and vegetation rehabilitation measures. It will support the implementation of the
                              project'’s Resettlement Policy Framework and seek to improve acceptance and ensure long-term sustainability of the expected project outcomes. It
                              will finance compensatory investments, such as economic tree plantations and fodder production for livestock in cases where access restrictions to
                              grazing areas might occur. It will also support the development of long-term land management arrangements for all relevant project sites where
                              such arrangements are feasible.

                              Component 2: Protective Shelterbelt Plantations. The objective of this component is to protect key farmland and infrastructure from desertification
                              and sand encroachment through tree and shrub shelterbelt plantations. It will support the establishment of multi-layer and multi-storey shelterbelts
                              of some 5,500 hectares along roads, irrigation canals and around agricultural fields and fruit orchards in key strategically selected locations. The
                              shelterbelts will serve as wind breaks, improve the ecological environment and help sustain and increase agricultural yields. It will also support
                              some supplemental but temporary irrigation installations to ensure the successful establishment of shelterbelt plantings.

                              Component 3: Project Management, Capacity Building and M&E. This component will support: (a) consulting services for the design, supervision,
                              including safeguards, monitoring and acceptance checks of protection plantings; and progress reporting; (b) applied research and demonstrations

                                                                                                                                                                         Page 1 of 5
                         to generate and disseminate an improved understanding of desertification control approaches; (c) training and extension for staff of county project
                         management offices and forest farmers as well as other stakeholders on the establishment, maintenance and post-management of desertification
                         control and plantation investments for long-term sustainability; (c) a project impact Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) system to monitor
                         implementation achievements and assess the environmental and socio-economic impacts.

                         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         The project will support desertification control, vegetation rehabilitation and ecological protection measures in seven cities/counties of Ningxia Hui
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Autonomous Region, including: Pingluo County, Xingqing District, Lingwu City, Litong District, Yanchi County, Qingtongxia City, and Zhongwei
                         City. The project is expected to generate local environmental benefits for the entire population within the participating cities/counties estimated at
                         around 3 million people, as well as to protect a number of key infrastructure facilities on the East Bank of the Yellow River, which are of strategic
                         important for the economic development of the region. Since the project areas are located in a wind corridor affecting major parts of Northern
                         China and have been identified as one of the major sources of sandstorms, the project would also indirectly benefit a much larger number of
                         people living as far as Beijing or Tianjin. Safeguard relevant physical characteristics include: the inclusion of some sites of natural habitats of
                         Ammopiptanthus mongolicus shrub lands, which are protected under government regulations; the protection of open access lands through closure,
                         access restrictions, and vegetation rehabilitation, large-scale plantings of natural shrub and grass vegetation for sand movement control, and
                         establishment of shelterbelts in strategic locations, which may require pest control measures.

                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                         Zong-Cheng Lin (EASCS)
                         Yiren Feng (EASCS)

                         6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                    Yes       No      Explanation
                         Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                 ✖                An Environmental Impact Assessment was carried out in accordance with
                                                                                              OP4.01. It included an analysis of potential positive and negative project
                                                                                              impacts, alternative project analysis, description of mitigation measures, and
                                                                                              an environmental monitoring plan that is integrated into the project's overall
                                                                                              M&E approach. The EIA confirmed that the project will bring significant
                                                                                              positive impacts to the natural and socio-economic environments. Negative
                                                                                              impacts will be minimal and if occurring only of temporary nature. Project
                                                                                              activities and investments have been designed in ways to avoid or minimize
                                                                                              any adverse impacts on the physical environment. Environment Protection
                                                                                              Guidelines have been developed that specify mitigation measures in case any
                                                                                              negative impact might occur. The EA process also included a Social Impact
                                                                                              Assessment to identify potentially adverse impacts and risks to people in
                                                                                              project-affected areas. The SA focused on those sites that have been selected
                                                                                              for hill closures and vegetation rehabilitation. It included an analysis of
                                                                                              livelihood conditions, an assessment of potential impacts of hill closures on
                                                                                              households, field surveys, and consultations with stakeholders in all seven
                                                                                              counties. The SA proposed various safeguard measures to mitigate to offset
                                                                                              potential negative impacts and provide livelihood alternatives, which have
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              been fully integrated in the project design and budget. In addition to the
                                                                                              Environmental and Social Impact Assessment reports, Environmental
                                                                                              Protection Guidelines, a Pest Management Plan and a Process Framework
                                                                                              have been prepared. Detailed public consultation was carried out during the
                                                                                              process as is documented in the EIA/SIA reports.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                         ✖                A small number of project sites selected for restoration include natural habitats
                                                                                              of Ammopiptanthus mongolicus, a second-class protected species indigenous
                                                                                              to the desert areas of Western China. Despite the current status of severe
                                                                                              degradation, the areas still represent valuable natural habitats. The EIA and
                                                                                              Environmental Management Guidelines describe the current status of these
                                                                                              habitats in the project areas and the threats to be addressed by the project.
                                                                                              The guidelines also detail measures to successfully rehabilitate these
                                                                                              vegetation communities. No conversion of the A. mongolicus areas is
                                                                                              foreseen.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                                            ✖      OP4.36 is not applicable. The project aims to establish grass and steppe
                                                                                              vegetation cover in desert and degraded steppe areas and some tree
                                                                                              shelterbelts around farmland and infrastructure, including some high value fruit
                                                                                              trees. None of the areas treated under the project is dedicated to timber
                                                                                              production.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09                             ✖                The establishment and management of protective plantings and shelterbelts
                                                                                              may require the control of pests and disease and the use of pesticides. A Pest
                                                                                              Management Plan has been prepared. It describes a range of pest and
                                                                                              disease control and management methods, emphasizing IPM, and the scope
                                                                                              of the recommended application under various conditions. The PMP also
                                                                                              provides a list of pesticides and herbicides that may be required under the
                                                                                              project in compliance with World Health Organization's recommended
                                                                                              categories. The PMP includes detailed provisions for training for project
                                                                                              stakeholders and a monitoring program. Implementation of the training and
                                                                                              monitoring programs has been budgeted in the project cost.



                                                                                                                                                                   Page 2 of 5
                               6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                  Yes        No      Explanation
                               Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                       ✖      OP4.11 is not applicable. The detailed site selection process and
                                                                                                   environmental screening confirmed that the Ming Dynasty Great Wall is not
                                                                                                   located in any of the selected project sites and/or impacted by the project.
                               Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                ✖      OP4.10 is not applicable. Ethnic Hui people are recognized as an ethnic
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                   minority in China but Hui people do not meet the criteria of Indigenous Peoples
                                                                                                   as defined in OP 4.10. Hui practice Islam but do not possess economic, social,
                                                                                                   or political institutions that are separate from those of the dominant society and
                                                                                                   culture nor do they have an indigenous language. Hui people share Mandarin
                                                                                                   as common language with their Han Chinese neighbors and Hui communities
                                                                                                   are part of the mainstream society of Ningxia with similar income levels and
                                                                                                   living standards as the Han and are not marginalized. The SA process did not
                                                                                                   provide any indication that there is any specific vulnerability of Hui
                                                                                                   communities in the project area with regard to possible negative project
                                                                                                   impacts or lack of equal opportunity to access positive benefits of the project
                                                                                                   that needs to be addressed by the project. Hui people comprise about one
                                                                                                   third of the population in the project areas.
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12               ✖                 OP4.12 will be applicable. The project will involve the protection and
                                                                                                   rehabilitation of degraded steppe and grassland areas. These sites are not
                                                                                                   legally designated protected areas but have been closed by the government.
                                                                                                   Project activities for vegetation rehabilitation may reinforce the government's
                                                                                                   grazing ban and result in reinforcing access restrictions to this land with some
                                                                                                   livelihood implications. It is expected that a total area of around 42,000
                                                                                                   hectares of open access areas will be included in vegetation rehabilitation and
                                                                                                   protection. Access restrictions may affect 24 villages and 5 forestry farms.
                                                                                                   Livelihood impacts will be addressed through the application of a Process
                                                                                                   Framework which will define appropriate compensatory measures to be
                                                                                                   provided and financed by the project under the integrated management sub-
                                                                                                   component. No involuntary resettlement or land acquisition is expected under
                                                                                                   the project.
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                    ✖      The project will not finance construction or rehabilitation of any dams as
                                                                                                   defined under this policy.
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                    ✖      The project is not located in any international waterways as defined under the
                               7.50                                                                policy.
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                        ✖      The project is not located in any known disputed areas as defined under the
                                                                                                   policy.

                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                 Overall the project will generate positive social and environmental impacts. No long-term large scale and/or irreversible are negative impacts
                                 expected. Environmental: The project is designed and expected to generate significant positive environmental impacts in the project areas and
                                 to result in improvements of the overall ecological environment in Ningxia. Project investments are directed at: (a) reversing the environmental
                                 degradation trend through restoring natural habitats and increasing natural vegetation cover on the Eastern Bank of the Yellow River; (b)
                                 protecting farmland areas, infrastructure, and urban/industrial sites through stabilizing and arresting the moving sands of the Mao Wu Su and
                                 Tengger Deserts in Ningxia; and (c) protecting rural livelihoods through integrated land management. Negative impacts are unlikely and may
                                 occur only, if the project is not properly implemented, for example, because of poor detailed plantation design such as the application of
                                 unsuitable planting models and species, insufficient consideration of hydrological aspects in vegetation establishment, poor site management,
                                 uncontrolled use of pesticides, etc. However, such negative impacts would only be of temporary nature. They are unlikely to materialize
                                 because of the long-term experience with such projects in Ningxia and the detailed preparation work undertaken during project design.
                                 Environmental risks will be managed through the appropriate planting model selection and the safeguards measures designed under the
                                 project, which are included in the project implementation manual, environmental protection guidelines, environmental monitoring plan, and pest
                                 management plan. Social: Overall social and socio-economic impacts are expected to be positive and possible negative impacts can be
                                 mitigated through the project's safeguards provision. Specifically, the project will involve the protection of open access degraded steppe and
                                 grassland areas through hill closures. These closures will reinforce the Government's general grazing ban policy and may result in access
                                 restrictions to resource use on those lands. It is expected that a total area of around 42,000 hectares of open access areas will be closed for
                                 vegetation rehabilitation and protection. The resulting access restrictions may affect 24 villages and 5 forestry farms. Such restrictions will be
                                 addressed through the implementation of the project's Integrated Management Sub-component which has been designed to allow for full farmer
                                 participation in the identification and implementation of appropriate compensatory measures and alternative livelihoods and in the long-term
                                 management of these areas.
                               2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                                 The project is expected to generate environmental benefits for the entire population within the participating cities/counties estimated at around 3
                                 million people, as well as to protect a number of key infrastructure facilities on the East Bank of the Yellow River, which are of strategic
                                 important for the economic development of the region. Since the project areas are located in a wind corridor affecting major parts of Northern
                                 China and have been identified as one of the major sources of sandstorms, the project would also indirectly benefit a much larger number of
                                 people living as far as Beijing or Tianjin. No long-term adverse or negative environmental or social impacts are expected.


                                                                                                                                                                         Page 3 of 5
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                           In addition to the ‘no project’ scenario, the Borrower has conducted a detailed site screening to identify the strategically most appropriate sites
                           for treatment and carried out effectiveness analysis of the various technical planting models available. The final project site selection includes
                           only areas of the highest possible impact. In areas of strategic importance, sand dune stabilization through straw checkerboards and seeding/
                           planting is proposed. Such sites include the Yindong Chemical Production Base on the east bank of the Yellow River, important farmland
                           resources, and the Yellow River itself. Hill closures will cover those areas that are under immediate threat of further degradation and are
                           unlikely to recover naturally. Multi-layer shelterbelt plantations are being selected only in areas of importance for high value agricultural
Public Disclosure Copy




                           production (e.g. grape and fruit development areas) and along important roads and canals. Technical models designed during the project
                           preparation represent an appropriate balance between technical and cost effectiveness and are environmental and ecological best choices.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                            and implement the measures described.
                           An Environmental Assessment was carried out in accordance with the Bank's Operational Policy OP4.01 and local government regulations. The
                           Environmental Impact Assessment Report includes an analysis of the potential positive and negative project impacts, an alternative project
                           analysis, a description of mitigation measures, and an environmental monitoring plan that is integrated into the project's overall M&E approach.
                           The EIA report documents the public consultation carried out during the preparation of the project. Environmental Protection Guidelines have
                           been developed that specify mitigation measures in case any negative impact might occur. Environmental Management Guidelines also specify
                           the treatment models and measures to successfully rehabilitate these vegetation communities and ecosystems to comply with the Bank's policy
                           on Natural Habitats (OP4.04). No conversion of the critical natural habitats is foreseen. In accordance with OP4.09, a Pest Management Plan
                           has been prepared to guide the control or pests and diseases and, if warranted, the application of pesticides during the establishment and
                           management of protective plantings and shelterbelts. The PMP describes a range of pest and disease control and management methods,
                           including Integrated Pest Management, and the scope of the recommended application in various situations. The PMP also provides a detailed
                           list of pesticides and herbicides that may be required under the project and that are in compliance with the provisions of the World Health
                           Organization's recommended categories. The PMP includes detailed provisions for training for project stakeholders and a monitoring program.
                           Implementation of the training and monitoring programs has been budgeted in the project cost. A Social Impact Assessment was carried out
                           during preparation to identify risks and potentially adverse impacts to local people in project-affected areas. The assessment focused on those
                           sites that have been selected for hill closure and vegetation rehabilitation investments. These sites are not legally designated protected areas
                           but closures may reinforce the public grazing ban in effect since 2003 and thus the project may result in the reinforcement of access restrictions
                           to these open access lands with some livelihood implications. The assessment included an analysis of local livelihood conditions, an
                           assessment of potential impacts of closures on households, field surveys, and consultations with farmers on collective land and workers on
                           state farms of all seven project counties. The assessment defined various safeguard measures to mitigate and offset potential negative impacts
                           and provide livelihood alternatives. These measures have been integrated in the project design and fully costed (Component 1(c)). A Process
                           Framework has been developed to guide the implementation of the safeguards measures and provide a framework for household participation
                           in project implementation. The framework defines the mechanisms for information dissemination, training, and the participation of affected
                           people in the design and implementation of compensatory measures to restore income losses. It also sets forth appropriate compensatory and
                           mitigation measures to ensure people's livelihoods are compensated and negative livelihood impacts brought about by the project are being
                           avoided or mitigated. The framework also sets forth the provision for social impact monitoring and includes a complaints handling mechanism.
                           Overall the technical design of the project is straightforward with no specific technical complexity. Project activities will be concentrated in a
                           small number of counties in Ningxia. Project sites are well documented. There is only a limited number of tested models for desertification
                           control and rehabilitation available, such as vegetation grids, seeding and planting, small-scale irrigation, mountain closure and assisted
                           vegetation rehabilitation, which keep technical challenges limited. Project activities will be implemented based on clear plans and pre-selected
                           locations. In addition, stakeholders are few and stakeholder responsibilities have been clearly defined. No specific design changes would be
Public Disclosure Copy




                           expected during implementation. However, capacity of the implementing agencies to implement the project's safeguards provisions will initially
                           be low and poses a risk. Bank project supervision will carefully monitor safeguards implementation and if needed, identify areas of training and
                           capacity building and, in consultation with the borrower, will develop training activities as needed.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                            on potentially affected people.
                           Key project stakeholders include local governments, the farmers in collective areas and workers of local forest farms in the seven cities/counties
                           of Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region, including: Pingluo County, Xingqing District, Lingwu City, Litong District, YanchiCounty, Qingtongxia City,
                           and Zhongwei City where the project will be implemented. In accordance with the Bank's disclosure policy, consultations with project-affected
                           people were conducted during the Environmental/Social Assessment processes during July- October 2010 and during July to September 2011
                           and are documented in the respective reports. The assessments included detailed field surveys and site screening, as well as direct
                           consultations with farmers on collective land and state farm workers on state farms of all seven project counties. The Environmental and Social
                           Assessment Reports, including the Environmental Protection Guidelines, Pest Management Plan, and Process Framework were reviewed by
                           the Bank as part of project appraisal and disclosed locally in the project areas in Ningxia (November 2011) and in the InfoShop (December
                           2011).

                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                            Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                               21-Nov-2011
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                           30-Nov-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                            20-Dec-2011
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                           Directors
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                            Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                               21-Dec-2011

                                                                                                                                                                    Page 4 of 5
                              Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                                30-Nov-2011
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                 20-Dec-2011
                             Pest Management Plan
                              Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                                 Yes
                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                    21-Dec-2011
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                                30-Nov-2011
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                 20-Dec-2011
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                            disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                            C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                              Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                     Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]

                            OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                              If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) natural   Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              habitats, does the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                            OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                              If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or SM? Are                   Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              PMP requirements included in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                              Management Specialist?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                              If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the             Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?                     Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language             Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for          Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?                     Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard           Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same               Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Signed and submitted by:                                                  Name                                                        Date
                            Task Team Leader:                     Ulrich K. H. M. Schmitt                                                          22-Dec-2011
                            Approved By:
                            Sector Manager:                       Wenlai Zhang (SM)                                                                22-Dec-2011
                            Comments:




                                                                                                                                                                          Page 5 of 5
