                                                                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                                APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA214
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Nov-2011

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                               Country:                          Rwanda                                     Project ID:                  P126440
                               Project Name:                     Third Rural Sector Support Project (P126440)
                               Task Team Leader:                 Loraine Ronchi
                               Estimated Appraisal Date: 28-Nov-2011                                        Estimated Board Date:        23-Feb-2012
                               Managing Unit:                    AFTAR                                      Lending Instrument:          Adaptable Program Loan
                               Sector:                           General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%), Irrigation and drainage (30%), Agro-industry, marketing, and
                                                                 trade (20%)
                               Theme:                            Other rural development (35%), Rural services and infrastructure (33%), Water resource management (17%), Rural
                                                                 policies and institut ions (15%)
                               Financing (In USD Million)
                                     Financing Source                                                                                                       Amount
                                     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                         0.00
                                     International Development Association (IDA)                                                                               80.00
                                     Total                                                                                                                     80.00
                               Environmental Category:           B - Partial Assessment
                               Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              In line with the overall APL objective and its programmatic phasing, the Project Development Objectives (PDOs) for RSSP3 are to:

                              (i)       Increase the agricultural productivity of organized farmers in the marshlands and hillsides of sub-watersheds targeted for development in
                              an environmentally sustainable manner; and
Public Disclosure Copy




                              (ii)           Strengthen their participation in market-based value chains.

                              3. Project Description

                              The long term programmatic objective of the RSSP APL series is to help the GoR achieve is strategic goal of unlocking rural growth in order to
                              increase incomes and reduce poverty. The series, at its inception, envisioned the first phase to be about building the capacity needed to support
                              the adoption of sustainable intensification technologies in developed marshlands and surrounding hillsides. The emphasis of the second phase
                              was to broaden and deepen the support provided, in order to accelerate intensification and commercialization. The third phase was envisioned to
                              extend and build on successful growth-stimulating RSSP activities, while emphasizing diversification of economic activities to increase and
                              stabilize rural incomes.

                                In keeping with the preceding phase, RSSP 3 will have three components, whose contents are adapted to reflect (i) the evolving overall vision for
                              the Program; (ii) technical RSSP 3 field activities conducted by the in-country Bank team and the GoR team in February 2011 and related
                              consultations with the GoR team in the early part of 2011; and, most importantly, (iii) lessons learned from RSSP 2 and from the Government#s
                              hillside companion program, the Land Husbandry, Water Harvesting and Hillside Irrigation (LWH). These lessons are referred to directly in the
                              Project description below. Given this is the third phase of the APL, the Project description and risk discussions in this Project Concept Note (PCN)
                              are relatively well informed, although they will be further developed during Project preparation.

                                Component 1 : Infrastructure for Marshland, Hillside and Commodity Chain Development
                                Proposed Allocation: USD 54 million

                                Building on the successful approaches, processes and experience of RSSP 1 and 2, the objective of Component 1 will be to expand irrigated
                              area of cultivated marshlands, to increase the use of erosion-controlling and productivity enhancing sustainable land management practices on
                              associated hillsides, and to finance up and downstream economic infrastructure needs articulated by women and men in their communities. The
                              component will be divided between three sub-components, (i) Marshland rehabilitation and development; (ii) Sustainable land management on
                              hillsides; and (iii) Infrastructure for commodity chain development. For the first sub-component, the Project will articulate clear selection criteria,
                              including cost per ha, for marshlands to be developed. Envisioned resources imply approximately 4,100 ha of marshlands rehabilitated or
                              developed for irrigation, although the number will vary by nature of marshlands selected. A number of marshlands will be identified during
                              preparation for which RSSP 2 safeguard instruments will be duly updated and related assessments prepared. The remaining hectares will be
                              identified during implementation and safeguard frameworks updated during Project preparation. For the second subcomponent, an approximate
                              12,300 ha of sustainable hillside land management associated with selected marshlands is envisioned. Since the (improved) hillside strategy of

                                                                                                                                                                            Page 1 of 5
                         RSSP 2, GoR, through the IDA-financed LWH, has piloted and developed a very effective watershed approach for sustainable land management
                         practices on hillsides. For its hillside work, RSSP 3 will adopt lessons learned, not only from RSSP 2, but from the best practice experience of the
                         LWH pilots. This will also permit the harmonization of overlapping indicators between the two operations. Lessons learned about the third sub-
                         component (formerly in Component 2 of RSSP 2) indicated (1) Project resources were insufficient to meet the basic demand from women and men
                         in Project areas for economic infrastructure, including post harvest facilities, feeder road improvements, etc. and (2) there was insufficient follow up
                         with communities on how the investment could be used to generate further revenue for further investments. Accordingly, this sub component will
                         be better resourced and then explicitly linked with capacity activities of Component 2 below. The Project may also consider extra-community
Public Disclosure Copy




                         economic infrastructures such as rural bulk markets.

                          Component 2: Capacity for Marshland, Hillside and Commodity Chain Development
                          Proposed Allocation: USD 11 million

                           11.       In RSSP 2, the key areas covered by Component 2 (formerly called "strengthening commodity chains") included strengthening farmer
                         organizations and cooperatives (e.g. good governance and basic operating capacity); extension and training activities to improve production and
                         productivity of farming systems in the marshland a nd hillsides (e.g. demo plots, soil fertility enhancements, promotion of improved inputs, and
                         IPM); and knowledge generation and dissemination. These activities are critical to maintaining the achievements of RSSP beyond the life of the
                         APL series, and so the design of Component 2 in RSSP 3 pays particular attention to three key lessons documented in the MTR, Aide Memoires
                         and Implementation Status and Results Reports (ISRs) for RSSP 2 with respect to this component. The first lesson is that Component 2 activities
                         were clearly under-resourced in RSSP 2. The Project attempted to correct for this post-MTR, with some success. RSSP 3 will improve the
                         resource allocation to these activities. The second key lesson was that there was little link between the infrastructure activities of the Project and its
                         capacity building activities. Component 2 for RSSP 3 will therefore also include formation of Water User Associations (WUAs), formerly found in
                         Component 1 of RSSP 2. In a related point, the third lesson from RSSP 2 concerns a lack of market-based follow up on economic infrastructures
                         financed by the Project. RSSP3#s Component 2 will therefore have a subcomponent explicitly for commodity chain diversification activities. This
                         subcomponent would finance activities that support strategic business planning for cooperatives and for profitable community use of Project-
                         financed investments; market linkages and market demand analysis; value added innovations linked to markets; micro and small business
                         formation support for input production/ landed and landless women and men community-members in Project areas, including in the management
                         of economic infrastructure. As compared to RSSP 2, greater attention will be paid to supporting cooperatives for long-term autonomous provision
                         of services, investment in infrastructure and marketing of goods. While this is in line with the evolving focus of the third phase towards greater
                         diversification and market orientation, cooperative readiness for this orientation will vary. As such, similar to RSSP 2, the Project will finance
                         capacity building diagnostic for all cooperatives to be supported under the Project. These will be a mix of RSSP 2 Cooperatives that require
                         ongoing support due to the timing of works in RSSP 2, and group formation and cooperative support for new marshland and hillside areas. While
                         the full gamut of cooperative support and support to women and men for value chain diversification activities will be provided at each site, the
                         cooperative diagnostic will determine the emphasis or focus. It is, for example, expected that RSSP 2 Cooperatives will be ready for more strategic
                         business support immediately, whilst new RSSP 3 cooperatives will require sequential emphasis on basic support followed by strategic business
                         skill-building. Capacity support for women and men to participate along the value chain will be provided from Project start across all sites.

                          Component 3: Project Coordination and Support
                          Proposed Allocation: USD 5 million

                           12.        In keeping with the commitment of DPs in the agricultural sector of Rwanda, RSSP 3 will not create a new PIU, but rather will merge the
                         RSSP 2 implementation team with that of the LWH implementation team. When the LWH Project was designed (see LWH PAD), it was done in
                         order to contribute to the Ministry#s One-PIU, in which each PSTA program had its own PIU under an implementation superstructure (under the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Permanent Secretary). The LWH Project finances the first of these four PIUs for Government, the PSTA Program 1 Implementation Team, whose
                         first task is the implementation of LWH. As part of the LWH scale-up under the Global Agricultural Food Security Program (GAFSP), the
                         procurement and financial management units of the LWH were merged with the more experienced ones of RSSP 2 in order to further the Banks
                         support to streamlined implementation in MINAGRI. The proposed RSSP 3 implementation structure is therefore an incremental continuation of
                         that commitment. For RSSP 3, the LWH and RSSP 2 team merger will form one implementation unit embedded in the Ministry#s structure,
                         undertaking the majority of the Governments intensification activities (i.e. RSSP and LWH activities). The implementation capacity of LWH
                         recently received a thorough assessment as part of the preparation for it#s the GAFSP scale-up and a similar assessment will take priority during
                         preparation with the RSSP 2 implementation team to ensure sufficient implementation capacity for the merged implementation unit.

                         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         The Project will work in selected marshlands and hillsides throughout the national territory.


                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                         Noreen Beg (AFTEN)
                         Svetlana Khvostova (AFTOS)

                         6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                     Yes        No      Explanation
                         Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                  ✖                 The approach for hillside activities in the Project promote erosion control and
                                                                                                prevent encroachment on steeper slope areas through improved yields from
                                                                                                good soil stewardship. Marshland and hillside development creates the risk of
                                                                                                loss of habitats and ecosystem services, as well as water quality and
                                                                                                environmental health consequences from enhanced or expanded irrigated
                                                                                                agriculture. Consequently, to enhance environmental planning of marshland
                                                                                                and hillside developments in Phases 1 and 2, an overall Environmental
                                                                                                Assessment (EA) and Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) for all RSSP
                                                                                                subprojects already undertaken have been prepared. Because at this stage of
                                                                                                project preparation, the sites of future sub-projects have not been confirmed,
                                                                                                the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) prepared for


                                                                                                                                                                       Page 2 of 5
                               6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                   Yes        No     Explanation
                                                                                                   RSSP II was updated and disclosed in-country and Bank Infoshop and will be
                                                                                                   implemented for all project sites, focusing on the ways and means for avoiding
                                                                                                   development of important marshlands, and minimizing marshland reductions
                                                                                                   and the ecological services they provide. The subsequent EMPs will be
                                                                                                   developed during upon selection of individual subprojects.
Public Disclosure Copy




                               Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                        ✖                Marshland habitats may be affected by the development of irrigated
                                                                                                   agriculture. This issue is central to the EA/EMP work discussed under OP4.01
                                                                                                   above.
                               Forests OP/BP 4.36                                           ✖
                               Pest Management OP 4.09                            ✖                The Pest Management Plan disclosed for the RSSP 2 was updated to cover
                                                                                                   RSSP 3 focus on wider range of crops. The updated PMP has been publicly
                                                                                                   disclosed in-country and in Bank Infoshop.
                               Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11             ✖                Upon identification of project sites, presence of physical cultural resources in
                                                                                                   the sub-project locations will be assessed and appropriate assessment,
                                                                                                   together with chance finds procedures, will be incorporated into site-specific
                                                                                                   project EMPs.
                               Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                ✖
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                ✖                Marshland and hillside developments involve land acquisition for small dams,
                                                                                                   reservoirs, borrow areas, roads, canals, etc. Because at this stage of project
                                                                                                   preparation, sites of future sub-projects has not been confirmed, the
                                                                                                   Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) prepared for RSSP II was updated and
                                                                                                   will be implemented for all project sites. Where and if needed, a Resettlement
                                                                                                   Action Plan (RAP)                                    will be prepared and
                                                                                                   implemented before the start of the concerned sub-project, upon selection of
                                                                                                   individual subprojects.
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                          ✖                RSSP dams are located on flat broad marshlands. No RSSP dam has
                                                                                                   surpassed 9 metres. Although the Project therefore neither envisions
                                                                                                   "construction of a large dam (15 m and higher) or a high hazard dam" nor "is
                                                                                                   dependent upon an existing dam " the Project will assess potential sites upon
                                                                                                   their selection and will determine the need for application of either a small dam
                                                                                                   safety guidelines, and/or dam safety plans/dam safety panel in accordance
                                                                                                   with OP4.37.
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP          ✖                At the request of the Government of Rwanda (GoR), riparian notification has
                               7.50                                                                been issued by the World Bank, on behalf of the GoR.
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                        ✖
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                 The project has been categorized as Environmental Screening Category B # Partial Assessment. Environmental impacts are likely to be short
                                 term, site-specific, non-sensitive or irreversible, and in every case, mitigation measures can be designed to reduce the negative impacts. The
                                 project triggers OP 4.01, OP 4.04, OP 4.09, OP 4.11, OP 4.12, OP 4.37, and OP 7.50.

                                 Because at this stage of project preparation, the sites of future sub-projects have not been confirmed, the Environmental and Social
                                 Management Framework (ESMF) prepared for RSSP 2 was updated. EAs/EMPs for the sub-projects will be prepared upon identification and
                                 prior to sub-project implementation.

                                 As required under OP 4.11, appropriate wording for chance finds procedures will be included in the sub-project Environmental Assessments/
                                 Environmental Management Plans and contracts. A section of the updated ESMF is dedicated to Occupational Health and Safety, specifically
                                 the use of Personal Protective Equipment for all workers. This includes the use of protective gear for agricultural workers applying pesticides
                                 and fungicides (as deemed necessary per the specifications of each specific chemical product).

                                 The Pest Management Plan (PMP) disclosed for RSSP 2 was updated to include Integrated Pest Management (IPM) practices for banana,
                                 wheat, pineapple, and some vegetables (onion, green beans, carrot, cabbage and mushroom) # as these crops may be selected in RSSP3
                                 subprojects. The PMP also includes a careful consideration of the combination of agricultural activities planned for RSSP3 sub-projects.

                                 The project also triggers OP 4.12 # Involuntary Resettlement, since envisaged marshland and hillside developments would require land
                                 acquisition for small dams, reservoirs, borrow areas, roads and canals, thereby necessitating resettlement activities. The extent of resettlement
                                 activities will be determined by the design of the individual sub-projects.
                               2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                                 The Project will work in selected marshlands and hillsides throughout the national territory. As the sites of future subprojects are not known prior
                                 to project appraisal, RSSP3 has adopted framework approach to environmental and social risk mitigation.

                                 The approach for hillside activities in the Project promotes erosion control and prevents encroachment on steeper slope areas through

                                                                                                                                                                         Page 3 of 5
                           improved yields from good soil stewardship. Marshland and hillside development creates the risk of loss of habitats and ecosystem services, as
                           well as water quality and environmental health consequences from enhanced or expanded irrigated agriculture. Consequently, to enhance
                           environmental planning of marshland and hillside developments in RSSP1 and RSSP2, an overall Environmental Assessment (EA) and
                           Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) for all RSSP subprojects already undertaken have been prepared.

                           The social impacts of the proposed project are largely positive, in that community and individual welfare will be enhanced as a result of the
                           expansion of the irrigated area of cultivated marshlands, increased agricultural productivity through the use of erosion-controlling and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           productivity enhancing sustainable land management practices on associated hillsides, and the financing of economic infrastructure needs.
                           Negative social impacts of the proposed project are limited and manageable, and are primarily related to the need for resettlement as a result of
                           land acquisition occasioned by project works, and temporary loss of crops.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                           N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                            and implement the measures described.
                           The RSSP implementation team has prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) based on the earlier ESMF
                           prepared for RSSP2. The ESMF proposes practical methods of mitigating the negative environmental impacts and includes requirements
                           defined by OP 4.04 and OP 4.11. In addition, the project team updated the Pest Management Plan (PMP) prepared for the RSSP 2 to cover
                           RSSP3#s focus on a wider range of crops. The updated ESMF and PMP have been reviewed by the Bank and found satisfactory. Both the
                           ESMF and PMP have been disclosed in-country both on the RSSP website and at local District offices and in the World Bank InfoShop.

                           Although it is extremely unlikely that the sub-projects selected would require dams of over 15 m in height, the project may include dams with a
                           height of between 10-15 m, although these dams are very unlikely to be located in areas classified as high risk under OP 4.37. Nevertheless, as
                           a precautionary measure, OP 4.37 has been triggered. The Guidelines for Managing Small Dams in Rwanda, originally disclosed for the LWH
                           project in November 2009, will therefore be updated and disclosed for RSSP3. If any sub-projects are found to qualify as either a large dam or a
                           higher risk dam of between 10-15 m, a dam safety plan will be prepared for that sub-project.

                           The project triggers OP 4.12 # Involuntary Resettlement, since envisaged marshland and hillside developments would require land acquisition
                           for small dams, reservoirs, borrow areas, roads and canals, thereby necessitating resettlement activities. . The extent of resettlement activities
                           will be determined by the design of the individual sub-projects. These resettlement activities would range from compensation for temporary loss
                           of crops, to actual relocation of Project Affected Persons (PAPs). The RSSP implementation team has updated the Resettlement Policy
                           Framework (RPF) developed for Stage 2 of the project. The document has been reviewed by the Bank and found satisfactory. The RPF has
                           been disclosed in the World Bank InfoShop and in-country both on the RSSP website and at local District offices.

                           RSSP 3 will not create a new Project Implementation Unit (PIU), but rather will merge the RSSP 2 implementation team with that of the Land
                           Husbandry, Water Harvesting and Hillside Irrigation Project (LWH) implementation team. RSSP3 will therefore benefit from the knowledge and
                           experience of the environmental and social (resettlement) specialists on both these teams, who have demonstrated a strong capacity to
                           implement safeguards activities to a level necessary to comply with the Bank#s safeguards requirements. The team has also been found to be
                           in compliance with relevant national environmental and social regulations and policies.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                            on potentially affected people.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Continuing the practice adopted for RSSP1 and RSSP2, the update of the existing safeguards instruments and preparation of the EAs and
                           EMPs involved consultations with local residents on potential environmental impacts and how they could assist in mitigation measures.
                           Preparation of the PMP involved consultations with farmers to assess pest management issues and evaluate current farmer practices given the
                           focus of RSSP3 on several new crops. Preparation of the RPF involved local consultations about the appropriate compensation values, and the
                           process of resettlement activities as followed in RSSP1 and RSSP2. The detailed preparation of all RSSP3 investments in marshland and
                           hillsides development or rural infrastructure will involve consultations with stakeholders, and their preferences will be taken into account before
                           subproject designs are finalized. An important aspect of these consultations involves agreeing with the stakeholders how the EMP will be
                           monitored and implemented during sub-project implementation, and how to continue with best practice Pest Management activities after the
                           sub-projects have been completed.

                           Updated drafts of ESMF, RPF and PMP have been disclosed in InfoShop and locally in accordance with the Policy on Access to Information,
                           which sets out the policy of the World Bank on public access to information in its possession.

                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                            Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                               16-Nov-2011
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                           21-Nov-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                            21-Nov-2011
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                           Directors
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                            Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                               16-Nov-2011
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                           21-Nov-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                            21-Nov-2011

                                                                                                                                                                  Page 4 of 5
                             Pest Management Plan
                              Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                                 Yes
                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                    16-Nov-2011
                              Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                                21-Nov-2011
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                 21-Nov-2011
Public Disclosure Copy




                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                            disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                            C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                              Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                     Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]

                            OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                              If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) natural   Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              habitats, does the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                            OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                              If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or SM? Are                   Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              PMP requirements included in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                              Management Specialist?
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                              Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts on               Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                              If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the             Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              plan?
                            OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                              Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements been made                      Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              for public awareness and training?
                            OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                              Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                                                Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]

                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?                     Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language             Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for          Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?                     Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard           Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same               Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Signed and submitted by:                                                  Name                                                        Date
                            Task Team Leader:                     Noreen Beg                                                                       17-Nov-2011
                            Approved By:
                            Sector Manager:                       Martien Van Nieuwkoop (SM)                                                       17-Nov-2011
                            Comments:      It was clarified that the safeguards experts on the team have reviewed and cleared the ISDS prior to SM approval.




                                                                                                                                                                          Page 5 of 5
