                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC803

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Oct-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           India                           Project ID:      P131235
                            Project Name:      Uttarakhand Decentralized Watershed Development Project Phase II (P131235)
                            Task Team          Norman Bentley Piccioni
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          00-undefined-0000               Estimated        15-Aug-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASDA                           Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector:            Agricultural extension and research (43%), Forestry (25%), General agriculture,
                                               fishing and forestry sector (18%), Sub-national gove rnment administration
                                               (7%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (7%)
                            Theme:             Rural services and infrastructure (49%), Participation and civic engagement
                                               (18%), Water resource management (13%), Land administrat ion and
                                               management (13%), Rural policies and institutions (7%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           29.25
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                 100.00
                              LOCAL BENEFICIARIES                                                          10.75
                              Total                                                                       140.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The PDO would be to improve and sustain the productive potential of natural resources and rainfed
                           agriculture, and to increase incomes of rural inhabitants in selected watersheds by effectively and
                           efficiently consolidating a participatory watershed development model. This would be achieved by
                           supporting GoUK in consolidating the participatory watershed model developed under previous IDA
                           supported interventions with an emphasis on strengthening environmental and livelihoods
                           sustainability.
                         C. Project Description
                         The proposed Gramya II would treat a total of 400,000 ha in the middle of the Himalayas, ranging
                         from 700m to 2,500m above sea level. The project would treat about 25 percent of the reserve forest
Public Disclosure Copy




                         areas for source sustainability. About 600 to 650 GPs in 20 to 22 developmental blocks would
                         benefit from the project. The project area would be selected according to the Common Guidelines
                         and would be contiguous to those micro-watersheds treated by the Gramya I to maximize impact by
                         enhancing the natural resource base and enabling cross-learning among GPs.

                         The Gramya II would introduce innovative features in its design, which would build on the
                         achievements of the Gramya I. These would include: (a) undertaking comprehensive watershed
                         development in contiguous rainfed areas and ensuring long term sustainability with an area based
                         rainfed development approach; (b) facilitating the same comprehensive watershed development
                         approach in about 50 percent of the IWMP target areas; (c) scaling up a market-driven value chain
                         development for high value vegetable crops; and (d) ensuring GP-level implementation of the two
                         key regulatory reforms under the Gramya I, which would be catchment planning (allowing the
                         reserve forest to be treated by the Watershed Directorate) and formation of Aam Sabha (women's
                         councils) in watershed planning.


                         In line with the GoUK Perspective and Strategic Plan 2009-2027, the proposed UDWDP II would
                         have four components: (a) participatory watershed development and management, (b) enhancing
                         livelihood opportunities, (c) consolidation of UDWDP I activities, and (d) institutional strengthening.

                         Component A. Participatory Watershed Development and Management (US$ 80 million). This
                         component would support GPs in selected micro-watersheds in developing watershed development
                         plans (WDPs), setting up user committees, and implementing WDPs. The project would provide
                         technical assistance in mobilizing GPs, treating micro-watersheds, developing water harvest
                         infrastructure, and improving technologies and practices in horticulture and livestock production.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This would include improving seeds and breeds and introducing high value crops and cultivation
                         techniques. While social mobilization and technical assistance would be provided by NGOs, relevant
                         line departments (agriculture, horticulture, and animal husbandry), and the WMD (engineering), the
                         project would create a pool of community-based mobilizers, accountants, extension service
                         providers, and para-vets at village or cluster level.

                         Component B. Enhancing Livelihood Opportunities (US$ 20 million). The component would support
                         (a) formation and capacity development of Common Interest Groups (CIGs) and their federations, (b)
                         value chain development, including input supply, value addition and quality control in harvesting and
                         post-harvest processing, and marketing, (c) marketing intelligence development and dissemination to
                         farmers (by using IT), (d) innovation grant to facilitate partnership with private sector, and (e)
                         income generation activities for vulnerable groups. NGOs would be hired to identify and train para-
                         professionals in CIG mobilization, accounting and book keeping, value chain development, and
                         marketing. The innovation grant would be managed by the WMD. The project would also promote
                         pine briquettes as alternative, clean fuel. The production was initiated by SLEM and would be scaled
                         up as income generation activities for vulnerable groups in Gramya II GPs.

                         Component C. Consolidation of UDWDP 1 activities (US$ 8 million). This component would
                         support selected Gramya I GPs in biodiversity conservation in inter GP space and farmer federation
                         consolidation by piloting the above community-driven CIG development. At the same time, the
                           proposed project would enhance federations' capacity in production by engaging farmers with
                           rainfed land and small landholders, and in post-harvest processing by engaging women and landless.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Component D. Institutional Strengthening (US$ 32 million). The component would finance project
                           operation costs, including capacity building, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), communication, and
                           knowledge management. The component would build GP and PRI capacity by implementing social
                           accountability measures, such as social audit and grievance redressal mechanisms. The project would
                           update the Gramya I communication strategy and develop targeted awareness messages about the
                           project's participatory and transparent approaches. It would also coordinate development of other
                           messages, such as extension, marketing and quality control information, and food and nutrition
                           security. The M&E would continue geographic mapping of the project areas and implementation of
                           participatory monitoring and evaluation (PME) at GP level and link with national M&E
                           improvements through the proposed Neeranchal national watershed project. The component would
                           also support knowledge management between GPs supported by Gramya II as well as IWMP and
                           among the State stakeholders in watershed development. It would also finance an establishment of
                           incentive fund to award best performing GPs in implementing their watershed development plans.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the            safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           A total of about 400,000 ha in the middle Himalayas ranging from 700m to 2,500m above sea level
                           will be treated by this project. About 600 to 650 Gram Panchayats, spread across 20 to 22
                           developmental blocks will benefit from the project. The Himalayan state of Uttarakhand is endowed
                           with 64.76% of its area under forests hence supporting rich biodiversity with a variety of flora and
                           fauna The altitude of Uttarakhand varies from 300m to 7,800m and the state has eight major types of
                           forests. There are 6 National parks and 6 Wildlife Sanctuaries of which sites of Nanda Devi National
                           Park and Valley of Flowers are World heritage Sites. The Project aims to treat about 25% of reserve
                           forest areas under this with the objective of source sustainability. The project area will be selected
                           from the untreated micro watersheds incorporated in State Perspective and Strategic Plan submitted
                           to Govt. of India for treatment of micro watersheds. The micro watersheds selected would be
Public Disclosure Copy




                           contiguous to the micro watersheds taken up in the UDWDP Phase- I. The project also proposes to
                           re-visit few selected areas in UDWDP-Phase I areas for consolidation.
                           The project period is proposed to 7 years from 2012 during the 12th and 13th five year plan.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Under the UDWDP-I, the Directorate had recruited an environmental specialist for the headquarter
                           while the field work was through the deputy project directors' teams. Their performance was largely
                           in line with the requirements, barring limited uptake of the IPM/INM strategy which will be
                           improved under the proposed project. The staffing need would be most likely similar, though this
                           will be reviewed during the environmental assessment.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Norman Bentley Piccioni (SASDA)
                           Ranjan Samantaray (SASDA)
                           Gaurav D. Joshi (SASDI)
                           Miki Terasawa (SASDS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                                 Environmental Assessment OP/                                      Yes
                                 BP 4.01
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       Yes

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                Yes

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           Yes

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   Yes
                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     Yes

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 28-Feb-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The
                                      specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. September 1, 2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      launch December 31, 2012 completion
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Norman Bentley Piccioni

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Zia Al Jalaly (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 11-Oct-2012
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Simeon Kacou Ehui (SM)                                                                                               Date: 17-Oct-2012




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
