                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                         APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                   Report No.: ISDSA1269
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Sep-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Georgia                            Project ID:    P130421
                            Project Name:       Regional Development Project II (P130421)
                            Task Team           Ahmed A. R. Eiweida
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           18-Sep-2012                        Estimated   06-Nov-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      ECSS6                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector:             General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (60%), Urban Transport
                                                (30%), Sub-national government administration (8%), Voc ational training (2%)
                            Theme:              Infrastructure services for private sector development (30%), City-wide
                                                Infrastructure and Service Delivery (25%), Cultural Heritage (25%), Urban
                                                Economic Development (10%), Regional integration (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                               Financing Source                                                                Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                7.50
Public Disclosure Copy




                              International Development Association (IDA)                                      30.00
                              Total                                                                            37.50
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective is to improve infrastructure services and institutional capacity to
                           support increased contribution of tourism in the local economy in the Imereti Region.
                            3. Project Description
                           The activities envisaged under the Project are expected to bring direct benefits to the residents and
                           tourists of Imereti. The implementation of the Project is expected to improve the access, quality and
                           reliability of public infrastructure; increase the volume of private sector investment in the region; and
                           increase small and micro enterprises in renovated culture heritage sites and cities. The Government
                           will benefit from improved institutional capacity of selected agencies and improved capacity to


                                                                         Page 1 of 9
                         operate and maintain assets.

                         The key results expected from the Project are:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Infrastructure Services:
                                 Increased number of hours per day of piped water services in Tskaltubo.
                                 Improved energy efficiency of street lights.

                         Tourism Economy:
                               Increased number of hotel beds in circuit route areas.
                               Increased revenue from tickets sold at Vani museum.

                         Institutional Capacity:
                                 Increased volume of private sector investment in Tskaltubo mobilized by the Tskaltubo
                         Destination Management and Development Agency.

                         Project Components:

                         The Project consists of two components: (1) Infrastructure Investment, and (2) Institutional
                         Development.

                         Component 1: Infrastructure Investment (IDA: US$26.46 million; Recipient: US$6.62 million)

                         Provision of financial resources to local-self governments (LSGs) to carry out Investment
                         Subprojects for the following activities:

                         Component 1.1. Urban Regeneration of Tskaltubo: An integrated approach is proposed for urban
                         renewal of Tskaltubo city. This includes a) rehabilitation of municipal infrastructure and utilities in
                         the central area; b) upgrading of public spaces, parks, and construction of tourism amenities, and c)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         restoration of public buildings with vernacular architecture. The proposed activities will help
                         improve livability and hospitality in a culturally-informed manner, enhance attractiveness for
                         visitors, revitalize the urban nuclei, and attract increased volume of private sector investments around
                         the medical and spa tourism cluster.

                         Component 1.2. Tourism Circuits Development: An integrated approach to site upgrading and
                         improved management of the six most attractive cultural heritage sites in Imereti: including Gelati
                         Monastery; Vani Museum and surrounding ethnographic site; the Ubisa Church; the Katskhi Church,
                         the Katskhi Column Monastery, and the Motsameta Monastery. This includes a) improving urban
                         landscaping and public parking; b) construction of information kiosks and public toilets; c)
                         restoration and refurbishing of the exterior and interior of the Vani Museum; d) improving access
                         roads; and e) preservation of selected cultural heritage sites.

                         The estimated cost of this component, including physical and price contingencies, is about US$
                         33.08 million, of which IDA will provide US$ 26.46 million and the Recipient will provide US$ 6.62
                         million in counterpart funding.

                         Component 2: Institutional Development (IDA: US$3.54 million; Recipient: US$0.88 million)

                         Enhancing the institutional capacity of the Georgia National Tourism Administration (GNTA), the

                                                                       Page 2 of 9
                         Agency for Culture Heritage Preservation of Georgia (ACHP), the National Museum, the Project
                         Implementing Entity (MDF), and other local and regional entities to carry out the following
                         activities:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Establishment of Tskaltubo destination management and development office.
                                 Tourism development and promotion
                                 Preparation of visitors' management plans for sustainability of Project's cultural heritage
                         sites.
                                 Development of skilled workforce and capacity building
                                 Monitoring and evaluating performance.
                                 Providing construction supervision support.

                         The estimated cost of this component, including physical and price contingencies, is about US$ 4.42
                         million, of which IDA will provide US$ 3.54 million, the Recipient will provide US$ 0.88 million
                         counterpart funding.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project will be implemented in various locations within Imereti Region, Georgia. Proposed sites
                         of subprojects include: Tskhaltubo, Gelati, Vani, Ubisa, Katskhi and Motsameta.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Darejan Kapanadze (ECSEN)
                         Kosuke Anan (ECSSO)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes                The project carries investment components in
                          BP 4.01                                              support to infrastructure development and
                                                                               therefore triggers OP/BP 4.01 Environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               Assessment. None of the project supported
                                                                               activities are expected to have significant, long
                                                                               term, or irreversible impacts on the natural
                                                                               environment, therefore the project is classified as
                                                                               environmental Category B.

                                                                               An Environmental Management Framework
                                                                               (EMF) prepared for the RDP is updated and
                                                                               adapted to the purposes of RDP II. The EMF will
                                                                               guide the preparation of subproject-specific
                                                                               Environmental Reviews (ERs) and/or
                                                                               Environmental Management Plans (EMPs).

                                                                               A Strategic Environmental, Cultural Heritage,
                                                                               and Social Assessment (SECHSA) is being
                                                                               carried out by the client in conjunction with the
                                                                               preparation of a Tourism Development and
                                                                               Marketing Strategy for the region. SECHSA will
                                                                               identify risks and opportunities associated with



                                                                       Page 3 of 9
                                                                         the overall development program proposed for
                                                                         Imereti. The SECHSA will a) pool baseline
                                                                         information on the target region, b) analyze the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         expected long term, cumulative, and induced/
                                                                         indirect impacts of the draft Regional Tourism
                                                                         Development and Marketing Strategy as well as
                                                                         of the concrete interventions proposed under RDP
                                                                         II, and c) assess the institutional capacity of the
                                                                         government agencies to manage environmental,
                                                                         cultural, and social implications of the regional
                                                                         development in Imereti, including gap analysis
                                                                         and recommendations for capacity building.

                                                                         An advanced draft of the EMF was disclosed in-
                                                                         country and through the Infoshop; discussed with
                                                                         the national, regional, and local stakeholders; and
                                                                         re-disclosed with the minutes of public
                                                                         consultations attached. The site-specific ERs and/
                                                                         or EMPs for all prepared individual investments
                                                                         have been developed satisfactory to the Bank,
                                                                         disclosed, and are being discussed with the
                                                                         stakeholders. These procedures will be completed
                                                                         for one later identified sub-project once its
                                                                         detailed design is available and before tendering
                                                                         of civil works.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No             None of the proposed subproject sites are
                                                                         located within or in immediate proximity to the
                                                                         designated natural protected areas, either inside
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         of- or close to the natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes            The project aims at attracting increased flow of
                         BP 4.11                                         tourists to the natural and cultural heritage sites of
                                                                         Imereti region. This would imply improvement of
                                                                         access to these sites and development of tourist
                                                                         infrastructure around them. Implementation of
                                                                         civil works in the immediate proximity to the
                                                                         historical monuments and other elements of the
                                                                         cultural heritage carries the risk of affecting their
                                                                         aesthetic value, accidental damage, or gradual
                                                                         deterioration.

                                                                         Also, development of tourist infrastructure and
                                                                         improving access to the cultural sites will imply
                                                                         earth works carrying high likelihood of chance


                                                                 Page 4 of 9
                                                                                finds. OP/BP 4.11 is triggered to ensure that no
                                                                                element of cultural heritage is affected negatively
                                                                                neither during construction nor operation of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                infrastructure provided under the project. Site-
                                                                                specific ERs and/or EMPs will cover the aspect
                                                                                of cultural heritage preservation and carry
                                                                                relevant mitigation measures, as well as
                                                                                arrangements for monitoring their
                                                                                implementation.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     Yes               OP/BP 4.12 is triggered in light of temporary
                            4.12                                                impacts of anticipated civil works and
                                                                                resettlement of street vendors. Resettlement
                                                                                Policy Framework has been prepared and
                                                                                disclosed to the public in both English and
                                                                                Georgian languages. A Resettlement Action Plans
                                                                                (RAPs) for an individual subproject in Gelati has
                                                                                been prepared and disclosed as needed in line
                                                                                with the RPF. Resettlement measures will be
                                                                                implemented prior to commencement of civil
                                                                                works at any given subproject site.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No

                            Projects on International          No                There is a likelihood that the Swedish
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                International Development Agency (SIDA) enters
                                                                                into a TF Agreement with the World Bank to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                implement a rehabilitation project for Tskaltubo
                                                                                wastewater treatment plan. This will be processed
                                                                                as a stand-alone TF, i.e. parallel financing. The
                                                                                OP will be triggered for the TF project to enable
                                                                                the client and task team to follow properly the
                                                                                policy guidelines.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential l arge scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The Regional Development Project II (RDP II) will finance infrastructure rehabilitation and
                              development sub-projects that according to the OP/BP 4.01 are classified as environmental
                              Category B. No large scale significant adverse environmental impacts are expected from the
                              project implementation. Majority of the civil works to be supported under the project are typical
                              and carry environmental implications which are common for small to medium scale infrastructure
                              projects. The Municipal Development Fund (MDF), which is the project implementing entity, is


                                                                        Page 5 of 9
                           well experienced in preparing and applying environmental mitigation measures to such type of
                           civil works.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           One challenge during conduct of regular works towards upgrading the existing small to medium
                           scale urban infrastructure will be the immediate proximity of some work sites to the cultural and
                           natural heritage sites. Such interventions carry additional risks of damaging monuments in case the
                           design and methodological approaches used are unfit for conservation of the historical and
                           aesthetic value of these sites or if tourist visitation of these sites, increased as a result of the project
                           interventions, is not managed in a sustainable manner. Building on the experience from the
                           ongoing RDP, the design of RDP II carries reliable mechanism for screening, raising, and
                           addressing the above risks in both the review and the implementation phases of sub-projects. Long
                           term cumulative impacts of the project implementation and induced development in the region will
                           have to be handled by the Borrower beyond the RDP II life through application of adequate policy
                           and managerial measures in the context of regional development of Imereti and more specifically -
                           development of tourism and hospitality services in this region. RDP II will provide good
                           background and policy guidance in this area by producing a Strategic Environmental, Cultural
                           Heritage, and Social Assessment (SECHSA) of the Imererti Regional Tourism Development and
                           Marketing Strategy (RTDMS) of the Borrower and the interventions proposed under RDP II. The
                           RTDMS is nearing completion and the first draft SECHSA report was reviewed and commented
                           on by the task team. SECHSA report will be further discussed with the stakeholders, revised based
                           on the public input, and finalized to the Bank satisfaction at a later stage of the project life.

                           The negative social impacts are expected to be limited, including some temporary inconvenience
                           to local population during construction, and longer term impacts related to increased influx of
                           visitors. Temporary impacts include dust, noise, limited access to the areas, and increased safety
                           risks, which are addressed through the site-specific Environmental Management Plans (EMPs), as
                           well as the Environmental Management Guidelines for Contractors, both of which are included in
                           the Operations Manual. These temporary impacts will likely be limited, since there are only few
                           residential structures in the immediate vicinities of the majority of sub-project sites. Direct long
Public Disclosure Copy




                           term impacts include traffic safety of local population due to increased influx of visitors, since the
                           proposed subproject sites of Ubisa and Katskhi are located alongside the roads leading to schools.
                           The increased number of traffic and usage of parking facilities might increase the commuting
                           students risks of traffic accidents, which would need to be addressed with adequate safety
                           measures. There would also be some cases of temporary resettlement. In Gelati, 44 local vendors
                           and businesses in the vicinities of the Monastery will likely be affected, since their stalls and shops
                           would be closed during the construction of the visitor facilities. A Resettlement Action Plan
                           (RAP) was prepared in advance to the project appraisal to address the project impact on these
                           affected people.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             Project implementation will have long term positive impact on the economic growth in Imereti
                           region through increased tourist visitation, improved infrastructure and utilities in the selected
                           municipalities, and enhanced business activity. This is expected to improve livelihood of the
                           residents of municipalities selected for direct interventions as well as to make some positive
                           change in the incomes of communities residing in the proximity to the cultural monuments and
                           natural assets. Indirect long term risks of the stimulated visitation and investment nearby and
                           around the heritage sites is the possibility of exceeding their carrying capacity as well as potential
                           loss of the aesthetic value of the landscapes surrounding tourist sites due to over-development in


                                                                         Page 6 of 9
                          their buffer zones. This potential threat could be effectively mitigated by following policy advice
                          to be provided in SECHSA and practicing integrated approach to the regional development.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Indirect social impacts would be related to: (a) urban gentrification of Tsukaltubo and Vani,
                           resulting from increased prices of goods/services as well as property values; and (b) a large influx
                           of investors and migrants attracted by the new economic opportunities. The SECHSA would
                           benefit from information about the main towns and cities in the region (e.g., Kutaisi, Khoni,
                           Tskaltubo, Chiatura, and Vani), since the majority of the proposed sub-project sites are located in
                           remote areas of Imereti, and socioeconomic impacts of the project would be felt more greatly in
                           urban areas where the tourists stay.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             No alternatives to the general design of the project have been considered with the specific
                           purpose of decreasing its potential adverse impacts. Analysis of alternatives and prioritization
                           occurred in the process of selecting individual investment proposals for the project support.
                           Technical alternatives are being looked at and analyzed as part of the sub-project review process
                           which looks at the consistency of design documents, economic studies, environmental risks, and
                           social impacts.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             The project implementing entity updated an Environmental Management Framework (EMF)
                           prepared for the purposes of the ongoing RDP. It carries detailed guidance on handling
                           environmental, cultural, and social aspects of the project implementation. It is included into the
                           Operations Manual of the project implementing entity. To handle the anticipated temporary
                           impacts of sub-projects and to address other possible resettlement issues a Resettlement Policy
                           Framework (RPF) was also updated from the one prepared for RDP. EMF and RPF are being used
                           for the development of investment-specific Environmental Reviews, as required, EMPs and RAPs,
                           as required. For all prepared sub-projects these documents have already been produced, cleared by
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the Bank, disclosed, and are being consulted with stakeholders. These procedures will be
                           completed for one later identified sub-project once its detailed design is available and prior to
                           tendering of civil works. The local municipalities will be responsible for the implementation of
                           RAPs with the assistance of the MDF prior to commencement of construction at the individual
                           project sites, while implementation of EMPs at the construction phase will be enforced on works
                           contractors directly by the MDF. Authorized national and regional agencies shall enforce
                           mitigation measures further on at the operation phase.

                          As part of the sub-project appraisal and approval process, the MDF will ensure that public
                          consultations are conducted for each sub-project. With regard to the subproject in Vani, the MDF
                          confirmed that the all nine households residing in the archaeological protection area were clearly
                          informed of the project plan, and that they have all been given the opportunity to raise concerns.

                          The MDF is the implementing agency for RDP II. The MDF has a long history of implementing
                          World Bank supported projects with a good track record of safeguard compliance, but in-house
                          capacity of MDF for ensuring application and monitoring of the measures for mitigating negative
                          impacts of civil works is limited due to the lack of specialized human resources and depends much
                          on the services of external consultants. The MDF has signed a contract with international
                          consulting form to provide construction supervision support of works, including monitoring of



                                                                     Page 7 of 9
                           safeguards enforcement. The MDF will be further encouraged to consider safeguards training for
                           its staff as already recommended for the purposes of the ongoing RDP.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The population of the Imereti region in general is the main beneficiary of the project.
                           Municipalities, elected local councils, NGOs, tourism businesses, potential future investors to the
                           region, the Georgia National Tourism Administration, the Agency for Cultural Heritage
                           Preservation, the Cultural Heritage Fund, the Ministry of Regional Development and
                           Infrastructure, the Ministry of Economy and Sustainable Development, and the Ministry of
                           Finance are also stakeholders of the project. The MDF is the designated implementing entity. At
                           the higher level, the national Government of Georgia is directly involved in the overseeing of the
                           project's implementation through MDF's Supervisory Board as the project is an integral part of the
                           national strategy for regional development.

                           From the very initial stage of the project preparation, the top management and technical staff of
                           the above listed national line agencies as well as those of the regional and municipal governments
                           have been directly involved in the consideration of all aspects of the proposed project. Public
                           consultations on the EMF and RPF were held in Imereti to generate inputs from a wide array of
                           the national, regional, and local stakeholders. The documents were disclosed in-country on June
                           30, 2012, and through the InfoShop on July 16, 2012. The final versions of these documents, with
                           the minutes of public consultations attached, were re-disclosed in-country and submitted to the
                           Bank Infoshop on September 21, 2012. The site-specific EMPs and RAPs (as required) for all
                           prepared sub-projects were reviewed and appraised by the Bank, disclosed in-country, and are
                           being discussed with the affected communities in the areas of individual project sites. The same
                           procedures will be applied before tendering of works to one remaining sub-project, which has been
                           identified later and is under preparation now.

                           Additionally, as part of the SECHSA process, a wide range of stakeholders including municipal
Public Disclosure Copy




                           authorities, local communities, civil society organizations, and the representatives of tourism
                           operators and hospitality businesses will be consulted about potential direct, indirect, short term,
                           and long term impacts of the RTDMS and the project interventions.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      25-Jun-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  21-Sep-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   21-Sep-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      25-Jun-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  21-Sep-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   21-Sep-2012
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.


                                                                      Page 8 of 9
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:

                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Ahmed A. R. Eiweida
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:         Name: Sana Kh.H. Agha Al Nimer (SM)                 Date: 25-Sep-2012




                                                                        Page 9 of 9
