                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSC337

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Aug-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Papua New Guinea                 Project ID:      P101578
                            Project Name:       PNG Energy Sector Development Project (P101578)
                            Task Team           Wendy E. Hughes
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           17-Feb-2011                      Estimated        30-Oct-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      EASNS                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector:             Other Renewable Energy (100%)
                            Theme:              Infrastructure services for private sector development (70%), Rural services and
                                                infrastructure (30%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                             1.05
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                    7.30
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Gap                                                                  0.90
                              Total                                                                          8.35
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed Project Development Objectives (PDO) are to (i) strengthen policy development and
                           strategic framework for renewable energy and rural electrification; and (ii) to attract investors for
                           sustainable development of new hydropower generation to supply the Port Moresby electricity grid.
                           C. Project Description
                           Component 1: Institutional and Policy Development for Renewable Energy and Rural Electrification
                           Implementing Agency: Energy Division, Department of Petroleum and Energy (DPE).

                           This would focus on policy development, institutional and strategy development, and capacity
                         strengthening for the GoPNG's role in development of the Naoro Brown hydropower project and
                         other hydropower projects that may be considered in the medium term. Key activities would include:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Energy Policy Development
                         Renewable Energy policy. This would include support for consultations and consensus-building
                         among stakeholders and drafting of the policy document.
                         Rural Electrification Policy. A draft policy was prepared in 2004 but never finalized. This would
                         include review and updating of the draft policy, including support for consultations and consensus-
                         building among stakeholders.

                         Institutional and Strategy Development
                         Rural Electrification Strategy.
                         - GIS Stocktaking and Development of a Stage 1 "Potential Rural Electrification Projects" Database.
                         This would involve preparation of Geographic Information System (GIS) database overlays of
                         population, infrastructure (e.g. roads, energy infrastructure, telecoms) and water resources.
                         - Analysis of alternative models of community and rural electrification projects including cost
                         structure, as an input to the ICCC process of developing tariffs for electricity supply in areas outside
                         the PNG Power exclusive supply areas.
                         - Environmental and Social Screening methodology for rural electrification projects.
                         - Preparation of a Rural Electrification Strategy. The strategy is expected to include identification of
                         subsidy resources to support rural electrification as well as criteria and guidelines for accessing the
                         subsidy funds. A number of entities are already involved in implementing electrification projects in
                         areas outside the main grids, including Western Power, PNG Power and others. Incorporating the
                         experience from on-going initiatives will be an important element in developing the strategy. Input
                         from other potential participants and beneficiaries, e.g. district and local authorities and community
                         representatives will also be essential. This activity would include support for consultations and
                         consensus-building among stakeholders including in locations outside the main urban centers, as well
                         as the analysis of options and drafting of the strategy.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Preparing for DPE / GoPNG role in new hydropower power generation developments. In the future,
                         GoPNG as the custodian of the national water resources will likely play a pivotal role in several
                         aspects of the development of new hydropower, including the Naoro Brown project, which could
                         require specialist expertise. GoPNG would provide oversight of the Naoro Brown project
                         development process. Under this sub-component, specialist support for GoPNG's role in Naoro
                         Brown oversight, for example on safeguards, could be provided. This activity would also provide
                         initial specialist support for targeted activities related to a broader GoPNG role in hydropower
                         development. Additional specific activities including training would be defined as and when new
                         projects move forward.

                         Project Management Support, including, hiring an Assistant PMU manager, Procurement specialist,
                         and Financial Management specialist as needed.

                         Component 2: Technical Assistance for Preparation and Planning for Port Moresby Hydropower
                         Supply
                         Implementing Agency: PNG Power.

                         Past studies have established the potential for hydropower development on both the Brown River the
                         adjacent Vanapa River. As demand for electricity in Port Moresby grows, it is anticipated that a
                         series of hydropower plants may be developed. Taking into account the long lead times in developing
                         hydropower projects, initial activities to prepare the Naoro Brown hydropower project, assess the
                         potential for and optimal sequencing of subsequent projects are included in the proposed project.
                         Two sub-components are proposed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2.i: Preparation of the Naoro Brown hydropower project for Port Moresby.

                         PNG Power hired international consultants (Entura) to undertake the feasibility study of the Naoro
                         Brown Hydropower project to supply the Port Moresby grid with about 80 MW. Activities to be
                         financed under the proposed Project related to the preparation of the Naoro Brown project to supply
                         Port Moresby would include:

                         - Naoro Brown Transaction Advisors (legal, technical and financial). Financial advisors would also
                         assist PNG Power in determining the tariff implications of the Power Purchase Agreement;

                         - Additional feasibility study work (i.e. Preparation of Geological Baseline Survey including
                         additional drilling to assess options for limiting seepage from the reservoir and, subject to further
                         review, possibly some drilling along the tunnel route, and information dissemination with affected
                         communities);

                         - Preliminary social assessment: Information sharing and consultation strategy, land owner
                         identification, land use mapping and consultations; Resettlement Policy Framework;

                         - Project Economic Analysis;

                         - Dam Safety Expert panel. (Once the Developer is in place, this would become the responsibility of
                         the Developer);

                         - Social and Environmental Expert Panel. (Once the Developer is in place, this would become the
                         responsibility of the Developer);
Public Disclosure Copy




                         - Social and Environmental specialists;

                         - Communications consultant;

                         - Environmental baseline survey work;

                         - Other preparation activities and specialist support identified during implementation, for example
                         additional preparation work following the completion of the feasibility study and as might be
                         recommended once the transaction advisors are in place;

                         - Project Management support.

                         2.ii: Improved planning related to hydropower supply for Port Moresby

                         Proposed activities related to the improved planning and identification of subsequent hydropower
                         projects for supply to Port Moresby would include:

                         - Three-basin inventory study of the Brown, Vanapa and Angabanga basins;
                           - Training, institutional strengthening and capacity building in areas critical for implementation of
                           improved performance and implementation of the next hydropower project. This could include
                           planning capacity, project evaluation and preparation and negotiation of power purchase agreements.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the              safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Component 1 of the proposed PNG Energy Sector Development Project will address national
                           policies which will be applied throughout Papua New Guinea. Component 2 which focuses
                           specifically on developing hydropower projects to supply the Port Moresby grid, will support
                           preparation of the Naoro Brown (NB) hydropower project and help identify others. The NB
                           hydropower project would involve a run-of river design, involving a dam that will be located
                           upstream of the confluence of the Naoro and Brown rivers. The land use area around the areas of the
                           dam, the penstock corridor and the power house is to a large extent natural with very little human
                           settlement and activity due to the relative inaccessibility of the area which in turn is due to its high
                           altitude and dense natural vegetation cover. Under the three basin inventory in Component 2,
                           hydropower potential in the Vanapa and Angabanga Basins would be considered. The study will
                           include initial assessment of the social and environmental aspects.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           There will be two main implementing agencies, namely the Department of Petroleum and Energy
                           (DPE) and PNG Power. The Department of Environment and Conservation (DEC) will also be
                           involved as the line agency responsible for approving the EA process and for issuingthe environment
                           license for the Naoro Brown hydropower project. PNG Power has little internal environment or
                           social management capacity. The DEC has worked with the WB on other projects. The proposed
                           PNG Energy Sector Development Project is taking a number of measures to address capacity issues
                           at two levels, (i) at the sector level - to effectively manage the environmental and social risks across
                           the sector as a whole as programs and projects get implemented, first through the preparation of a
                           Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) and (ii) Project Level, where tailor-made
                           specific and direct measures will be identified and supported under the proposed PNG Energy Sector
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Development Project to support these institutions (PNG Power and GoPNG (including DEC and
                           DPE) with differing levels of support consistent with their roles in the Naoro Brown hydropower
                           project and sector, for the environmental and social management of the Naoro Brown Hydropower
                           project and potentially other hydro power projects that the GoPNG is considering during the
                           implementation period of the PNG Energy Sector Development Project.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           James Orehmie Monday (EASTS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The Proposed Environmental and Social
                           BP 4.01                                               Management mechanisms for this project have
                                                                                 been outlined in the attached Environment and
                                                                                 Social Management Framework.

                                                                                 For the Naoro Brown Project - First, as part of
                                                                                 the ongoing feasibility Studies, an initial
                                                                                 environmental and social screening is being
                                                                                                                                 done to determine the potential environmental
                                                                                                                                 and social impacts on a broader scale to ensure
                                                                                                                                 these issues are being considered as part of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 decision-making process for Naoro Brown
                                                                                                                                 hydropower project. After this is done, but
                                                                                                                                 during the preparation of the proposed PNG
                                                                                                                                 Energy Sector Development Project the Task
                                                                                                                                 Team will then support PNG Power to prepare
                                                                                                                                 the terms of reference (TOR) for the Naoro
                                                                                                                                 Brown Hydropower Project for the preparation
                                                                                                                                 of Environmental Assessments (EA,
                                                                                                                                 Environmental Management Plans (EMPs),
                                                                                                                                 Social Assessments (SA), Resettlement Action
                                                                                                                                 Plans, (RAPs), Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                                                                                                 (RPF), Indigenous Peoples Development Plan
                                                                                                                                 (IPDP), Indigenous Peoples Policy Framework
                                                                                                                                 (IPPF) and Dam Safety Reports (DS) . The
                                                                                                                                 actual preparation of the EA, EMP, RAP, RPF,
                                                                                                                                 IPDP, IPDF and DS themselves, will be done by
                                                                                                                                 the Naoro Brown project developer who will be
                                                                                                                                 identified and selected during the
                                                                                                                                 implementation of this TA project.

                                                                                                                                 Please refer to the Environment and Social
                                                                                                                                 Management Framework attached to this ISDS
                                                                                                                                 for more details.
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No
                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Aug-2011
                               B.


                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                             A. specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                             The    Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage
                             ISDS would be prepared:
Public Disclosure Copy




                             B.      For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-
                             stage ISDS:

                             C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                             The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:      Name: Wendy E. Hughes

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan (RSA) Date: 07-Aug-2012
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Mona Sur (SM)                         Date: 07-Aug-2012
Public Disclosure Copy
