                                                                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                               APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA571
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Apr-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                          China                                  Project ID:                     P125458
                              Project Name:                     China: Yan'an Water Supply Project (P125458)
                              Task Team Leader:                 Sing Cho
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 10-Jan-2012                                    Estimated Board Date:           09-Aug-2012
                              Managing Unit:                    EASCS                                  Lending Instrument:             Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                           Water supply (80%), Sub-national government administration (20%)
                              Theme:                            Urban services and housing for the poor (80%), Municipal governance and institution building (20%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                    Financing Source                                                                                                   Amount
                                    Borrower                                                                                                              87.43
                                    International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                                 60.00
                                    Total                                                                                                                147.43
                              Environmental Category:           A - Full Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              The development objective of the proposed project is to enhance the water security in Yan’an City by increasing the water supply. Achievement of
                              the project objectives will be measured through the following PDO indicators: (a) volume of water sold (m3/year); (b) working ratio of YWSC; and
                              (c) water supply reliability.

                              3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                              The proposed project has the following three components:

                              Component 1: Water Diversion Works and Treatment Facilities ($136.9 million). Construction of a new water treatment plant at Yaodin, a water
                              reservoir dam at Kanjiagou and three pumping stations, and installation of water conveyance tunnels and pipes, and raw transmission mains, all as
                              needed to transfer annually about 12.75 million cubic meters of raw water to Yan'an Municipality and installation of a instrumentation control
                              system for the control of water transfer scheme operation.

                              Component 2: Institutional Development and Water Supply Operations Improvement ($1.0 million). Provision of technical assistance and training to
                              Yan’an Municipality for:

                              (a)           the strengthening of the institutional and urban water management capacities of Yan’an municipality;

                              (b)      establishing a decision support system within Yan’an Municipality for the safe and optimal operation and management of its urban water
                              supply which uses multiple water sources; and

                              (c)         development of a water savings program including measures to address leakage and non revenue water reduction, reclaimed water
                              utilization and water demand management.

                              Component 3: Project Management and Implementation Support ($1.0 million). Provision of technical assistance and training for Project
                              management and monitoring, including monitoring of the implementation of the Environmental Management Plan and Resettlement Action Plan.

                              In addition, the following complementary works to be constructed ahead of the Yan’an Water Supply Project (YWSP) with 100% Yan’an Municipal
                              Government (YMG) financing for dual purposes (YWSP and a planned water diversion scheme to supply water to other parts of Yan'an
                              Municipality). These include: (a) Water Intake to Wangjiaqu PS (Stage 1) and associated water mains; (b) Wangjiaqu PS (Stage1) to Wangjiaqu
                              PS (Stage 2), associated water mains and grit removal facility and sand/silt disposal site; (c) Yangjiashan Tunnel and associated water mains,
                              Yanshuiguan PS (Stage 3) to the Gaojiawan PS; and (d) Baishuwua Regulating Reservoir and associated water mains. However, both Bank
                              funded portion and domestic funded portion are included in the EA, RAP and Dam Safety from safeguard prospective.

                              The total financing requirements of the project are estimated to be US$147.43 million, of which US$60 million would be IBRD Loan, and the
                              remainder would be counterpart funds from Yan’an Municipal Government and the Agricultural Bank. The project will be implemented from 2012 to
                              2017.


                                                                                                                                                                     Page 1 of 6
                               Institutional Arrangements: A Project Leading Group (PLG) has been formed by Yan’an Municipal Government (YMG). The PLG is headed by a
                               Deputy Mayor of YMG. The members of the PLG are the responsible directors of Yan’an Finance Bureau (YFB), Yan’an Water Affairs Bureau
                               (YWAB), Yan’an Development and Reform Commission (YDRC), Yan’an Municipal Management Bureau (YMMB), Yan’an Construction
                               Commission (YCC), and Yan’an Environmental Bureau (YEB). The responsibility of the PLG is to provide policy guidance and ensure coordination
                               of important project-related issues.

                               Implementation of the project will be the responsibility of the Yan’an Water Investment Company (YWIC), reporting to the Yan’an Water Affairs
Public Disclosure Copy




                               Bureau (YWAB). A Project Management Office (PMO) has been established in YWAB, currently with twenty one staff, including seconded staff
                               from various sector departments. The Deputy Director of the YWAB is the head of the PMO, which will be responsible for the daily coordination
                               and liaison with all government authorities.

                               4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                               The proposed project is located in the Yan’an Municipality of Shaanxi Province in China. The water diversion point is situated at the middle reach
                               of the Yellow River, and the water transfer route crosses Yanchuan county and Baota District before it reaches the target beneficiary areas of the
                               project, namely, Baota district of Yan’an City. A total of 154,000 households are anticipated to benefit directly from the project by the year 2020.
                               The project areas are in a semi-arid region of the Yellow River Basin.

                               5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                               Xiaokai Li (EASIN)
                               Yiren Feng (EASCS)
                               Jun Zeng (EASCS)

                               6. Safeguard Policies                           Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                               Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01             Yes              Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes
                                                                                                If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) review and
                                                                                                approve the EA report? ?       Yes
                                                                                                Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?
                                                                                                Yes
                               Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                     Yes              Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of critical
                                                                                                natural habitats? No
                                                                                                If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-
                                                                                                critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures acceptable
                                                                                                to the Bank? N/A
                               Forests OP/BP 4.36                              No
                               Pest Management OP 4.09                         No
                               Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11          No
                               Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                   No
Public Disclosure Copy




                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12             Yes              Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework (as
                                                                                                appropriate) been prepared? Yes
                                                                                                If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager
                                                                                                review the plan? Yes
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                       Yes              Have dam safety plans been prepared? Yes
                                                                                                Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts
                                                                                                (POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? Yes
                                                                                                Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements
                                                                                                been made for public awareness and training? No
                                                                                                Note: EPP will be prepared during the initial years of implementation.
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP       No               Not applicable.
                               7.50
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60           No               Not applicable.


                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                   A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                                  Environment Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)

                                  The project is assigned as Category A project because of concerns over issues like the diversion and transfer of water from the Yellow river.
                                  Environment Assessment (EA) reports, including an EA summary, the EIA, and an Environmental Management Plan (EMP), have been
                                  prepared in accordance with national requirements and the Bank’s OP 4.01. The EA Report has been prepared, incorporating the Bank’s
                                  comments, and found to be satisfactory.

                                  The EA covers baseline information on environmental and socio-economic conditions. The EA identified and assessed the Project’s benefits
                                  and impacts on the natural and social environment. The EA report did not identify serious adverse or irreversible environmental impacts after
                                                                                                                                                                         Page 2 of 6
                           incorporating measures in project design, construction and operation, and it concluded that the Project will bring positive impacts to the natural
                           and socio-economic environment through increase of return water to local water system and closure of existing ground water wells to improve
                           the ground water regime and agriculture ecology. It will increase the water supply for Yan'an city in a sustainable manner, and improve
                           management of the city's water systems. However, some negative impacts may arise during project implementation, such as limited negative
                           impacts on soil, air, water, acoustic environments, and solid wastes mainly during construction. These impacts will be temporary and localized.
                           In addition, the construction of Kanjiagou reservoir needs to close oil wells, the construction of water pipeline will have two intersections with the
                           existing natural gas pipeline, the potential impacts related to the oil wells and natural gas pipeline, and ancillary facility such as transmission
Public Disclosure Copy




                           lines were sufficiently identified, and mitigation measures were appropriately addressed in EIA/EMP. All Project investments have been
                           designed to avoid or minimize any adverse impacts to acceptable levels on the physical environment. Preventive measures during the design,
                           construction and operation phases were prepared to minimize or even eliminate the negative impacts, and are noted in the EMP.

                           Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)

                           There are no critical natural habitats, natural reserves, protected areas, or endangered species within the project influence areas. It is
                           concluded that activities financed by the IBRD loan will not have adverse impacts on natural habitats. However, the Wanjiaqu water intake,
                           which will be financed by the government, may have potential minimal adverse impacts on fish species in the Yellow River.

                           The project will divert raw water from the Wanjiaqu water intake of the Yellow River. The EA concluded there are no protected fish species, no
                           fishes feeding sites, no spawn sites, and no wintering sites in the 5km stretches upstream and downstream of the Wanjiaqu water intake of the
                           Yellow River. However, Yellow River provides a habitat for five indigenous fish species, including Coreius septentrionalis, Rhinogobio nasutus
                           Kessler, Leuciscus chuanchicus Kessler, Silurus lanzhouensis Chen, Gobio huanghensis. The Yellow River indigenous fish species migrate
                           from downstream of Wanjiaqu to upstream of Wanjiaqu water intake during winter and early spring each year.

                           The EIA concluded that the water intake from Wanjiaqu takes for less than 1% of the water flow of the Yellow River at Wanjiaqu even during the
                           driest season. In addition, when the flow at Wanjiaqu section is smaller than 100 m3/s (ecological base flow), average 3.2 days per year, the
                           raw water intake activity will be stopped, and the water will be supplied by the Baishugua and Kanjiagou regulating reservoirs. The project
                           design also includes fish protection measures, the project will setup fish net (1cmx1cm) at the Wanjiaqu water intake to prevent fish from being
                           sucked into the water intake, thus the impacts on the fishes will be avoided. With these mitigation measures taken, the potential impact on the
                           fish species is negligible.

                           Dam Safety:
                           The project will finance construction of a regulating dam/reservoir (Kangjiagou, 42m high earthfill dam, reservoir capacity: 1.55 million m3).
                           Another dam – Baishuwua dam (59m high earthfill dam; reservoir capacity: 5.56 million m3) is also to be built as part of the complementary
                           works (to be financed with government funds) ahead of the Bank project. In addition, two existing reservoirs/dams, Wangyao (55m high earthfill
                           dam, reservoir capacity: 203MCM) and Hongzhuang (50.2m high earthfill dam, reservoir capacity: 9.79 million m3) supply water to the existing
                           service areas of Yan’an city (Baota District). All the above-mentioned dams are owned by YWIC. The OP 4.37 is therefore triggered.

                           Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP4.12):
                           Major resettlement impacts relate to land acquisition and demolition of structures. The project will require land acquisition, relocation of houses/
                           cave dwellings used by villagers, and relocation of infrastructure. The project will require the acquisition of about 414.65mu or 27.64 ha of land
                           (9.56 ha for Bank-financed components and 18.09 ha for YMG-financed components) contribute to 11.94% of total farm land of the affected
                           nine villages. The project will also require demolition of 2,130 m2 of housing/cave dwelling areas (incl. 1,680 m2 of housing, 35,747 trees and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           131 ha of nursery), which will affect 12 households. Some 1,711 mu or 114 ha of land will be temporally taken during project construction. The
                           project will affect 810 people through land acquisition and house/cave dwelling demolition. Project impacts are detailed in the RAP. No land is
                           acquired for protecting the water resource protection zone of the intake and two reservoirs. 18 households are located within the secondary
                           water resource protection zone of the intake, however, there will be no impact on their living and access to their assets and lands.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                             The project will bring significant positive impacts to the natural and socioeconomic environments to Yan’an City. The project as a whole is
                           substantially positive in environmental terms, with the benefits greatly overweighing the negative impacts. Any potential negative impacts have
                           been mitigated to acceptable levels, and all project investments have been designed to minimize any adverse impacts on the physical
                           environment. The main development bottleneck of Yan’an City is shortage of water, soil erosion and water pollution. The project will alleviate
                           significantly the water shortage problems faced by Yan’an through increased water supply and expanded service areas, greatly improve
                           people’s standards of living, thus creating more employment opportunity in the region. It will also bring significant environmental benefits. With
                           the operation of the project, Yan’an will bring 23.06 million m3 of return water per year by 2030, and gradually reduce the use of ground water,
                           thus curbing the trend of over exploitation of ground water, and is beneficial to the local water system, ground water resource protection and
                           agriculture ecology. In the long run, the project will be beneficial for the local ecological environment.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                            During the design phase the EA teams worked closely with project planners/ owners, the feasibility study team and social team to compare
                           and evaluate alternatives. The EA identified, evaluated and compared various options for dam sites, and optimal alternatives were selected
                           based on the avoidance of (or least adverse) social and environmental impacts, as well as other economic, technical, and financial
                           considerations for least cost solutions. A “no project? scenario was also considered as an alternative. In addition, in-depth alternative analysis
                           was carried out for water source sites, pipelines routes, water supply plant sites, water treatment process, access roads, and other construction
                           arrangements. As a result, the routes of the pipelines, access roads and other construction arrangements were optimized by significantly
                           shortening the length, reducing the areas to be excavated and spoils to be disposed, thus reducing the land acquisition, decreasing the number
                           of resettlement people, and with least cost. Above numerous alternative assessments can be found and explained in details in the EA report.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                            and implement the measures described.
                            Environment Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
                           To effectively implement the outcomes of the EA process and comply with relevant policy and legal requirements, a stand-alone Environmental
                           Management Plan (EMP) was developed in close collaboration with the PMO. This guarantees with it increase the EMP’s ownership by PMO,
                           and increase chance of successful implementation.


                                                                                                                                                                     Page 3 of 6
                         EMP includes policy, applicable environmental standards, environmental management system, mitigation measures, institutional arrangements,
                         capacity building, and estimated costs for the mitigation measures, and monitoring programs during the construction and operation phases.

                         The EMP specifies mitigation measures for both Bank financed project and Government financed project, to address all potential adverse
                         impacts during preparation, construction and operation of the proposed investments. It also outlines the institutional arrangement and
                         responsibility of each party from design, construction to operation. It details environmental monitoring for construction and operation phases,
                         including parameters to be monitored, locations, frequency, monitoring agency and budget estimate. The EMP also includes budgeted
Public Disclosure Copy




                         monitoring plan and training plan which are integrated into the overall implementation plan of the project.

                         For the 29 oil wells in Kanjiagou reservoir, the capping of the oil wells will strictly follow the domestic standard SY/T 6646 -2006 Well
                         Abandonment and inactive well practices, which is developed based on US API Bull E3 1993 Environmental Guidance Document, the project
                         will hire independent consultant to supervise the oil well closure process, and the responsibilities of implementer , budget and time schedule
                         were specified in the EMP, to ensure the water quality of the reservoir during the operation phase.

                         For the two intersections with the existing natural gas pipeline, the client conducted several rounds of consultation and meetings with the
                         natural gas company, the relevant domestic technical specification related to natural gas was fully incorporated, and the procedures, specific
                         requirements and measures for design, onsite supervision and management were specified in the EMP, to ensure the safety of the natural gas
                         pipeline.

                         For the ancillary facilities such as transmission lines, telecoms cables, the relocation or new alignments are not known at this stage, to address
                         the potential minor impacts caused by the construction of ancillary facilities, the EMP includes the procedures to be followed, measures taken,
                         cost, and responsibilities of implementation for the ancillary facilities.

                         The Environmental, Health, and Safety (EHS) issues were fully considered during the EIA process, the relevant context of WBG EHS
                         Guidelines, including EHS General Guidelines, EHS Guidelines for Onshore Oil and Gas Development, and EHS Guidelines for Water and
                         Sanitation were included in the EIA/EMP.

                         The environmental monitoring has been integrated and budgeted into the overall monitoring and evaluation of the project. The EMP including
                         Chance Finding Procedures for PCRs will also be incorporated into bidding documents and contracts to ensure their implementation. As the
                         result, the EMP will become mandatory to contractors and EMP training is required to be held prior to the commencement of construction, and
                         relevant parts of EMP will be incorporated into bidding/contract documents.

                         Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)
                         When the flow at Wanjiaqu section is smaller than 100 m3/s (minimum ecological flow), average 3.2 days per year, the raw water intake activity
                         will be stopped, and raw water will be supplied by Baishugua and Kanjiagou regulating reservoir. In addition, the project design also considered
                         fish protection measures such as fish nets (1cmx1cm) at the Wanjiaqu water intake to prevent the fish from being sucked into the water intake,
                         thus the potential adverse impacts on fish will be negligible.

                         In addition, to protect water quality and drinking water safety of the intake area, the water source protection zone will be demarcated around
                         Wanjiaqu water intake during the operation phase. The water source areas are divided into 3 zones, namely the Primary Protection Zone,
                         Secondary Protection Zone and Quasi-Protection Zone. The Primary Protection Zone is waters 1,000 meters upstream and 100 meters
                         downstream and land 100 meters outward from the right bank of the Yellow River from the water intake; the Secondary Protection Zone is
Public Disclosure Copy




                         waters 2,000 meters from the Primary Protection Zone and land 200 meters from the outer reach of the right bank; the Quasi-Protection Zone is
                         waters 5,000 meters from the Secondary Protection Zone and land 300 meters from both banks of the Yellow River. The pollution control
                         measures will be implemented for the various water source protection zones by following the relevant Laws and Regulations (refer to EIA for
                         detail). With these mitigation measures taken, the pollutants discharged from water source protection zone around Wanjiaqu will be reduced,
                         which will be beneficial for the water quality of Wanjiaqu intake, thus improve the quality of natural habitat nearWanjiaqu intake.

                         Furthermore, the returning water of the project will be discharged into the Yan River. Yan River is currently polluted and water quality is Class
                         IV, and no flow during dry season (December to February), the runoff in Yan River reduced gradually, and the aquatic ecological condition
                         degraded seriously recently. With the operation of the project, the treated returning water will increase the runoff of the Yan River, maintain the
                         constant water flow throughout the year, and create larger water areas in the water receiving areas, which will increase the carrying capacity of
                         the water environment of Yan River, provide favorable conditions for aquatic plants, and create more feeding sites and habitats suitable for
                         zooplankton and benthic animals, and contribute to the growth of fish population. In the long run, the project will improve the water and
                         ecological environment of the Yan River.

                         Dam Safety:

                         A panel of dam safety experts (POE) was established by Yan’an PMO in September, 2011with terms and conditions satisfactory to the Bank,
                         and was convened for the first time in November 2011. A dam safety review report was prepared for the two existing dams, Wangyao and
                         Hongzhuang, and draft dam safety plans (including instrumentation plan, supervision plan, draft outlines for the OMS Plans and EPPs)
                         prepared for the two new dams, Kangjiagou and Baishuwua, both of which were reviewed by and discussed with the Bank team’s dam safety
                         specialist during pre-appraisal mission. An updated dam safety review report incorporating Bank’s comments, have been provided to the Bank
                         in both English and Chinese before project appraisal.

                         For the two existing dams (Wangyao and Hongzhuang, location refer to Figure 2), the POE inspected these dams and reviewed the safety
                         management arrangements before project pre-appraisal. While the POE concluded that both dams are safe to operate, it provided the following
                         key recommendations: (a) the rating curve for the Wangyao reservoir should be evaluated and the reservoir operating rules be updated
                         considering the heavy siltation of the reservoir; (b) the monitoring data needs to be complied and the various rules and procedures on dam
                         operation, monitoring, inspection and maintenance be pulled together to formulate an OMS plan for both reservoirs. An agreed action plan to
                         implement these recommendations of the POE has been agreed during the project appraisal.

                         For the two new dams (Baishugua and Kangjiagou, location refer to Figure 2), the main recommendations for the feasibility study stage are
                         related to re-checking the standards of design and check floods and their calculations, and reviewing the capacity of water/flood release
                         structures against the need of emergency reservoir emptying. These recommendations will be incorporated in finalizing the feasibility study.
                                                                                                                                                               Page 4 of 6
                           Operation, Maintenance and Surveillance Plans (OMS Plans) and Emergency Preparedness Plans (EPPs) will be prepared and furnished to
                           the Bank for review a year ahead of the dam commissioning. During project implementation, qualified contracts will be contracted for the dam
                           construction, and competent consultants will be engaged to supervise the dam construction. The POE will meet regularly to review the works
                           quality and required dam safety plans to ensure that the dams are built with good quality and operated safely in compliance with the Bank
                           policy requirements under OP4.37.

                           Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP4.12)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           1.        In accordance with local laws and Bank requirements, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for the project was prepared in Chinese and
                           English both for Bank and the YMG/other sources of financed facilities by the Yan’an PMO, with assistance from house demolition offices, local
                           land bureaus, affected villages and communities, potentially displaced persons, and Shaanxi Academy of Social Science. Key principles,
                           considerations and salient activities in project design and RAP preparation included:

                           •         Acquisition of land and other assets, and relocation of people, will be minimized as much as possible. For example, the optimized
                           design of Gaijiawan Pre-treatment Plant (now optimize as pumping station only for updated water quality monitoring data) reduced some 66 mu
                           or 4.4 ha of farmland.
                           •         A socio-economic survey was conducted to determine baseline conditions, especially of project affected persons.
                           •         Compensation for houses or other properties was determined at full replacement value. The replacement cost has been analyzed in
                           the project RAP.
                           •         Compensation will be provided to all project affected persons, including those who lack house registration or other documents, such
                           as legal documents.
                           •         Basic infrastructure and service facilities will be provided in areas where project affected persons will be resettled.
                           •         Affected persons were consulted during planning for acquisition of land and other assets, and provision of rehabilitation. The first
                           round of public consultation was conducted in June 2011 and the second round of public consultation was conducted in August, 2011.
                           •         Financial and physical resources for resettlement and rehabilitation will be made available when required.
                           •         Special consideration will be given to vulnerable groups. 9 vulnerable families will be affected by land acquisition from the project.
                           Besides other special assistance, every households will receive CNY 10,000 or USD 1,562 of financial assistance.
                           •         Institutional arrangements will be established to ensure effective and timely design, planning, consultation and implementation of the
                           RAP.
                           •         Effective and timely supervision, monitoring and evaluation of project implementation will be executed.

                           A Resettlement Policy Framework has been developed according to relevant local laws and regulations as well as World Bank OP 4.12 on
                           Involuntary Resettlement for the resettlement practices on transmission line construction. It describes the overall legal framework, planning
                           principles, procedures, compensatory approach, consultation and participatory requirements, grievance redress mechanisms, organization and
                           monitoring arrangements.

                           Institutional Capacity

                           Yan’an municipality was involved in recent years in Bank supported projects such as rural water supply project and Loess Plateau
                           Rehabilitation Project which were completed successfully. However, the project entity – YWIC is new to World Bank operations. The Yan’an
                           PMO has engaged experienced consulting firms and individual consultants to advise and assist them in EA and RAP development and
                           consultation during project preparation. This is in addition to the Bank safeguards policy training provided by the Bank team and guidance from
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Shaanxi Provincial Finance Department and Development & Reform Commission. During implementation, the project entity will engage
                           qualified consultants to undertake monitoring of EMP and RAP execution. The Borrower’s technical and institutional capacity for implementing
                           Bank’s safeguard policies will be further strengthened with assistance from the Bank team and experienced experts to be hired by YWIC during
                           the implementation. Trainings and workshops have been planned and included in the project implementation plan based on a capacity building
                           program for safeguards in EMP. The Bank task team will continuously help to build up the project entity’s capacity during the preparation and
                           implementation of the project.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                            on potentially affected people.
                            Two-stage public consultations including expert consultations, questionnaires, symposia, and interviews, have been conducted with the
                           different stakeholders. It included persons from different gender, socioeconomic and educational backgrounds, groups, and occupations. The
                           primary objective of the first round was to survey the public’s opinion about the project, while for the second round it was to communicate the
                           EA findings, discuss intended mitigation measures, and confirm public acceptance and satisfaction. In addition, there have been several rounds
                           of consultations with key stakeholders including Yanchang Oil Company and the West-East Gas Pipeline Company to discuss the specific
                           mitigation measures pre construction and during construction phase. The majority of those consulted expressed strong support for the project,
                           and acceptance of short-term inconveniences, such as noise and dust during the construction phase. The EA and EMP incorporated counter
                           measures to address these concerns.

                           Information about the project was disclosed on August 4 2009 and Nov 8 2011. The availability of the EA reports, and how to access to them,
                           was announced in the “Yan’an Daily? on Nov 8, 2011. The EIA, EMP, and EA Summary were disclosed at the website of different government
                           agencies and are available at PMO. All the Environmental safeguard documents mentioned above was disclosed at the Infoshop in
                           Washington, D. C. on Dec 13, 2011.

                           Project-affected persons and organizations were informed about the project and its impacts in meetings during the preparation of the RAP.
                           Comments and recommendations received from these meetings were incorporated in the RAP and the feasibility study. Public participation will
                           continue during RAP implementation. Project information will be provided to affected persons through television, newspapers, bulletins and
                           posters. The RAP was summarized in a resettlement information booklet and distributed to affected households, and disclosed in the “Yan’an
                           Daily? on Dec 1, 2011. The English version was disclosed at the Infoshop on Dec 14, 2011.

                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other


                                                                                                                                                                Page 5 of 6
                              Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                                 Yes
                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                    19-Nov-2011
                              Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                                08-Nov-2011
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                 13-Dec-2011
                              For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive                 10-Jan-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Directors
                             Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                              Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                                 Yes
                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                    30-Nov-2011
                              Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                                01-Dec-2011
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                 14-Dec-2011
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                            disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                            C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                              Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                     Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                            OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                              If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) natural   Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              habitats, does the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                              If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the             Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              plan?
                            OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                              Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements been made                      Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              for public awareness and training?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?                     Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language             Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for          Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?                     Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard           Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same               Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Task Team Leader:                     Sing Cho
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:      Name: Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan (RSA)                                      Date: 04-Apr-2012
                            Sector Manager:                       Name Paul Kriss (SM)                                                             Date: 23-Mar-2012




                                                                                                                                                                        Page 6 of 6
