                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC874

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Jun-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Turkey                          Project ID:      P126101
                            Project Name:      PMR TURKEY (P126101)
                            Task Team          Jari Vayrynen
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          00-undefined-0000               Estimated        26-Apr-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSS2                           Lending          Technical Assistance Loan
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector:         General energy sector (50%), General industry and trade sector (50%)
                            Theme:          Climate change (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                     0.00
                              Partnership for Market Readiness                                             5.35
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Total                                                                        5.35
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to assist Turkey put in place a Monitoring, Reporting
                           and Verification (MRV) system in the energy and industry sectors in view of the establishment of a
                           carbon market.
                           C. Project Description
                           Objectives and main implementation phases of the PMR

                           The PMR is a grant-based, capacity building multi-donor trust fund that provides funding and
                           technical assistance for the collective innovation and piloting of market-based instruments for
                           greenhouse gas emissions reduction. The PMR funding target is US$100 million and donor pledges
                           totaling US$79.5 million have been made so far. The Partnership brings together developed countries
                         (i.e. the Donor countries Australia, Denmark, EC, Germany, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, Spain,
                         Switzerland, United States, and United Kingdom) and developing countries (i.e. the fifteen
                         Implementing Countries Brazil, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Colombia, India, Indonesia, Jordan,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Mexico, Morocco, South Africa, Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine and Vietnam), as well as other key
                         experts and stakeholders. The PMR provides a platform for technical discussions on market
                         instruments, fostering South-South exchange, facilitating collective innovation for pilot efforts and
                         harnessing financial flows for implementation and scale up. Decisions in the PMR, including criteria
                         for and allocation of funding, are made by the Partnership Assembly (consisting of both the PMR
                         Donors and Implementing Countries).

                         The PMR is country-led. It provides systemic support to enhance countries’ technical and
                         institutional capacities in order to implement market-based instruments, such as a domestic emissions
                         trading system (ETS) or a scaled-up crediting mechanism. As the Implementing Countries are at
                         different stages of development and market readiness, each will approach the use of market
                         instruments in a different way. Some will focus on building core “readiness? components, such as
                         new systems for MRV, data collection, baseline setting, and establishing regulatory institutions;
                         others will go further and pilot an appropriate domestic or international market-based scheme.
                         Regardless of a country’s choice, capacity building and piloting can have cross-cutting benefits
                         relevant to implementing non-market based mitigation actions, designing low emission development
                         strategies, and identifying areas of low cost mitigation potential.

                         The PMR activities in each Implementing Country takes place in two phases.
                         •        Preparation Phase: With a benefit of a US$350,000 preparation grant, each PMR
                         Implementing Country formulates a Market Readiness Proposal for review and endorsement by the
                         PMR Partnership Assembly. The Implementing Country may also use the preparation grant for
                         activities that continue into and overlap with the Implementation Phase. Turkey joined the PMR in
                         April 2011 and was awarded the preparation grant in May 2011. The grant agreement – the first one
                         in the PMR – for the recipient executed grant was signed in December 2011 between the Bank and
                         the State Treasury of Turkey. Ministry of Environment and Urbanization and its climate change
Public Disclosure Copy




                         department has been designated as the implementing agency.
                         •        Implementation Phase: The Implementing Country enters into the PMR Implementation
                         Phase once the PMR Partnership Assembly has reviewed and endorsed its Market Readiness
                         Proposal and awarded an Implementation Grant to it. Each Implementing Country is required to
                         present its draft Market Readiness Proposal (see step 3 below) within two years after the award of the
                         preparation grant (with a possibility of extension of six months in extraordinary circumstances). With
                         the benefit of the Implementation Grant, which will range between US$3 - $8 million per country,
                         the Implementing Country puts in place the readiness components outlined in the Market Readiness
                         Proposal, including, where applicable, piloting the proposed market instrument. The size of the
                         funding is determined by the Partnership Assembly in accordance with a set of criteria and
                         availability of funding. The criteria for evaluation of the Market Readiness Proposals include (i) the
                         scope of the proposal and sound rationale behind the choice of the instrument and sectors, (ii)
                         comprehensiveness of the proposal with regard to planning for a implementation/piloting of a
                         Market-based Instrument (scaled up GHG Crediting instrument or domestic emissions trading), (iii)
                         estimate of GHG mitigation potential, (iv) identification of milestones and the timetable for
                         implementation, and (v) ratio of co-financing. First Implementation Grants may be awarded by the
                         Partnership Assembly in late 2012.

                         Turkey's expected PMR activities
                         In order to be able to prepare its Market Readiness Proposal, the MoEU will organize consultations
                         and utilize the Preparation Phase grant to organize such meetings, training events and outreach to
                         stakeholders, as well as to establish effective project management capacity. The Ministry may also
Public Disclosure Copy




                         commission background studies (that may continue or be complemented during the Implementation
                         Phase), such as carrying out impact assessment and cost-benefit analysis of introducing market
                         mechanisms as well as preparing suggested roadmaps and actions to run such systems. The MoEU is
                         currently in the process of selecting a part time Procurement Specialist for a period of two years, and
                         may later also hire a technical specialist to provide additional implementation support.

                         Turkey has indicated that its Market Readiness Proposal, and therefore its PMR Implementation
                         Phase activities, would run through end of 2015 or 2016 and focus on implementation of a robust
                         MRV system for GHG emissions in the key sectors, as provided by the MRV by-law adopted on 25
                         April 2012. The PMR would support the implementation of the MRV system e.g. by providing
                         training and other support to key government staff, emission verifiers, industrial associations and
                         operators of the obligated installations, documentation templates, and general outreach and
                         communication on the MRV by-law.

                         When Turkey presented its MRV framework at the PMR meeting in May 2012, a number of the
                         PMR implementing countries expressed strong interest in learning from Turkey’s experience. At the
                         same time, the experience gained from some PMR donor countries, such as Germany, UK and
                         Australia, offers value lessons for Turkey. Going forward, the team together with the PMR
                         Secretariat intends to facilitate such learning and experience sharing.

                         Other PMR Implementation Phase activities, if any, are not yet defined and will be added to the
                         project scope when Turkey’s Market Readiness Proposal becomes available. However, Turkey has
                         tentatively indicated that it may include in its Market Readiness Proposal studying, designing and
                         implementing readiness components for a possible pilot phase of a market mechanism. The specific
                         activities could include establishing emission baselines and marginal abatement cost curves in key
                         sectors, and defining scenarios for deviating from those baselines using the market based instrument.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         They could also include e.g. designing and establishing a registry system, and designing allowance
                         allocation options (in case a cap-and-trade system would be proposed). Such activities could
                         eventually lead to adopting and launching such a pilot scheme towards the end or after the PMR
                         Implementation Phase in Turkey.

                         It is important to note that Turkey has made no decisions on the use and scope of market based
                         mechanisms. Its operating environment internationally is very dynamic, including the EU accession
                         process and the UN negotiations. If Turkey was to eventually join the EU, it would have to
                         implement the EU’s Emission Trading Scheme (EU ETS) directive as a part of its aquis
                         communitaire. Given that a large share of Turkey’s exports goes to the EU countries, it is worth
                         noting that the EU ETS directives include a provision that could trigger trade measures for imports
                         from non-EU countries that do not have equivalent GHG mitigation policies and measures. In the
                         UNFCCC, a new market mechanism is being developed in the context of the negations on a new
                         international agreement, targeted to be concluded by 2015. Turkey could also use a market
                         instrument for purely domestic purposes. Some of the activities Turkey will implement partly with
                         the PMR support are compatible with various possible scenarios, and provide further basis for
                         making decisions on which instrument (if any) to ultimately pursue.


                         Background information on the MRV by-law
                         The Turkish MRV by-law, which is based on the MRV regulation in the EU Emissions Trading
                         Scheme, establishes an installation-level monitoring, reporting and verification system covering all
Public Disclosure Copy




                         major sources of GHG emissions from the energy (combustion of fuels with output of 20MW
                         thermal or more) and industry sectors (coke production, metals, cement, glass, ceramic products,
                         insulations materials, paper and pulp, chemicals over specified threshold sizes/production levels).
                         Under the MRV legislation operators are obliged to monitor their emissions in accordance with
                         approved monitoring plans and submit their verified emissions reports annually. The MRV by-law
                         does not establish any emission limitation or reduction obligation on the operators.

                         The GHG verifiers will be accredited by the Turkish Accreditation Organization TURKAK. The
                         verifiers may be both international (if they have a registered company in Turkey) and domestic, and
                         they need to meet certain qualification requirements included in the by-law. The licenses for the
                         verifiers are issued by the Ministry.

                         Each operator needs to submit the monitoring plans for its installations to a verifier first for review
                         and then to the Ministry by June 2014. The monitoring plans need to prepared and submitted to the
                         MoEU’s approval by mid-2014, before which they need to be submitted to an accredited verifier for
                         its vetting. The Ministry will then approve the monitoring plans by December 2014. Development of
                         the monitoring and reporting protocols and practices are likely to be a part of the capacity building
                         and training activities that Turkey would propose to do in its Market Readiness Proposal. Note that
                         the protocols should be able to build on those used in the EU ETS.

                         The first reporting period is set as 1 January – 31 December 2015 and the reports for that period are
                         first independently verified by one of the accredited verifiers – this will typically include a site visit.
                         The verified monitoring reports are due to be sent to the Ministry in April 2016.

                         While there are no accurate estimates yet on how many installations will be included, the preliminary
                         estimates are in the range of 2,000-3,000 installations (covering some 200-250 million tons CO2e
Public Disclosure Copy




                         emissions, equivalent to roughly 50% of Turkey’s current annual GHG emissions). The MoEU is
                         currently working with the industrial associations to identify the relevant installations.

                         Failing to comply with the regulation is subject to the generic data reporting requirements and related
                         sanctions under the Turkish Environmental Law No. 2872 and the Ministry has proposed an
                         amendment to the Law to included specific provisions related to the MRV by-law. The ministry is
                         also considering integrating the GHG reporting system into the environmental licensing scheme,
                         meaning that an installation will have to have all GHG emissions reports submitted in order to
                         operate.

                         Implementation of an MRV system will provide Turkey accurate information and a database on
                         GHG emissions in key sectors of the economy, as well as on the technologies, fuels and emission
                         factors at the various installations. The data can thus be used to significantly increase the quality of
                         the Turkish National Inventories to the UNFCCC. The data obtained through MRV can also help
                         Turkey in its negotiations on the future international climate change regime under the UNFCCC. It
                         could also be used in the preparation of the MAC curves, and subsequently in the design of policies
                         and measures, including a possible market based instrument. Turkey has declared during the
                         UNFCCC negotiations that it will be implementing Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions
                         (NAMAs). These cover variety of sectors including energy, transport, industry, buildings, waste,
                         agriculture, land use and forestry. The high quality data obtained from the installation level MRV
                               system will help Turkey to put in place and monitor policies and measured in the sectors covered by
                               the NAMAs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                               Furthermore, the data will provide basis for designing and implementing not only climate change
                               mitigation policies and measures but also other energy efficiency and environmental policies and
                               measures, as well as for deploying e.g. results based finance instruments (including potentially those
                               of the World Bank Group).
                               D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the                                                                                    safeguard
                               analysis (if known)
                               As this is TA the consultants will mostly work in Ankara, including at their own offices and those of
                               the Ministry of Environment and Urbanization. Delivery of the training and capacity building
                               activities, and preparation of consultant reports may include various locations throughout Turkey.
                               E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                               Ministry of Environment and Urbanization is the institution responsible for environmental
                               assessment policies in Turkey and has the necessary institutional capacity for safeguard policies.
                               F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                               Dmytro Glazkov (ECSS2)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                                 Safeguard Policies                                                Triggered?                    Explanation (Optional)
                                 Environmental Assessment OP/                                      No
                                 BP 4.01
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No
                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Apr-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             N/A
                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Task Team Leader:   Name: Jari Vayrynen

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)     Date: 25-Jul-2012
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Ranjit J. Lamech (SM)   Date: 10-Jul-2012
Public Disclosure Copy
