                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA2511
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Apr-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Apr-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Lao People's Democratic                        P130222
                                                                             Project ID:
                                               Republic
                            Project Name:      LA-Scaling-Up Participatory Sustainable Forest Management (P130222)
                            Task Team       Peter Jipp
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       15-Mar-2013                          Estimated   28-May-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: EASTS                                 Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Forestry (80%), Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Climate change (50%), Environmental policies and institutions (50%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:          39.39              Total Bank Financing:           19.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                              Financing Gap:                   0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                         7.56
                              IDA Grant                                                                                 19.00
                              Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                                              12.83
                              Total                                                                                     39.39
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective is to execute REDD+ activities through participatory sustainable
                           forest management in priority areas and to pilot forest landscape management in four provinces.
                            3. Project Description

                                                                      Page 1 of 12
                         The SUPSFM project will build and expand on progress achieved by Government of Lao PDR (GoL)
                         in implementing participatory approaches to sustainable forest management under the Sustainable
                         Forestry for Rural Development (SUFORD) Project (P064886). It will expand implementation to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         production forest areas in three additional provinces; develop sustainable livelihood options with
                         producer groups; pilot Forest Landscape Management; and contribute to a supportive external
                         environment with a strong focus on REDD+ readiness and accompanying capacity building
                         requirements. SUPSFM will go beyond the SUFORD models in several important respects by: (a)
                         explicitly incorporating and monitoring forest carbon emission reductions, (b) introducing
                         performance payments for forest carbon sequestration, (c) focusing additional efforts on developing
                         sustainable livelihood options, and (d) fostering inter-agency coordination at the forest landscape
                         scale.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will provide technical and social support in provinces where Participatory Sustainable
                         Forest Management (PSFM) is currently operational in Xayabouly, Vientiane, Attapeu, Bolikhamxai,
                         Khammouane, Savannakhet, Champasack, Salavan, and Xekong and develop a Forest Landscape
                         Management approach covering state managed forests (production, conservation, and protection
                         forests) and village use forests in four northern provinces. It is anticipated that REDD+ will have
                         widespread impacts on the management of Lao PDR’s forests and forest resources, affecting both
                         forest-dependent and Indigenous Peoples. Besides generating employment and cash incomes, forests
                         are essential to the needs of a significant number of households in forest areas, who rely on them for
                         food security, fuel, medicine, construction materials and other forest products. Inclusion of female
                         staff on the project design and implementation teams will help ensure that existing rights of local
                         communities, and especially women, to forest resources are taken fully into account and that the
                         benefits from REDD+ are shared equitably. With GoL indicating its commitment to pursue REDD+
                         significant institutional changes have already been completed while others remain in process. The
                         key implementing institutions include the Departments of Forestry (DoF) and Forest Inspection
                         (DoFI) in MAF and the Department of Forest Resources Management (DFRM) in MONRE. These
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Departments will implement their respective mandates to strengthen policy and regulatory
                         instruments that help create an enabling environment to benefit the forestry sector and forest-
                         dependent communities.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Frederick Edmund Brusberg (EASSD)
                         Satoshi Ishihara (EASTS)
                         Sybounheung Phandanouvong (EASTS)
                         Anupam Bhatia (EASTS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes               An Environmental and Social Impact
                          BP 4.01                                            Assessment has been prepared by the
                                                                             implementing agency. During project
                                                                             implementation specific environmental safeguard
                                                                             issues will be screened and identified in
                                                                             participating villages through application of a
                                                                             Community Engagement Framework (CEF) and



                                                                     Page 2 of 12
                                                                         an Environmental Management Plan (EMP), then
                                                                         further validated through participatory land use
                                                                         planning (PLUP) and integrated into community
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         action plans (CAPs) at the village level and forest
                                                                         management plans at the sub-FMA level.
                                                                         Detailed guidance on the implementation of the
                                                                         EMP will be included in the Project
                                                                         Implementation Plan.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes             Project areas include state designated forests in
                                                                         three categories, i.e. Production, Protection and
                                                                         Conservation as well as smaller community
                                                                         managed village use forests outside of designated
                                                                         categories. Identification and mapping of sloping
                                                                         lands, riparian zones, and High Conservation
                                                                         Value Forest (HCVF) and appropriate
                                                                         management and protection activities in project
                                                                         areas will be identified during the forest
                                                                         management planning process. The EMP
                                                                         provides operational guidance.in this regard.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes             Bank-supported projects in Lao PDR have
                                                                         contributed to the development of the legal and
                                                                         regulatory frameworks, financial incentives and
                                                                         capacity to undertake sustainable forest
                                                                         management planning at national, provincial and
                                                                         local levels. The achievement and renewal of
                                                                         Forest Stewardship Council certification for a
                                                                         growing area of production forest in Lao PDR
                                                                         indicates sustained progress. Forest management
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         plans covered by the EMP will be prepared and
                                                                         implemented during the project implementation
                                                                         phase. Increasing the area of managed forest in
                                                                         Lao PDR and strengthening Forest Law
                                                                         Enforcement and Governance (FLEG) are
                                                                         expected to diminish the scope for unplanned,
                                                                         unsustainable logging.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes             Limited pesticide use during project
                                                                         implementation in connection with forest
                                                                         restoration and alternative livelihoods activities is
                                                                         anticipated. Mitigation steps and guidelines have
                                                                         been provided in the EMP including Project
                                                                         Screening Procedures. Pesticides use will be
                                                                         minimized and alternatives, including integrated
                                                                         pest management, will be explored.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes             Chance Find Procedures and Project Screening
                         BP 4.11                                         procedures have been developed in the EMP.
                                                                         Evaluation of cultural and archaeological



                                                                 Page 3 of 12
                                                                        significance will be undertaken as part of PLUP
                                                                        process.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    Yes             Many project beneficiaries are Indigenous
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        Peoples, as defined in the policy, known in Lao
                                                                        PDR as ethnic groups. A Community
                                                                        Engagement Framework (CEF) was developed
                                                                        that includes an Ethnic Group Planning
                                                                        Framework (EGPF; locally equivalent to an
                                                                        Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework) that
                                                                        defines processes and procedures to ensure that
                                                                        free, prior and informed consultation is conducted
                                                                        at the beginning of and throughout engagement
                                                                        with affected communities and that they
                                                                        meaningfully participate in developing and
                                                                        implementing plans for alternative and more
                                                                        sustainable use of natural and forestry resources
                                                                        and improved livelihoods. It also includes
                                                                        measures to ensure that impacts and project
                                                                        benefits are addressed in a culturally appropriate
                                                                        manner. Where broad community support is not
                                                                        established, the project will not be implemented.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes             The project will support only minor civil works
                         4.12                                           including construction or rehabilitation of office
                                                                        buildings on public lands. No land acquisition or
                                                                        physical relocation is anticipated. Nonetheless,
                                                                        the Resettlement Policy Framework was
                                                                        developed to set out policies and procedures that
                                                                        should apply in the unlikely event that some
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        private land has to be acquired or private assets
                                                                        are lost. RPF requires that alternative locations be
                                                                        explored to avoid physical relocation if possible
                                                                        or any significant impact on the local population.

                                                                        Impacts of the project such as increased access
                                                                        restriction to natural resources will be addressed
                                                                        under a Process Framework that is contained in
                                                                        the Community Engagement Framework (CEF).
                                                                        The CEF which sets out processes and procedures
                                                                        to allow project affected people to meaningfully
                                                                        participate in developing and implementing CAPs
                                                                        to enhance livelihoods in a sustainable manner
                                                                        and adequately mitigate any short-term negative
                                                                        impacts that may result from project
                                                                        implementation.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No




                                                                Page 4 of 12
                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                The Project Implementing Agency (Department of Forestry) carried out an Environmental and
                              Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), which identified affected people including Ethnic Groups, as
                              Indigenous Peoples are called in Lao PDR, and potential environmental and social impacts of the
                              project.
                              The ESIA found that the Project would be implemented in and around production forest areas
                              (PFAs) with existing communities who are reliant to varying degrees on forest resources for their
                              livelihoods. Many of the communities are culturally and linguistically distinct ethnic groups who
                              live outside the mainstream Lao culture and are vulnerable to sudden changes in access to natural
                              environment and related sources of livelihood. Project will explore possible voluntary restrictions
                              to livelihood activities or access to forest resources to ensure sustainable forest management.
                              Most restrictions are already in place under current law and policy, but community planning,
                              tenure strengthening, and enforcement efforts that the Project plans to introduce are likely to
                              increase compliance and therefore limit economic opportunities for some households. Income
                              streams available to villagers from conservation forests will include the harvesting, processing and
                              marketing of non-timber products, livelihood activities carried out on privately held land within
                              the conservation forest, and payment for environmental services.

                             Potential restrictions of access are expected to be minor and will be compensated by project
Public Disclosure Copy




                             supported activities to enhance the livelihood of project-affected people. The Project will preserve
                             the current land and resource use patterns to the extent that is technically possible and
                             environmentally sustainable, based on participatory livelihoods and land use planning processes.
                             Project activities related to timber harvesting are unlikely to cause negative impacts because
                             sustainable forest management norms have already been adopted and are widely observed in
                             project areas.

                             Land acquisition is expected to be minor, if any, because the project will support only minor civil
                             works such as construction of office buildings on public land; acquisition of private land or land
                             used for economic or residential purposes is not expected. Nonetheless, the risk remains that some
                             households may be affected by project-related land acquisition; a Resettlement Policy Framework
                             has been prepared and included as an annex to the Community Engagement Framework.

                             While the ESIA did not find significant negative impacts under the previous project, it identified
                             several gaps in the implementation of community engagement and consultation processes which
                             could cause negative social impacts if not addressed. In particular, the ESIA pointed out the
                             limited capacity of government officials in carrying out the free, prior and informed consultation
                             processes with affected communities and ensuring their meaningful participation in the
                             development and implementation of PSFM, which highlighted the challenges in establishing and
                             maintaining broad community support.

                                                                        Page 5 of 12
                          The project has been rated category “A? in recognition of the number of safeguard policies
                          triggered (7) and the dual nature of the higher level project objective: to both utilize forest
Public Disclosure Copy




                          resources for poverty alleviation while managing these resources in a sustainable manner. The
                          category “A? classification is also justified in light of a complex implementation context with
                          shifting institutional roles, limited capacity context and a shifting policy and regulatory
                          environment. Nevertheless, significant adverse or cumulative environmental impacts are not
                          anticipated.

                          Environmental Safeguard issues associated with the project relate to sustainable forest
                          management including in the northern provinces where forest landscape management will be
                          piloted. It is anticipated that village livelihood development and sustainable forestry management
                          activities in the project target areas may cause environmental impacts on the management of
                          wildlife and botanical non-timber forest products (NTFPs). Assessments of biodiversity and
                          wildlife values will be undertaken as part of the PLUP process, so that CAPs can take into account
                          results of t he assessments. The terrain of the northern provinces is mountainous with low-lying
                          river valleys dominated by mixed deciduous forests. The region is environmentally fragile with
                          steep slopes, significant biodiversity resources and High Conservation Value Forests (HCVF) and
                          habitats. Rain-fed upland agricultural fields, fallows, and forests characterize the landscape.
                          Shifting cultivation is a dominant land use in these provinces and contributes significantly to
                          household food security.

                          Given the focus of the project to improve sustainable forest management there are no foreseen
                          large- scale or irreversible safeguard issues directly related to the project. However, based on the
                          initial diagnostic assessment during the project preparation, significant impacts could be caused by
                          project activities to critical habitats and biodiversity resources if norms and procedures for
                          participatory sustainable forest management are not followed and monitored closely. Detailed
                          assessments of potential impacts will be undertaken by carrying out biodiversity assessments as
                          part of PLUP so that the findings can be addressed in the CAPs. The baseline of these assessments
Public Disclosure Copy




                          will also be monitored through the project to ensure compliance with safeguards.

                           SUPSFM includes parallel financing from Finland for Technical Assistance that will be managed
                           through joint implementation support missions and will follow WB Safeguard Policies. It is
                           anticipated that SUPSFM will collaborate with a new project currently being designed by KfW,
                           which is expected to operate in conservation and protection forest areas adjacent to SUPSFM
                           PFAs in Louangnamtha and Bokeo Provinces. Because this parallel financing is still under
                           development and not yet approved, the task team has established and maintained a dialogue with
                           the German Embassy and KfW about opportunities for collaboration and alignment of policies.
                           This proposed KfW-financed project is expected to follow the same Community Engagement
                           Framework adopted by GOL for SUPSFM and would thus be consistent with World Bank
                           Safeguards policies.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            The project will have positive long term impacts on the livelihood of project affected people as it
                           will help them enhance their livelihood through more efficient and environmentally sustainable
                           use of natural resources.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.


                                                                     Page 6 of 12
                            Adverse impacts of the current design are expected to be minimal and alternative designs
                           (without a forest landscape management approach) were rejected as not sufficient to address the
                           major drivers of deforestation and forest degradation in Lao PDR.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            Environmental and social safeguard issues have been mainstreamed in project design, planning,
                           and implementation. Safeguard instruments include an Environmental Management Plan (EMP)
                           and a Community Engagement Framework (CEF) which includes an Ethnic Group Planning
                           Framework (EGPF), an access restriction Process Framework (PF), and a Resettlement Policy
                           Framework (RPF). In addition project design has strengthened the field presence of technical
                           support staff and coordination mechanisms by using GoL Technical Service Centers. Adequate
                           funds have been allocated for Borrower capacity building in Safeguards and implementation.

                          DoF has a good track record of working with the Bank in implementation of the SUFORD Project
                          over the last nine years and has gained increasing familiarity with and knowledge of Bank
                          safeguard requirements. As noted in the recent SUFORD Safeguards assessment, the
                          Implementing Agency will need technical assistance in meeting safeguard requirements. Bank
                          Staff will provide strategic inputs and timely guidance; consultants, both national and
                          international, who are familiar with Lao PDR safeguard issues and Bank requirements will be
                          engaged, and partnerships with civil society organizations will be established. In addition
                          opportunities will be identified for coordination and experience-sharing among staff and
                          consultants working on the FIP Dedicated Grant Mechanism (DGM) and the REDD+ Readiness-
                          Preparation Proposal (R-PP) to ensure cross-fertilization of ideas and dissemination of approaches.

                          The CEF through its Process Framework will address potential access restrictions of project
                          participating people and gaps in implementation of community engagement and consultation
                          processes under SUFORD, and those identified by the ESIA for SUPSFM. The CEF defines
                          processes and procedures to ensure that the free, prior and informed consultation process that will
Public Disclosure Copy




                          be conducted with affected people and that project beneficiaries will meaningfully participate in
                          the development and implementation of alternative natural resource use practices, and more
                          sustainable livelihoods. The participatory processes to be used in the project will be embedded in
                          the development of Community Action Plan (CAP), which will be signed and endorsed by both
                          beneficiary communities and District Agricultural and Forestry Office (DAFO) as the expression
                          of broad community support. CAPs will include measures to both enhance income streams of
                          villagers and address short-term loss in livelihood that may result from stronger restriction of
                          access to forest resources. Baseline livelihood data especially of vulnerable households, including
                          women headed households, will be collected based on participatory poverty assessment, and their
                          livelihood status will be regularly monitored throughout the project implementation under the
                          participatory monitoring and evaluation (M&E). Under the participatory M&E, village level
                          meetings will be conducted on a quarterly basis, under the support of project hired consultants and
                          local experts with experience in participatory methods, and impacted villagers will be identified,
                          livelihood status of vulnerable households be assessed, and measures that may potentially improve
                          project performance in enhancing community livelihoods will be explored. Where villages consist
                          of hamlets that previously constituted independent villages but are now consolidated into larger
                          villages, participatory planning process will start at the hamlet level. Project implementation staff
                          under the support of qualified international and national experts embedded at the district level will
                          help ensure that participatory processes are properly carried out, that villagers gradually gain more
                          experience and knowledge in participatory processes during project implementation, and that


                                                                    Page 7 of 12
                         voices and interests of minority hamlets are respected in the village level planning process.
                         Elected village representatives including both a male and a female representative will participate
                         in the annual meeting at the district level, to discuss with project implementing agencies
Public Disclosure Copy




                         outstanding safeguard issues and agree on measures to address them.

                         The project will also carry out PLUP in each participating village so that boundaries between
                         villages and between use zones are clearly delineated in agreement with villagers. Under PLUP,
                         the current and customary use of land and forest, and how they are managed, will be assessed, and
                         village land and forest management rules will be formulated and agreed in a participatory manner.
                         The PLUP process will help ensure that the parts of forests that have been traditionally and
                         customarily used by villagers will be clearly delineated for continuing use by communities. Tenure
                         rights in the form of community land titles or community leaseholds will be given to communities
                         on a pilot basis based on the result of PLUP, as the project’s contribution to enhance recognition
                         of customary and indigenous tenure rights. Issues related to environmental safeguards will be
                         integrated under PLUP and these will include identification of High Conservation Value Forests,
                         critical habitats, biodiversity, and areas of cultural, spiritual, and religious significance. Likely
                         presence of the Physical Cultural Resources (PCRs) will also be identified through PLUP and
                         verified through field visits. Management plans will place emphasis on conservation and
                         management of endangered wildlife and NTFPs by revising technical guidelines for pre-harvest
                         and logging to take into account environmentally fragile highland areas. Monitoring of the Code of
                         Logging Practice will be carried out.

                         EMP provides guidance on likelihood of increased fire frequency in deciduous forests. High risk
                         villages will be identified through CEF and PLUP and appropriate mitigation steps agreed with
                         local communities. Situational analysis of fire use in northern PFAs will be monitored, and
                         successful fire management practices from SUFORD areas will be documented and shared. DoF
                         will ensure full compliance with its fire management conditions, as described in its guidelines on
                         forest harvesting in PFAs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pesticide use will be avoided and reduced where feasible and high-risk villages will be identified.
                         The EMP has developed a Project Screening Procedure to avoid activities that require intensive
                         use of pesticides. Integrated pest management plans will be introduced, and high risk villages will
                         be provided training, and safety equipment for sub projects that require pesticide and fertilizer use.

                         The project will use indigenous leadership and conflict resolution mechanisms as the first tier
                         grievance mechanism but will significantly strengthen their capacity including on safeguards
                         requirements, gender equity, existing legal and administrative frameworks and land management.
                         Communities are also allowed to submit grievances directly to the project apex entity, the National
                         Project Steering Committee in which Bank TT may participate as an observer. Local experts with
                         experience in community participation and engagement on PSFM and livelihood issues will be
                         hired and embedded at the district level who will often accompany project implementing staff
                         when they go to villages to provide technical guidance including on consultations and community
                         engagement. Regional universities, NGOs or other entities operational in project provinces will be
                         hired by the project on a short-term basis to support project teams technically and carry out
                         training occasionally. The Bank TT will also carry out frequent implementation support to ensure
                         that CEF is adequately implemented on the ground and develop the capacity of local
                         implementation staff.

                         In order to address project risks with regard to the ongoing GoL program of village consolidations,

                                                                    Page 8 of 12
                          the project will distinguish between villages that have been consolidated in the past, and those
                          scheduled or proposed for consolidation. The project will apply the following criteria:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          a) in villages consolidated in the past the project will identify such villages and:

                          (i) determine through participatory social assessment if land and tenure issues associated with the
                          consolidation have been resolved to the satisfaction of communities, ;

                          (ii) ascertain if adequate land for agriculture or other means of livelihood to improve, or at least
                          maintain their livelihoods, has been made available;

                          (iii) exclude such villages if outstanding issues related to land for agriculture and natural resource
                          are identified, and convey findings to Provincial Authorities for appropriate action;

                          (iv) excluded villages can subsequently become project beneficiaries if: (a) Provincial Authorities
                          demonstrate that issues have been resolved, (b) communities confirm such resolution met
                          standards of free, prior and informed consultation, and (c) communities provide their broad
                          community support for participating in SUPSFM.

                          b) Villages scheduled or proposed for consolidation during the life of the project are excluded
                          from participation in SUPSFM.

                           In cases where project participating villages consist of multiple hamlets including those of Ethnic
                           Groups, separate CAPs may be developed for respective hamlets. Elected representatives will
                           represent such hamlets both in village-wide and district level meetings to present views and
                           opinions collected at the hamlet-level meetings. The project will utilize the map of concessions
                           granted in the previous few years and continuously engage with provincial governors to avoid
                           project risks due to allocation of land concessions.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Key stakeholders include Department of Forestry (DoF), Provincial Agricultural and Forestry
                           Office (PAFO), District Agricultural and Forestry Office (DAFO), and beneficiary community
                           members. In addition, development partners active in the forestry development both at the
                           national level and in provinces where the project will operate will play a key role. In addition
                           organizations such as the Lao Women’s Union and Lao Front for National Construction, and civil
                           society organizations will be important stakeholders.

                          A series of stakeholder consultations have been done for the project. FIP investment plans which
                          set out various investments to be implemented in different categories of forests in Lao PDR,
                          including this project, was consulted with stakeholders. Consultations meetings were also carried
                          out in different provinces for this project where applicable safeguard policies and approaches to be
                          used to address policy requirements were explained to participants.

                          Engagement with and participation of beneficiary community members is the key cornerstone of
                          the project. Throughout project implementation, project participating villagers will continuously
                          be engaged for the development of alternative use of natural resources and sustainable livelihoods,
                          and given opportunities to provide feedback to the project under participatory M&E, following the
                          procedures described in CEF.


                                                                      Page 9 of 12
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       28-Jan-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    28-Jan-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive       05-Apr-2013
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Lao People's Democratic Republic                                  28-Jan-2013
                           Comments: The draft ESIA has been presented and discussed in consultation workshops at
                                         national and subnational level in Lao PDR. Feedback from these consultations is
                                         being documented and will be incorporated in a revised ESIA following appraisal.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       28-Jan-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    28-Jan-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Lao People's Democratic Republic                                  28-Jan-2013
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       28-Jan-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    28-Jan-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Lao People's Democratic Republic                                  28-Jan-2013
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    NA
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       NA
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    NA
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [       ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats


                                                                   Page 10 of 12
                             If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
Public Disclosure Copy




                             project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                            OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                             If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                             in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                             Management Specialist?
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Peter Jipp



                                                                       Page 11 of 12
                         Approved By
                         Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)       Date: 10-Apr-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Coordinator:
                         Sector Manager:     Name: Julia M. Fraser (SM)      Date: 11-Apr-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             Page 12 of 12
