                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC2944

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-Jun-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Jun-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Ethiopia                         Project ID:      P143302
                            Project Name:       ET Competitiveness and Job Creation Proj (P143302)
                            Task Team           Asya Akhlaque
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           03-Dec-2013                      Estimated        27-Feb-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      AFTFE                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          General industry and trade sector (50%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade
                                                (25%), Vocational training (25%)
                            Theme(s):           Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (50%), Other Private Sector
                                                Development (50%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    100.00                      Total Bank Financing:         100.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                                 Financing Gap:                  0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                              0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                   100.00
                              Total                                                                         100.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The development objective of the proposed project is to contribute to job creation by attracting
                           investments and improving enterprise competitiveness in the targeted industrial zones (IZ). This will
                           be achieved by: (i) strengthening institutional and regulatory framework for IZ development, and
                           capacity building; (ii) supporting industrial infrastructure development of IZs; and (iii) enhancing IZ
                           linkages to small and medium enterprises (SMEs) through targeted interventions.
                         C. Project Description
                         The project will comprise of three mutually-reinforcing components: (i) strengthening institutional
                         and regulatory framework, and capacity building; (ii) industrial infrastructure through development
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of IZs; and (iii) enhancing IZ linkages to SMEs through targeted interventions. These components
                         will be underpinned by a well-designed and strengthened Public Private Dialogue (PPD) mechanism.

                         The immediate investment focus of the project will be in Addis Ababa – starting either with Bole
                         Lemi or Kinto IZ sites, subject to the results of the social safeguards and environment due diligence,
                         while setting up the essential building blocks and master planning for the later phased zone
                         development in Dire Dawa. The Project will support the GoE in the development and
                         implementation of an effective industrial zone strategy with realistic goals and timelines for
                         establishment of new industrial zones based on sound demand analysis.

                         A pre-feasibility study has been undertaken for the Kilinto and Dire Dawa industrial zone sites, while
                         a preliminary analysis was done of the Bole-Lemi site. These sites have differing potential to
                         maximize returns through enterprise creation and FDI, and ensuing job creation. Using a phased
                         approach, the Project will concentrate investments in the more viable zones in Addis. This will
                         minimize the risks of design complexity, over-extending limited implementation capacity, and
                         dilution of impact from spreading resources too thinly.

                         COMPONENT 1: Institutional and Regulatory Framework and Capacity Building

                         The objective of this component is to support GoE in strengthening the institutional and regulatory
                         framework that underpins an effective industrial zones program. Currently a review of the legal
                         framework of industrial zones - that was enacted in July 2012 - is underway. The draft regulations
                         that will lead to the establishment of the Ethiopian Industrial Zone Development Corporation
                         (EIZDC) have been prepared and submitted to the Council of Ministers for approval. As part of the
                         new Project, technical assistance will be provided for operationalization of the EIZDC, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         development of implementation regulations, systems and manuals for operating IZs. In line with
                         international good practice, a regulatory authority will be set-up. In addition, the establishment of a
                         “one-stop? shop to provide different business regulation services, will be an important component of
                         the soft infrastructure within each zone, and in order to be effective it will require proper authority to
                         operate on behalf of the relevant government agencies (Ministry of Trade, Revenue and Customs
                         Authority, Tax Office, Ministry of Urban Development and Construction, Ministry of Labor etc).
                         Other areas of assistance would include technical support for developing PPP framework to
                         accommodate various models for IZ development and management, and assistance for investment
                         generation support through marketing and promotion of the zones. Activities financed under this
                         component may include technical assistance or consultancy assignments, capacity building, and
                         equipment.

                         COMPONENT 2: Support for Industrial Infrastructure Development

                         The objective of this component is to support development of physical on-site and/or off-site
                         infrastructure investment, based on a demand-based and phased master planning for Kilinto and Bole
                         Lemi sites. In line with good practice, the new model of IZs in Ethiopia are expected to be equipped
                         with high-quality infrastructure, and common services and amenities, which would be made available
                         to local and foreign companies through a single, efficient, streamlined industrial park administration.
                         Activities financed under this component may include goods, works, equipment, technical assistance
                         and capacity building.

                         To plan and inform infrastructure investments, a feasibility study would be undertaken for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         industrial zone sites in Addis Ababa. These will include a master plan detailing the engineering
                         design of the zone, economic and financial analysis detailing the costs and return on investments, and
                         infrastructure assessments detailing the requirements for on and off-site infrastructure. A gaps’
                         analysis will be carried out for the Bole Lemi industrial site, which will provide information on the
                         existing investments in the site and the associated support required to bring the site up to global
                         standards. The feasibility analysis will help define the total investment needed to develop Addis
                         Ababa IZs, and thus the financial contribution of the project to on-site versus off-site infrastructure.

                         COMPONENT 3: Enhancing IZ linkages to SMEs

                         This objective of this component is to support linkages between domestic SMEs and large firms in
                         producing and processing (upstream) activities and marketing (downstream) activities. SMEs face
                         difficulties accessing skills and finance that ke ep them from growing out of low-productivity, low-
                         quality traps as they are unable to upgrade technology or expand production. Possible interventions
                         aimed at alleviating these constraints may include matching grant programs; partnerships along the
                         value chains of an individual company (for instance, as proposed in Mozambique to link MSMEs
                         with mining companies; and IFC’s supplier development program in Zambia). This component will
                         also address the demand-supply mismatch of skills, and how the existing vocational and skills
                         training institutes in and around Addis Ababa and Dire Dawa can be strengthened to respond to
                         markets needs of the priority sectors within manufacturing in Ethiopia. Activities financed under this
                         component may include technical assistance, capacity building, and equipment
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Based on the findings and discussion of the pre-feasibility study of Kilinto and Dire Dawa site, it has
                         been agreed that the Bank would undertake a programmatic and phased engagement for IZ
Public Disclosure Copy




                         development in Ethiopia. Subject to due diligence on social safeguards and environment assessment
                         of the two sites, the Bank would support IZ sites in a phased manner. In the first phase, the Bank
                         would support the proposed Kilinto IZ, focusing on both “hard? and “software? elements. At a
                         parallel level, the Bank would initiate technical assistance for Dire Dawa IZ to support the “building
                         blocks? and thereby advance its readiness status. Among other things, this would include support for
                         IZ institutional framework and capacity building of key IZ institutions, and development of the eco-
                         system. This, combined with the Government’s efforts towards connecting the zone to the port -
                         through a new railway track and construction of major roads network development - would help Dire
                         Dawa become a more viable value proposition for investors. Lastly, the Government also expressed
                         its interest in Bank’s support for the Bole Lemi IZ site – in addition to Kilinto site - as part of Phase 1
                         program. The potential nature of Bank support for Bole Lemi would need to be discussed once the
                         due diligence was satisfactorily completed. The sites to be supported under this project are located in
                         urban setting where the ecosystem is devoid of forests, natural habitat and physical cultural resources
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         Although the project sites are known, the types of activities to be supported by the project are still
                         evolving, and may trigger Category A safeguards issues. The upstream work for the Environmental
                         and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be completed before appraisal, along with public
                         consultation and disclosure. The ESMF will guide the preparation of project specific environmental
                         assessments that will be prepared before any decision is made on financing subprojects that have
                           been identified for possible financing under Component 2 of this project. The initial site visits during
                           project preparation confirmed that there will be no land acquisition or resettlement, as all project
                           physical activities are envisaged to be carried out on existing sites and structures. However, since the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           project might deal with legacy land acquisition issues as well as undetermined civil works activities,
                           which might include land acquisition, OP4.12 has been triggered as a precautionary measure, and a
                           Resettlement Policy Framework will be prepared and publicly disclosed. As with the ESMF, the RPF
                           will also be consulted upon and disclosed in-country and at the Infoshop prior to appraisal. The
                           initial assessment of the institutional capacity of the client to prepare good safeguards instruments
                           and screen sub-projects to identify environmental and social impacts, indicate limited capacity.
                           Therefore, the proposed project will support measures that will strengthen the Borrower's capacity to
                           identify and assess potential adverse environmental and social impacts and to implement and monitor
                           appropriate mitigation measures. Specifically, the Borrower will designate a qualified and
                           experienced social scientist and an environmental officer to be responsible for social and
                           environmental safeguards matters and they will receive training on World Bank safeguards policies.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Chukwudi H. Okafor (AFTCS)
                           Asferachew Abate Abebe (AFTN3)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The subproject location is known but the types
                           BP 4.01                                               of activities to be supported by the project are
                                                                                 still evolving at this stage of project preparation,
                                                                                 and may trigger Category A safeguards issues.
                                                                                 The upstream work for the ESMF will be
                                                                                 completed with public consultation and
                                                                                 disclosed in-country and at the Bank’s Infoshop
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 prior to appraisal. The ESMF will guide the
                                                                                 preparation of project specific environmental
                                                                                 assessments that will be prepared before any
                                                                                 decision is made on possible financing under
                                                                                 component 2.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No               The project is not being implemented in or near
                                                                                 natural habitats.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No               The project does not involve forest activities.

                           Pest Management OP 4.09              No               The project does not involve pest management
                                                                                 activities.
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No               The project is being implemented in areas that
                           BP 4.11                                               do not have physical cultural resources in or
                                                                                 near them.
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No               The initial screening indicates that there are no
                                                                                 groups in the project area that meet the criteria
                                                                                 of the policy.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           The exact locations of project activities will be
                                 4.12                                                                                            carried out within existing locations, but the
                                                                                                                                 exact subproject activities are undetermined
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 activities, and might include civil works, and
                                                                                                                                 possible legacy issues, with potential for
                                                                                                                                 adverse localized environmental and social
                                                                                                                                 impacts, which cannot be determined prior to
                                                                                                                                 appraisal. Therefore, as a precautionary
                                                                                                                                 measure, the project will prepare a Resettlement
                                                                                                                                 Policy Framework (RPF) with public
                                                                                                                                 consultation. This document will be consulted
                                                                                                                                 upon and disclosed in-country and at the Bank’s
                                                                                                                                 Infoshop prior to appraisal.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            N/A

                                 Projects on International        No                                                             N/A
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             N/A
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Aug-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The team will by August 2013 conclude the ESMF and RPF preparation, review, approval and
                                      disclosure exercise in advance of appraisal. Considering the weak institutional capacity, and the
                                      necessary steps needed to meet the Category A processing requirements, the team expects to have
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      the necessary funding and consultants in place by July 2013 to keep the operation on track for a
                                      Board Submission within the FY14.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Asya Akhlaque

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name:                                                                                                                      Date:
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Irina Astrakhan (SM)                                                                                                 Date: 11-Jun-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
