                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC5008

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Aug-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Aug-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                            Project ID:      P132873
                            Project Name:      Hebei Rural Renewable Energy Development Demonstration Project (P132873)
                            Task Team          Jin Liu
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          01-Jun-2014                      Estimated        20-Feb-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASCS                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Other Renewable Energy (50%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector
                                               (50%)
                            Theme(s):          Rural services and infrastructure (50%), Climate change (50%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    200.00                     Total Bank Financing:        100.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                                Financing Gap:                 0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                    100.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                       100.00
                              Total                                                                       200.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to demonstrate sustainable renewable energy
                           production and utilization to reduce environmental pollution and supply clean energy in rural areas.
                           C. Project Description
                           China’s economy has experienced remarkable growth over the past several decades, but this growth
                           has been accompanied by an increase in social and environmental challenges. Intensive agricultural
                         farming and the expansion of livestock production in the rural areas are considered viable means for
                         creating rural income and employment and secure a food supply. However, the rapid agricultural
                         development poses a threat to the local environment and public health. Every year, around 728
Public Disclosure Copy




                         million tons of crop residues are produced by agricultural farming and most of them are used by
                         households as fuel or burned as waste in open fields. This is causing significant indoor and outdoor
                         air pollution. The concentrated livestock farms in the rural areas also produce serious pollution from
                         the inappropriate animal manure treatment. The proposed project will support installation and
                         operation of biogas facilities that use crop residues and animal wastes as the feedstock to generate
                         biogas mainly for rural residents cooking and heating. This would be an effective way to reduce
                         pollution and provide renewable energy in rural areas.

                         The proposed project components and main activities are the following:

                         (a) Component 1: Large-scale biogas facilities development and sustainable management. The
                         proposed project activities are to develop state-of-the-art large-scale biogas facilities that use local
                         crop straw, livestock manure, and other wastes in rural areas to generate biogas that meets local rural
                         resident needs mainly for cooking and heating.

                         (b) Component 2: Pilot of the use of solar energy and biomass pellets combustion hybrid heating
                         system. The PCN review meeting decided to further discuss with client to remove this component
                         from the project during the project preparation.

                         (c) Component 3: Technical support, project management, and monitoring. This component includes
                         technical services, training and extension, policy advice, monitoring and evaluation, and project
                         management. In addition, provincial-level central laboratory and subproject based laboratories will
                         be established and guidance and operational manuals for the biogas digester operation and digested
                         slurry application would be developed.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis (if known)
                         Around 14 subprojects were proposed by project agencies, which include 12 biogas facilities and 2
                         pilots of a hybrid renewable energy system that uses solar energy and biomass pellets clean
                         combustion facilities. Around 12 provincial and county energy companies and livestock farms are
                         proposed as the project entities/project implementation units (PIUs). The proposed project sites are
                         located in the rural areas of 14 counties in Hebei Province. The subprojects and their locations will
                         be further assessed and confirmed during the project preparation.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         A Project Leading Group headed by a vice-governor and consisting of members from key line
                         departments such as the Hebei provincial finance bureau, development and reform commission,
                         agriculture department and energy department has been established at the provincial level to provide
                         overall guidance and coordination to the project preparation and implementation. The PPMO has
                         been established and the county PMOs will be established in each of the participating counties during
                         further project preparation once subprojects are selected. Project agencies have committed to assign
                         adequate staff at the provincial and county PMOs to be responsible for the project design and
                         implementation, including social and environmental safeguards, procurement and financial
                         management. Provincial and county PMOs have rich experience in Government biogas program
                         management and provincial PMO has also worked with Bank team on the CPF Hebei Livestock
                         Waste Management Project preparation, including safeguard work. However, the client’s experience
                           in implementing the Bank safeguards policy is limited, and the Bank task team will assist client
                           improving its capacity during the project preparation and implementation.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Yiren Feng (EASCS)
                           Meixiang Zhou (EASCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The proposed Project is designed to demonstrate
                           BP 4.01                                              sustainable biomass renewable energy
                                                                                production and utilization to improve the
                                                                                environment and supply clean energy in rural
                                                                                areas. It is expected that the project would bring
                                                                                significant positive environmental and social
                                                                                benefits to the selected rural areas in Hebei
                                                                                Province. It is expected that the project is likely
                                                                                to also have some potential adverse
                                                                                environmental impacts in the project areas,
                                                                                specifically, under the investments of
                                                                                Component 1 and Component 2. Therefore, OP
                                                                                4.01 is triggered.

                                                                                The adverse environmental impacts of the
                                                                                project will be mainly related to the construction
                                                                                and operation of biogas facilities, such as wastes
                                                                                and dust caused by the small civil work, biogas
                                                                                pipeline to nearby rural communities/residential
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                buildings and feedstock transportation. Those
                                                                                impacts are expected to be not significant due to
                                                                                small scale of the civil work and non-sensitive
                                                                                locations. With mitigation measures
                                                                                implemented, the adverse impacts will be
                                                                                avoided or mitigated to an acceptable level.

                                                                                The proposed project is classified as Category B
                                                                                according to OP4.01. An Environmental
                                                                                Management Plan (EMP), which has all the
                                                                                elements of an EIA, will be prepared for the
                                                                                project. It will cover the project area of
                                                                                influence (feedstock sources, transport, disposal
                                                                                of wastes, etc.). The EMP will include
                                                                                Environmental Codes of Practice (ECOP) to
                                                                                address generic impacts and measures from
                                                                                small construction activities, site specific
                                                                                impacts and mitigation measures, results of
                                                                                conducted surveys and assessments, mitigation
                                                                measures for social impacts that are not covered
                                                                by OP 4.10 and OP 4.12, as well as a capacity
                                                                assessment and capacity building measures. In
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                addition, an Environmental Management
                                                                Framework (EMF) will be prepared and
                                                                annexed to the EMP. The EMF will include the
                                                                criteria for selecting subprojects, which will
                                                                address the potential changes of component
                                                                activities in terms of number of biogas facilities
                                                                or location during the project preparation phase
                                                                or implementation phase.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No   The project is located in rural areas with
                                                                intensive agricultural activities and no any
                                                                natural habitats are in or near the project areas.
                                                                This policy is not triggered.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No   Feedstock of the biogas facilities will be
                                                                existing crop residues and livestock manures.
                                                                The project will not finance any activities
                                                                related to forests, as well as not use any of forest
                                                                products as biogas feedstock. This policy is not
                                                                triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No   The project will only use crop residues from
                                                                existing farm land, thus no increased
                                                                agricultural production and no use of pesticides
                                                                are envisaged as a result of the project. This
                                                                policy is not triggered.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No   The project is located in rural areas with
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BP 4.11                                intensive agricultural activities. According to
                                                                the preliminary screening, the proposed sites are
                                                                not in or close to any physical cultural heritage.
                                                                This policy is not triggered. However, Chance
                                                                finds during constructionmay occur and relevant
                                                                clauses will be included in all bidding
                                                                documents and construction contracts to address
                                                                this situation.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No   The Initial social screening exercise confirmed
                                                                that there is no ethnic minority people group
                                                                living in the proposed project sites. In the
                                                                proposed project localities, only occasionally
                                                                Hui and Man people live scattered with Han
                                                                people, but they are well integrated with local
                                                                majority Han communities for very long time,
                                                                as well as intermingled with mainstream
                                                                society, which do not fit the definition of the
                                                                Bank IP. Therefore, according to the
                                                                information available, the Bank OP/BP 4.10 is
                                                                                                                                 not applicable to this project. During the project
                                                                                                                                 preparation, this will be finally concluded
                                                                                                                                 according to the further social assessment to be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 conducted.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           Through primary screening, among 12 proposed
                                 4.12                                                                                            biogas sites and 2 sites for pilot of a hybrid
                                                                                                                                 energy system of solar energy and biomass
                                                                                                                                 facilities, 7 of these sites do not need to acquire
                                                                                                                                 new land as their civil works or small facilities
                                                                                                                                 of the project could be built on existing plant
                                                                                                                                 compounds or farmers’ house roofs or gardens
                                                                                                                                 (for solar energy use). Additional land is needed
                                                                                                                                 to be acquired for the remained 5 project sites
                                                                                                                                 (totaling for around 25 ha) for the project civil
                                                                                                                                 works. There will be no house demolition under
                                                                                                                                 the project. In addition, 2 project sites have land
                                                                                                                                 acquired over the last two years. Therefore the
                                                                                                                                 Bank policy OP/BP 4.12 is triggered.

                                                                                                                                 The project will prepare a consolidated
                                                                                                                                 Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for subprojects
                                                                                                                                 that need new land. The RAP will include a Due
                                                                                                                                 Diligence Report for subproject sites which
                                                                                                                                 acquired land before the Bank’s involvement
                                                                                                                                 over last two years. In addition, a Resettlement
                                                                                                                                 Plan Framework (RPF) will be prepared and
                                                                                                                                 annexed to the consolidated RAP, to address
                                                                                                                                 any potential changes of component activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 during the project preparation phase or
                                                                                                                                 implementation phase.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project will not finance construction or
                                                                                                                                 rehabilitation of any dams as defined under this
                                                                                                                                 policy. This policy is not triggered.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The policy is not triggered as the project does
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            not involve trans-boundary rivers.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The policy is not triggered as the project does
                                 7.60                                                                                            not involve any disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Jan-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             In addition to above mentioned social and environmental studies, a social assessment (SA) will be
                             conducted by experienced professional consultant team during the project preparation to identify
                             potential social risks, local people’s social concerns and opinions for the social dimension of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                             project; and assess the social relationships and interactions between the project implementation
                             units and impacted communities and rural residential areas. The stakeholders’ consultation will be
                             conducted to better understand the local farmer’s willingness and affordability of the use of biogas
                             and solar energy and relevant concerns, such as safety and the provision of service system, as well
                             as government subsidies for the clean energy use and waste collection. The mitigation measures
                             will be recommended to address the identified potential negative impacts to local households. The
                             RAPs and due diligence review should be parts of the SA.

                             The EA and SA processes have been started in July 2013 and will be completed by October 31,
                             2013. At that point, all the relevant documentation related to safeguards policies will be available
                             in their draft stage for the Bank preparation mission review.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:       Name: Jin Liu

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name:                                                      Date:
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Mark R. Lundell (SM)                                 Date: 26-Aug-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
