                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA237
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Sep-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-Sep-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Vietnam                           Project ID:    P123961
                            Project Name:      Vietnam Road Asset Management Project (P123961)
                            Task Team          Mitsuyoshi Asada
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          12-Sep-2013                       Estimated   15-Jan-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASVS                             Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (90%), Central government
                                              administration (5%), General transportation sector (5%)
                            Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (90%), Administrative and
                                              civil service reform (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     301.70           Total Bank Financing:                250.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                       50.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                             250.00
                              AusAID-World Bank Strategic Partnership in Vietnam                                        1.70
                              Total                                                                                   301.70
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve the efficiency and sustainability
                           of the national road asset management system and maintenance practices performed by the Ministry


                                                                       Page 1 of 8
                         of Transport on selected roads in Vietnam.
                          3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed project consists of the following three components:

                         Component A: Road Asset Management System (RAMS) Development (US$10 million, with US
                         $8.3 million IDA financing and US$1.7 million co-financing grant). This component will finance the
                         development and implementation of a comprehensive Road Asset Management System (RAMS).
                         This activity will build on previous initiatives and complement ongoing activities in the sector
                         funded by the Asian Development Bank (ADB), and the Japan International Cooperation Agency
                         (JICA). This component will consist of the following four activities: (i) establish a road condition
                         database; (ii) undertake an initial data collection survey for the entire national highway network
                         followed by a rolling update of one-third of the network in each subsequent year of the project; (iii)
                         design and implement a Road Asset Management System compatible with the already established
                         sub-systems; and (iv) develop short-, medium-, and long-term road asset management plans for
                         maintenance and improvement of the national road network.

                         Component B: Road Asset Preservation (US$156.6 million, with US$156.6 million IDA financing).
                         In addition to funding traditional road asset maintenance works this component will also support
                         PBCs to demonstrate more efficient maintenance of selected highways. It will finance technical
                         assistance on establishing a legal framework for PBCs, develop standard bidding documents, taking
                         into account previous experience of PBC contracts, and the development of a supervision manual
                         (for both engineering and environmental supervision); preservation of high priority sections of the
                         national road network through both traditional input-based method (271 km) and PBC (273 km); a
                         study to compare alternative maintenance strategies as the basis of developing practical policy advice
                         on effective, long-term preservation strategies for Vietnam, and supervision of the works.

                         Component C: Road Asset Improvement (US$132.4 million, with US$82.4 million IDA financing
                         and US$50.0 million GOV financing). This component will finance road improvement activities for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         high priority sections (55 km) of the national road network. It will include civil works, supervision
                         activities, and land acquisition and resettlement (financed by the GOV). Civil works will include
                         widening of nine bridges over 25 m, which are currently causing bottlenecks on the network.

                         Component D: Institutional Strengthening (US$2.6 million, with US$2.6 million IDA financing).
                         This component will support targeted activities to develop the capacity of Vietnam’s road agencies to
                         undertake better planning, budgeting, constructing, and monitoring of road assets. Specific activities
                         will include: (i) improvements in human resource management within the Directorate for Roads of
                         Vietnam’s (DRVN) with respect to the planning, budgeting, management, and operation of the new
                         information management system; (ii) improvements in management, transparency, and monitoring of
                         the recently established RMF; (iii) development of standard drawings for infrastructure facilities to
                         increase consistency and quality control of pre-fabricated parts, and to expedite design and
                         construction processes; as well as (iv) technical and financial audits of project implementation.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Vietnam Road Asset Management Project (VRAMP) covers a variety of geographical regions of
                         Northern Vietnam, such as Red River Delta Region (National Highway No. 18 - NH18, National
                         Highway No. 5 - NH5, National Highway No. 38 - NH38, National Highway No. 39-1 - NH39-1,
                         National Highway No. - NH39 and Bridges on National Highway No. 38B - NH38B); the northern


                                                                      Page 2 of 8
                           mountainous area (National Highway No. 2 - NH2 North-North-East and National Highway No. 6 -
                           NH6 to the North-West); and National Highway No. 48 (NH48) on the Northern Central Region.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Northern Vietnam has large plains lying in the river basins of the Red, Lo, and Chay Rivers, which
                           flow in a northeast-to-southwest direction into Bac Bo Gulf. North and northwest of these plains are
                           large hilly and mountainous areas. Northern Vietnam is influenced by a monsoon climate, with four
                           distinct seasons and high humidity. In order to cultivate land and earn their living, inhabitants of the
                           north built dikes over the centuries, resulting in today's system of dikes that are thousands of
                           kilometers long along the river banks.

                           The rehabilitation and maintenance of the national road sections and construction of four bridges will
                           be implemented in 9 provinces of Ha Giang, Ha Noi, Hai Duong, Hai Phong, Hoa Binh, Son La, and
                           Tuyen Quang (under component B) and Thai Binh, Hung Yen, and Hai Duong (under component C).
                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Son Van Nguyen (EASVS)
                           Nghi Quy Nguyen (EASVS)

                            6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes
                            BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          Yes

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09              No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       Yes
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment. The policy is triggered because the project involves the road
                              rehabilitation, maintenance, and construction some bridges under components B and C of the


                                                                         Page 3 of 8
                         project, requiring the identification, avoidance, and mitigation of potential adverse environmental
                         and social impacts. The project will have mostly positive but some adverse environmental impacts.
                         On the positive side, the project will bring major benefit in reduction of travel time, improvement
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of road safety, reduced vehicle operating costs, and more reliable delivery times.

                         The potential impacts could be caused by typical civil works to be carried out at the subproject
                         level such as upgrading and rehabilitation of existing discrete road sections that spread over the
                         northern half of the country. The three Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs) and nine
                         Environmental Protection Commitments (EPCs) prepared by the client confirmed that the adverse
                         environmental impacts are expected to result mainly from the construction activities and include:
                         noise, dust, vibration, fumes from asphalting and transportation of materials; disruption to traffic,
                         access to roadside activities, and to waterways; damage to local roads and localized flooding;
                         interruption of local household businesses and utility services; potential contamination of soil and
                         water from disposal of waste materials and fueling equipment; destruction of crops, trees; and
                         worker safety. Direct impacts from operation potentially include: increased noise and vibration
                         disturbance, air pollution from vehicle exhaust, fuel and lubricants spills, and increased accidents.
                         No physical cultural resources are impacted by the project. However, these environment impacts
                         are likely to be short term, site-specific, non-sensitive or irreversible, and in every case, mitigation
                         measures can be designed to reduce the negative impacts.

                         OP 4.04 Natural Habitats. During project preparation it was determined that a 10km section of the
                         existing NH6 runs through the Hang Kia Pa Co Natural Reserve, of which approximately 7km
                         pass through the buffer zone area and about 3km pass through the core zone (strict protection area)
                         of the natural reserve, from Km149 to Km152. Therefore, this policy is triggered. The main
                         potential impacts are anticipated to occur during periodic maintenance of NH6 and include illegal
                         hunting and cutting trees, waste and noise generated during civil work, forest fire risk, and
                         encroachment on the natural reserve. However, the limited nature of the maintenance works on
                         NH6 will have little to moderate effects on the protected area and its biodiversity. Specific
                         mitigation measures have been included in the subproject Environmental Management Plan
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (EMP).

                         OP 4.10 Indigenous People. There is no ethnic minorities in the project areas, thus the policy is not
                         triggered.

                         OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement. Under component C, land acquisition and resettlement will be
                         required for construction of four long bridges and connecting roads along NH38B and upgrading
                         of NH 39, NH39-1, and NH38. Most of land acquisition and resettlement is due to the widening of
                         the right of way (ROW) and construction of new bypasses under certain locations. Most road
                         sections of NH38B have been upgraded through RNIP. The road has been widened to class 3 with
                         total ROW of 12 meters. At four locations including bridges, upgrading of the road has not been
                         completed and the original width of about 5 meters remains. For both Cap Bridge and Trang
                         Bridges, since both new bridges will be located at same place as the existing ones, temporary
                         bypasses and bridges will be built to accommodate traffic flow during construction, which will
                         involve a certain amount of land acquisition and resettlement. For Cong Neo Bridge and Trang
                         Thua Bridge, new bridges at different locations will be built along with new bypasses, which will
                         involve certain amount of land acquisition and resettlement. Similar land acquisition and
                         resettlement is required for upgrading NH 39 (16.5km) NH39-1 (20km) and NH38 (18.6km).




                                                                     Page 4 of 8
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            The potential risks related to operation of the subproject infrastructure are described above. No
Public Disclosure Copy




                           other negative potential indirect and/or long term environmental and social impacts due to future
                           activities are anticipated in the project areas. The long term positive impacts of the project include
                           benefit in reduction of travel time, improvement of road safety, reduced vehicle operations costs,
                           and more reliable delivery times.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            During preparation of the project, screening has been carried out for all the subprojects to exclude
                           all activities that would go against the project development objective.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            To address the project negative environmental and social impacts the following safeguard
                           documents have been prepared by the Client and reviewed by the Bank environment and social
                           specialists and found to be satisfactory:

                           •        Subproject EIAs and EPCs: The Government’ s regulations on EIA require the
                           preparation of an EIA or an EPC for an investment project. Accordingly, three EIAs and nine EPC
                           for the 12 subprojects have been prepared as part of the feasibility studies and submitted for
                           Government approval.

                           •        Environmental Management Plans (EMPs): The EMPs for the 12 sub-projects have been
                           prepared. The EMPs have also been reviewed by the Bank and found satisfactory. The EMPs
                           consist of the set of appropriate and site-specific mitigation, monitoring, and institutional measures
                           to be taken during implementation and operation to eliminate adverse environmental and social
                           impacts, offset them, or reduce them to the acceptable levels. The EMP for NH6 also includes
Public Disclosure Copy




                           mitigation measures to address the potential impacts on the natural reserve. The EMPs will be
                           included in the bidding and contractual documents. They will be implemented through PBC and
                           traditional road maintenance contracts for component B and construction contracts for component
                           C. Implementation of the EMPs will be monitored and supervised by the Project Management Unit
                           No. 3 (PMU3), the construction supervision consultant, the independent environmental monitoring
                           consultant, and will be supported by capacity building for PMU3, supervision consultants, and
                           contractors.

                           •       Resettlement Plans (RPs): Resettlement Plans of four sub-projects have been prepared.
                           Three RPs previously prepared under RNIP have been updated based on detailed impact survey,
                           updated compensation policies, lessons learned from recent experiences, and recommendations of
                           the Bank review missions. In summary, there are 1947 HHs affected by the project, among which
                           827 HHs will lose residential land, 524 HHs lose more than 10 percent productive land, and 29
                           HHs completely lose housing. Although all sub-projects are known by appraisal, Client also
                           prepares compensation, assistance and resettlement policy applicable to VRAMP. This document
                           spells out principles of OP 4.12, updated national laws/regulations and proposed policies and
                           entitlement applied to this project. Its key contents are consistently presented in four above
                           described RPs. The proposed document will be approved by Prime Minister of Government of
                           Vietnam, ensuring a proper application of OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement of the World
                           Bank.


                                                                      Page 5 of 8
                         Safeguard implementation and capacity building
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project will be implemented by PMU3 of the Implementing Agency, which has experienced
                         staff and experience in the implementation of several projects funded by the Bank and other
                         donors. Additional training will be provided to PMU3 staff and the contractor on the
                         implementation of EMPs and the World Bank safeguard policies.

                         Environment

                         PMU3 will be responsible for monitoring the overall project implementation, including
                         environmental compliance of the project. It will have the final responsibility for environmental
                         performance of the project. PMU3 will be responsible for reviewing and approving the EIAs,
                         EPCs, and EMPs. The construction supervision consultant will take the lead in ensure contractor
                         compliance with the EMPs. Furthermore, PMU3 will also be responsible for overall supervising
                         the implementation of the EMPs, reviewing project monitoring reports, and implement regular/ad
                         hoc monitoring, and request further mitigation measures based on their own environmental
                         management jurisdiction. A safeguard unit under PMU3 will be established with two
                         environmental management staff to help with environmental management of the project.
                         PMU3 will contract experienced independent environmental monitoring services for external
                         monitoring of compliance with the EMPs. The independent environmental monitoring consultant
                         will carry out the environmental monitoring program as designed in the EMPs and advise on
                         additional monitoring of mitigation measures to be implemented by the contractors. The consultant
                         will submit bi-annually monitoring reports to the PMU3 and to the Bank.

                         Social

                         PMU3 is responsible for overall management, including resettlement plan update, fund
                         disbursement, consultant engagement, instrument implementation and its monitoring and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         reporting. Before resettlement implementation, the resettlement plan will be updated, based on
                         DMS, RCS and compensation plan to be prepared in early resettlement implementation stage and
                         to be approved by provincial or district people committees.

                         PMU3 will disburse in a timely manner resettlement fund to the Compensation, Support and
                         Resettlement Council (CSRC) at the district level which specifically implements the RPs. PMU3
                         will assigned a qualified staff to oversight all activities under the umbrella of social safeguard
                         policies. Training programs are designed in the RPs to strengthen the capacity of implementing
                         agencies.

                         PMU3 will contract experienced independent consultant to monitor the implementation of
                         Resettlement Plans. The consultant will carry out the monitoring exercise as designed in the RPs
                         and advise on additional mitigation measures to be implemented by PMU3. The consultant will
                         submit monitoring reports to the PMU3 and to the Bank.

                         PMU3 will appoint a professional appraiser at the initial stages of the resettlement implementation
                         to conduct Replacement Cost Surveys (RCS) as a point of comparison with the established
                         compensation rates.




                                                                   Page 6 of 8
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             In addition to the DRVN, PMU3, other key stakeholders are People’s committees, local
Public Disclosure Copy




                           authorities, local communities, mass organizations, and general public.

                           Consultation: Public consultations with the people and households directly or indirectly affected,
                           local authorities, mass organizations, and the management board of Hang Kia Pa Co Natural
                           Reserve at the subproject level were conducted in the process of preparing the safeguard
                           documents (EIAs, EPCs, EMPs, RPs, RPF) during January – March 2013. Feedbacks from all the
                           consultations were taken into account in the preparation of the final safeguard documents and the
                           subproject design. Consultation will be continuously conducted during project implementation.

                           Disclosure: Prior to project appraisal, all safeguard documents (EIAs, EPCs, EMPs, RPs,) have
                           been disclosed locally in Vietnamese at the project sites and at the Vietnam Development
                           Information Center. They have also been disclosed in English at the Bank’s InfoShop in
                           Washington DC.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      17-Jul-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   19-Jul-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Vietnam                                                          03-Jul-2013
                           Comments: At Vietnam Development Information Center
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      17-Jul-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   19-Jul-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Vietnam                                                          03-Jul-2013
                           Comments: At Vietnam Development Information Center
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats




                                                                     Page 7 of 8
                             Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             degradation of critical natural habitats?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                             project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Mitsuyoshi Asada
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:         Name: Jennifer J. Sara (SM)                         Date: 16-Sep-2013




                                                                        Page 8 of 8
