                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC5306

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Jul-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 22-Jul-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Zimbabwe                        Project ID:      P145518
                            Project Name:      Productive Safety Net Project (PSN) (P145518)
                            Task Team          Melis Ufuk Guven
                            Leader:
                            Estimated                                          Estimated        30-Oct-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTSE                           Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Other social services (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Social safety nets (80%), Other social protection and risk management (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         25.00                Total Bank Financing:          0.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                               Financing Gap:                 0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                     0.00
                              Free-standing TFs AFR Human Development                                     25.00
                              Total                                                                       25.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective is to provide temporary income support to poor non-labor
                           constrained rural households through their participation in labor-intensive community works, while
                           putting in place the building blocks of a National Productive Safety Net system.
                           C. Project Description
                           The project would assist the Government of Zimbabwe in scaling up the pilot Productive Safety Net
                           (PSN) program as an integral part of the overall social protection system. The program would aim to
                         provide participating rural households affected by the lean season or other external shocks with
                         timely and predictable cash transfers. The project would strengthen institutional and implementation
                         capacity to operationalize the PSN at the national level and would be implemented over a period of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         four years. The districts (as well as the number of districts) where the project would be implemented
                         would be agreed with the Government in consultation with relevant stakeholders during project
                         preparation on the basis of transparent criteria. The total budget for the project is approximately US$
                         22 million.

                         The following are the main components proposed for the recipient-executed trust fund;

                         Component 1 – Labor-intensive Community Works (approximately 70 percent of total project
                         funding)

                         The specific objective of this component would be to provide the poorest and most vulnerable non-
                         labor constrained rural households with timely and predictable supplemental income through their
                         participation in labor-intensive community works. This component would take in to account the
                         following important aspects of a labor-intensive community works program:

                         Seasonality: poor rural households face underemployment and lack of income at specific times of the
                         year, linked to the agricultural calendar. Community works under this component would therefore be
                         implemented mostly during the months when rural households are less busy with agricultural
                         activities and food insecurity is higher due to the depletion of household food reserves and rising
                         food prices in local markets.

                         Duration and Level of Benefits: The exact duration and the level of benefits that selected households
                         would be able to derive from their participation in community works activities would take into
                         account the experience of the pilot. The duration and level of benefits would be determined such that
                         they do not create negative incentives for households to pursue their regular or new livelihood
                         activities, but provide a safety net to smooth their consumption and avoid negative coping strategies
Public Disclosure Copy




                         such as selling their assets in periods of elevated need (e.g. during lean seasons). It is expected that
                         the targeted households would be able to participate for a maximum of 15 days per month during
                         four months per year, at a daily (below market) wage rate.

                         Targeting: Households that would participate in community works would be selected using a
                         combination of several targeting approaches, including geographical targeting, community-based
                         targeting and self-targeting (and possibly PMT in certain districts) as follows: i) a geographical
                         targeting approach would be used to select the program implementation districts (combining a
                         number of criteria to be agreed with the Government) and, depending on the availability of poverty
                         and/or food security data below the district level, may also guide the selection of wards; ii) a
                         community-based targeting mechanism would then be used to identify the poorest households,
                         combined with self-targeting (for households to express their will to enter the program under the
                         conditions, particularly the daily wage rate, offered); iii) in the districts where the PSN would
                         overlap with the HCT, it is expected that the PSN would combine these approaches with the PMT
                         currently being used by the HCT (the program would also support the government in improving and
                         updating the PMT with the most recent data from the 2010 household survey ).

                         Labor-intensive Feature of Community Works: Community works would be labor-intensive, with a
                         high percentage of the costs going to the cash transfers to beneficiary households. Based on the
                         experience of the pilot, the labor component of the activities would therefore be of around 70% of the
                         costs of the activities on average, while the remaining 30% would cover capital inputs and district
                         administrative costs for designing and supervising community works. This cost structure of
                         community works would guarantee that a wide range of high quality community works activities is
Public Disclosure Copy




                         implemented, while permitting that the largest possible number of poor households participates in the
                         program.

                         Type of Community Works Activities: It is expected that the range of labor-intensive community
                         works supported by the pilot would be expanded and would contribute to the overall objective of
                         increasing food security and building resilience to climate-related shocks (drought, floods, etc.) and
                         other external shocks. A number of criteria to guide the identification of activities would be c learly
                         defined, and would in particular ensure that activities: i) are in line with the general objective of
                         improving resilience to shocks, improving food security or supporting the local economy; ii) have a
                         clear public good character, and do not bring benefits to a narrow group within the community; iii)
                         meet a number of environmental and social safeguards requirements (to be developed in an
                         Environmental and Social Management Framework to be prepared and adopted by the government
                         for the program); iv) do not induce resettlement of individuals or households in the community. It is
                         expected that community works would therefore mostly be in the areas of soil and water
                         conservation and management, rehabilitation of degraded areas, rural roads maintenance, support to
                         agricultural practices, etc. A manual of labor-intensive community works would be developed in
                         partnership with the Ministry of Agriculture and FAO and would guide the selection of community
                         works by communities and district authorities. This manual would be developed with a view to
                         introduce a wide range of community works that would respect the criteria set above and would also
                         include an innovative menu of activities with potentially high and direct impact on local economies.

                         Component 2 – Institutional and System Strengthening (approximately 30 percent of total project
                         funding)

                         The specific objective of this component would be to increase the capacity of the Ministry of Labor
                         and Social Services, districts and communities to implement, monitor and evaluate a labor-intensive
Public Disclosure Copy




                         public works program. Through the pilot, capacity was built in two districts to implement labor-
                         intensive public works activities. The expansion of a public works program through the proposed
                         project would further build this capacity in a higher number of districts and at national level,
                         including by supporting the government in creating and improving systems, processes and tools for
                         the implementation of the social protection system. The component would also support the
                         implementation, monitoring and evaluation of project activities and the development of a grievance
                         redress mechanism.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The exact number of districts and the criteria for selecting these districts would be defined in the
                         Project Implementation Manuel (PIM) during the design phase. The PIM would include a negative
                         list of activities, materials and inputs that cannot be financed under the project.

                         The project would finance small labor-intensive public works under sub-projects, of an average size
                         of US$ 20,000 and maximum around US$ 40,000. Sub-projects would be selected during project
                         implementation and would have to comply with minimum eligibility criteria as spelled out in the
                         PIM. The small works financed by the project would be short in duration (not more than
                         approximately 4 months), would employ around 100 people (working an average of 15 days per
                         month during the 4 months) and would be completed essentially by hand (using simple tools). Sub-
                           projects would be labor-intensive (around 70 percent of the costs would be for labor inputs) and
                           therefore materials would be mostly local materials, and equipment limited to simple hand tools such
                           as picks, shovels and wheelbarrows.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Sub-projects would be mostly in the areas of soil and water conservation and management,
                           rehabilitation of degraded areas, existing rural roads maintenance (there will be no new rights of way
                           or the opening of new trails or roads), support to agricultural practices (but no agricultural inputs or
                           pesticides would be distributed or used), etc.

                           An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), including a checklist that would be
                           used for screening of sub-projects would be developed at the appraisal stage.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Ministry of Labour and Social Services (implementing agency) has some previous experience
                           related to safeguards through the recent implementation of the pilot public works project (which the
                           proposed project intends to expand) for which a simplified EMF was developed. It is anticipated that
                           this EMF would be adjusted and updated during project preparation for the proposed project.
                           Compliance with the environmental and social safeguards mitigation measures and checklists (as
                           would be outlined in the EMF and the PIM) would be supervised by the District Environment
                           Officers (similar to the arrangements in the pilot project). Funds would be set aside in the project to
                           support these officers to undertake the environmental and social safeguards supervision and for
                           trainings at community and district level for sub-project preparation. Training would be provided to
                           officers during implementation
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Liba C. Strengerowski-Feldblyum (AFTN2)
                           Paula F. Lytle (AFTCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The project would finance very small
                           BP 4.01                                               community labor-intensive works (of an average
                                                                                 size of US$ 20,000 and maximum US$ 40,000).
                                                                                 The sub-projects would be limited in scope and
                                                                                 location and, would use very limited (mostly
                                                                                 local) materials (representing approximately 20
                                                                                 percent of total sub-project cost). Mostly simple
                                                                                 hand tools would be used for implementation,
                                                                                 and digging would be done by hand using
                                                                                 shovels. The sub-project would almost never
                                                                                 require specific equipment. It is therefore not
                                                                                 expected that these sub-projects would have any
                                                                                 significant environmental impact. Similar to the
                                                                                 pilot project, to mitigate against any potential
                                                                                 negative environmental impact an
                                                                                 Environmental and Social Management
                                                                                 Framework (ESMF) would be developed and
                                                                                                                                 would include a screening form to check
                                                                                                                                 eligibility of potential sub-projects, and to
                                                                                                                                 ensure that proper environmental risk
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 management measures get implemented when
                                                                                                                                 needed.
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No                            The project would not finance sub-projects
                                                                                                                                 leading to significant loss or degradation of
                                                                                                                                 natural habitats. The location of sub-projects
                                                                                                                                 will not be in a protected area or park and there
                                                                                                                                 would be no conversion of habitats, as the small
                                                                                                                                 works would take place in already intervened
                                                                                                                                 areas.
                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No                            The project would not include forest
                                                                                                                                 management activities, or activities aimed at
                                                                                                                                 using forest resources, leading to deforestation
                                                                                                                                 or to forest degradation.
                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No                            The project would finance labor and some
                                                                                                                                 limited material (such as wheelbarrows and
                                                                                                                                 small hand tools) for small agriculture works,
                                                                                                                                 but would not finance any agricultural inputs or
                                                                                                                                 pesticides. Therefore, the pest management
                                                                                                                                 policy would not be triggered.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No                            Since any excavation works would be very
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         limited (such as e.g. ditches and septic wells
                                                                                                                                 that would be dug manually) the probability of
                                                                                                                                 any finds of cultural value is low. Nonetheless,
                                                                                                                                 special procedures in case of unanticipated
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 discoveries would be included in the EMF.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            There are no indigenous people in the areas
                                                                                                                                 foreseen for the implementation of the project.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            The project will utilize screening to ensure that
                                 4.12                                                                                            any sub-projects of rehabilitation/construction
                                                                                                                                 proposed will remain within the footprint of
                                                                                                                                 existing community assets or on public
                                                                                                                                 unencumbered land would be eligible under the
                                                                                                                                 project to ensure that no involuntary
                                                                                                                                 resettlement, land acquisition or loss of assets
                                                                                                                                 occurs as a result of the sub-project. See 4.01.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            There will be no activities involving dams.

                                 Projects on International        No                                                             All activities will have localized effects and will
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            not affect any international waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             There will be no activities in border or disputed
                                 7.60                                                                                            areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                           A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Sep-2013
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Since the proposed project builds on the recent pilot public works project, no specific safeguards
                             related studies are planned during preparation. The existing EMF (used for the pilot) would be
                             updated given the scale of the expansion and an ESMF would be prepared during project
                             preparation and would be finalized, cleared, and disclosed at the InfoShop and in country before
                             Appraisal.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:       Name: Melis Ufuk Guven

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name:                                                     Date:
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Manuel Salazar (SM)                                 Date: 22-Jul-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
