                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC2752

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-May-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-Jun-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                            Project ID:      P133261
                            Project Name:      Guizhou Rural Development and Poverty Alleviation Project (P133261)
                            Task Team          Ulrich K. H. M. Schmitt
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          15-Jan-2014                      Estimated        20-Aug-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASCS                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Crops (30%), Animal production (20%), Irrigation and drainage (20%), Agro-
                                               industry, marketing, and trade (20%), Agricultural extensi on and research
                                               (10%)
                            Theme(s):          Rural markets (40%), Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Rural policies
                                               and institutions (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:    140.00                     Total Bank Financing:        100.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                                Financing Gap:                 0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      40.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        100.00
                              Total                                                                        140.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective would be to develop and test new models for agricultural sector
                           development and for improved institutional arrangements in Guizhou’s poverty stricken areas, which
                           increase rural income in an equitable and socially acceptable and in environmentally sustainable way.
                           C. Project Description
                         The proposed project seeks to assist Guizhou Province in advancing the agriculture restructuring and
                         modernization agenda. The project aims to achieve the development objective through the
                         implementation of the following components and activities:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •        Component 1: Restructuring of agricultural sub-sectors. The objective of this component
                         would be to develop more efficient agricultural production systems focusing on 2 to 4 key
                         agricultural pillar industries (or sub-sectors) in each project county. This would be achieved through
                         the restructuring of the current production patterns and by supporting the enabling institutions. This
                         restructuring would aimed at creating or supporting larger, economically more viable and long-term
                         sustainable production units, which are capable to use better technologies and can capture value
                         added in the up-stream processing and marketing value chains.

                         The component would support socially acceptable models of cooperative development, farmland
                         consolidation, and company-farmer cooperative organizational models using a market and business-
                         driven approach. Project financing would be provided for investments to: (a) develop new and
                         improve existing farmer cooperatives; (b) introduce new or improved production systems, pre-
                         processing/processing technologies for agriculture products, storage and marketing facilities; and (c)
                         strengthen farm-to-market linkages, including up-grading of quality standards, labeling, certification,
                         branding, product tracing, logistics, food safety etc.

                         The establishment of new farmer cooperatives and strengthening of existing farmer cooperatives
                         would include the financing of: (a) training in management and business operation; (b) management
                         facilities for farmer cooperatives and technical training, and (c) start-up productive/pre-processing
                         investments for new and innovative technologies. Agro-enterprises that can provide public goods
                         would be supported through public-private-partnership investments. Such investments would
                         include (d) activities which are directly supportive to poor farmers, such as the provision of technical
                         services, training, and (e) incremental costs related to sourcing their raw material from targeted poor
                         areas and targeted poor households.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The component would also focus on developing and implementing benefit sharing mechanisms
                         between company and households that would allow households to receive a fair share of the value-
                         added generated through value-chain integration. The development of such benefit sharing
                         mechanisms will require the setting of targets and the monitoring of public-private partnership
                         arrangements with the possibility of applying sanctions in case commitments are not met.

                         •         Component 2: Public infrastructure and services support. The objective of this component
                         would be to improve public infrastructure and other public services in order to enable and facilitate
                         restructuring of the agricultural sub-sectors under Component 1. Specifically, the component would
                         support investments in production road infrastructure (for example, tractor roads, field tracks or
                         access to processing and marketing facilities), irrigation, drainage, communications, public market
                         facilities, electricity supply and other infrastructure, which is necessary to facilitate and complement
                         farmer and private sector investment under the first component. In addition, the component would
                         provide investment in other supporting public services, such as food safety testing and control, public
                         extension and training services, marketing systems and agriculture research and technology transfer
                         as well as market studies for business development.

                         •      Component 3: Training and capacity building. The objective of this component would be to
                         improve the understanding of the roles and responsibilities of public sector institutions, enterprises,
                         and farmers in poverty alleviation through the development of value chains, including improved
                         benefit sharing mechanisms. The investment would include analytical studies, policy guidelines, and
                         the development of appraisal guidelines for public sector support in rural areas. Training would be
Public Disclosure Copy




                         provided for government officials in relevant line agencies, entrepreneurs, and a wide range of public
                         sector institutions.

                         Component 4: Project management, monitoring and evaluation (M&E). The objective of this
                         component would be to establish an effective project management and M&E system, to ensure that
                         coordination between project implementation agencies at all levels as well as coordination with other
                         government programs and institutions in the sector, and to capture of implementation lessons from
                         the project. This component would provide support to the project management offices at all
                         implementing levels, including office equipment, transportation and technical assistance services. It
                         would also include support to establishing and operating the project’s progress and impact M&E
                         system.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         About 80 percent of land area of Guizhou Province belongs to limestone and karst areas. Rural
                         poverty in these areas is deep and persistent, with poverty rates often above 35 percent. The unique
                         geographic conditions and the limited availability of productive farmland, combined with
                         inaccessibility and underdeveloped infrastructure, pose specific challenges to agricultural
                         development and environmental management.

                         The project would be implemented in the karst areas of the Wuling and Wumeng Mountains and
                         involve 11 counties of three prefectures, including Bijie, Zunyi, and Tongren, covering a total
                         population of 6.6 million and 2.4 million registered rural poor. Within the selected counties, project
                         areas would cover 122 townships, 547 administrative villages, 256,000 households, 1.02 million
                         people (of which 355,000 are registered as poor), which would directly benefit from project
                         interventions. A significant proportion of the beneficiary population would belong to ethnic
Public Disclosure Copy




                         minorities.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The proposed project would be implemented under the overall responsibility of the Guizhou
                         Provincial Leading Group for Poverty Reduction and Development (LGOPAD). LGOPAD has
                         previous experience with Bank supported projects based on long-term cooperation partnership.
                         However, this experience dates back to the mid 1990s with significant staff turn-over since then and
                         some capacity constraints may exist. The LGOPAD is expected to have good capacity to implement
                         social safeguards policies and provisions, since such aspects belongs to core mandate of LGOPAD
                         and are part of the day-to-day work. In terms of environmental safeguards, capacity of the
                         implementing agency at provincial and county levels is expected to be quite weak. In particular,
                         there is little experience with the agricultural production issues as well as a limited understanding of
                         Bank’s Environmental Assessment policy requirements and procedures.
                         F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                         Chaogang Wang (MNSUS)
                         Xin Ren (EASCS)
                         Meixiang Zhou (EASCS)
                         Aimin Hao (EASCS)
                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies             Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes          An Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)
                           BP 4.01                                     report and Environmental Management Plan
                                                                       (EMP) need to be prepared as part of the EA
                                                                       process. Depending on the project design, an
                                                                       Environmental Management Framework may
                                                                       also be required, if part of the project
                                                                       investments cannot yet be determined by the
                                                                       time of appraisal. The EIA needs to pay
                                                                       particular attention to the following:

                                                                       Livestock. Investments in the expansion of
                                                                       livestock and animal husbandry need to:
                                                                       consider the suitability and carrying capacity of
                                                                       pasture areas as well as fodder and feed stock
                                                                       sources, particularly in mountain areas; be in
                                                                       line with national policies on grazing
                                                                       restrictions and slope-land protection; and
                                                                       include appropriate measures to balance
                                                                       livestock numbers with fodder supply, both at
                                                                       the household and community level.
                                                                       Animal waste management. The EIA needs to
                                                                       analyze issues around animal waste and non-
                                                                       point source pollution, which in combination
                                                                       with improper handling may lead to negative
                                                                       environmental impacts under the project, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       devise appropriate management and mitigation
                                                                       measures.
                                                                       Crop production. Erosion may occur as part of
                                                                       traditional slope-land cropping. The EIA need to
                                                                       analyze the availability of appropriate water and
                                                                       land resource for crop production under the
                                                                       project. Potential impacts of monoculture
                                                                       cropping and related possible negative impacts
                                                                       such as pest and disease, soil quality
                                                                       deterioration etc. may need to be addressed.
                                                                       Agricultural processing. For investments in
                                                                       simple primary processing, such as cleaning,
                                                                       cutting or drying of raw produce, environmental
                                                                       impacts are likely to be minimal. More
                                                                       advanced processing, such as starch and
                                                                       beverage production, slaughtering and meat
                                                                       production facilities, however, may cause more
                                                                       significant negative impacts in form of air and
                                                                       water pollution as well as water and energy
                                                                 consumption.
                                                                 Rural Infrastructure. Possible negative impacts
                                                                 form new infrastructure construction as well as
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 rehabilitation of existing infrastructure need to
                                                                 be analyzed and mitigation measures described.
                                                                 Protected area. Proximity of project investment
                                                                 to any protected areas, such as protection zones
                                                                 for natural forest and for drinking water, needs
                                                                 to be taken into account as part of the project
                                                                 site selection criteria to avoid/minimize impacts
                                                                 on the above areas.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       TBD   OP4.04 may be applicable if project sites are
                                                                 located in or may impact natural habitats. Based
                                                                 on current information, the project is not
                                                                 expected to impact on critical natural habitats.
                                                                 However, further information needs to be
                                                                 provided through the EA process to confirm
                                                                 whether OP4.04 is applicable or not.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes   The project can be expected to involve the
                                                                 application of pesticides in agricultural
                                                                 production as well as pest management issues
                                                                 due to the expansion of agricultural production,
                                                                 intensification and diversification activities. A
                                                                 Pest Management Plan (PMP) needs to be
                                                                 prepared as part of the EA process.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   The occurrence of and proximity of project
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BP 4.11                                 investments to cultural, historical, religious
                                                                 sites, sacred sites for minority people etc. are
                                                                 yet to be identified during EIA process to
                                                                 confirm whether OP4.11 is applicable or not.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   Ethnic minority population takes up about 25
                                                                 percent of total population in the project areas in
                                                                 Guizhou, covering a large number of different
                                                                 groups. Ethnic minority communities may not
                                                                 be part of the mainstream society and in many
                                                                 areas may be marginalized with income levels
                                                                 and living standards below those of the
                                                                 mainstream society. Many prospective project
                                                                 household are potentially vulnerable or
                                                                 disadvantaged and specific means may need to
                                                                 be designed to ensure that these communities
                                                                 and households will benefit from the project.

                                                                 A detailed Social Assessment (SA)/ Social
                                                                 Impact Assessment (SIA) needs to be prepared
                                                                                                                                 to carefully analyze the issues around ethnic
                                                                                                                                 minorities in the project areas. It is expected
                                                                                                                                 that an Indigenous People Plan (IPP) or
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 Indigenous People Planning Framework (IPPF)
                                                                                                                                 needs to be prepared as well and IPP aspects
                                                                                                                                 need to be integrated into the project design.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           The project will support infrastructure for the
                                 4.12                                                                                            development of agricultural industries. This
                                                                                                                                 will include water supply, road, electricity,
                                                                                                                                 flood protection, development of farmland at
                                                                                                                                 village level. In addition, ecological
                                                                                                                                 resettlement and/or agriculture land
                                                                                                                                 consolidation may take place in some project
                                                                                                                                 areas under government programs, and this may
                                                                                                                                 or may not be in anticipation of the project. The
                                                                                                                                 SA/SIA needs to carefully analyze ongoing
                                                                                                                                 government programs for resettlement,
                                                                                                                                 agricultural land consolidation, as well as the
                                                                                                                                 amount of land resources needed for
                                                                                                                                 infrastructure investments under the project.
                                                                                                                                 Based on the findings of the SA/ SIA report, the
                                                                                                                                 specific resettlement instruments, either
                                                                                                                                 resettlement policy framework or resettlement
                                                                                                                                 action plan, will be determined and prepared
                                                                                                                                 during preparation.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Dec-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The EIA report, EMP, PMP as well as the SA/ SIA, Resettlement Plan (or Framework), and IPP
                                      (or IPPF) will be prepared, drafted, disclosed, and consulted with the project stakeholders before
                                      project appraisal, which is expected to take place around February 2014. Site-specific/sub-project
                                      EMPs, if determined to be required, will be made available at the project implementation stage,
                                      once the individual sub-sector proposals have been prepared, appraised, and approved.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Ulrich K. H. M. Schmitt

                                 Approved By:


                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Regional Safeguards Name:                        Date:
                         Coordinator:
                         Sector Manager:     Name: Mark R. Lundell (SM)   Date: 03-Jun-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy
