                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC622

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Aug-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Indonesia                        Project ID:      P127813
                            Project Name:      Coral Reef Rehabilitation and Management Program Phase III (P127813)
                            Task Team          Marea Eleni Hatziolos
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          13-Nov-2012                      Estimated        28-Mar-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASIS                            Lending          Adaptable Program Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector:            General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%), Public administration-
                                               Agriculture, fishing and forestry (25%), Sub-national government administration
                                               (25%)
                            Theme:             Biodiversity (60%), Climate change (20%), Micro, Small and Medium
                                               Enterprise support (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          10.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                       50.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                           12.00
                              Financing Gap                                                               12.00
                              Total                                                                       72.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The development objective of COREMAP Phase III is to provide communities with the capacity and
                           incentives to co-manage their coral reefs sustainably, through support for: (a) more effective local
                           governance; (b) livelihoods development and business innovation based on coral reef ecosystem
                           goods and services; and (c) knowledge creation, dissemination and regional networking.
                           C. Project Description
                         COREMAP III will have a district level focus with strong emphasis on community development and
                         conservation of the natural resources base, for the direct benefit of users. Through improved
                         governance arrangements at the District and Village levels, the project will introduce better
Public Disclosure Copy




                         management practices, and policy incentives to catalyze behavioral change by all key stakeholders.
                         The project aims to protect a percentage of coral reefs as no-take zones to serve as sanctuaries for
                         biodiversity and to help restore degraded fish stocks. Other ecosystem services include coastal
                         protection during storm surge, reduced flooding and saltwater intrusion in low lying areas,
                         maintenance of water quality and tourism amenity values, and carbon sequestration in mangroves
                         and seagrass beds. No-take zones will also serve as sources of recruitment for corals, fish, and other
                         threatened species, as well as provide critical habitat in the life history of many species which are
                         pelagic or migratory as adults. In addition to supporting protection of no-take zones, the project will
                         introduce best fisheries management practices (including minimum size and allowable take limits,
                         closed seasons during spawning, and sustainable gear/fishing practices) to help rebuild over-fished
                         stocks in traditional fishing grounds. Through protecting the functional integrity of healthy reefs and
                         restoring ecological function to degraded reefs and fish stocks, natural resource rents can be
                         harvested from ecosystem services and wealth created at the local, community level. This will create
                         the kinds of incentives that will re-enforce behavioral change leading to long-term stewardship of
                         coral reefs and related ecosystems.

                         Significant support for alternative livelihoods will be introduced through introduction of financially
                         viable eco-enterprises at the Village and District levels. These alternatives are meant to provide
                         greater returns to labor and should help drive the behavioral change and shift away from overfishing
                         in areas where catch per unit effort has been declining steadily and composition of the catch and its
                         value are also being eroded. Given the importance of women’s involvement in the artisanal fisheries
                         sector and their potential role in contributing to cottage industries like artisan handicrafts and eco-
                         tourism, including home stays and vegetable gardening, etc., the gender dimension will be a priority.
                         Once community revenues are building and profits invested in social development activities, women
                         and children will benefit disproportionately, if investments are made in community health, education
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and nutrition. Expected benefits include increased revenues and resilience resulting from
                         diversification and upgrading (higher markets) of activities of the participating communities, which
                         will contribute to reduce the pressure on the natural resources and subsequently generating global
                         benefits in terms of biodiversity, and integrity of fish stocks and threatened migratory species.

                         Based on the above approach, four components are envisaged:

                         Component 1: Consolidation and Extension of the COREMAP Model. This component will
                         strengthen capacity for sustainable local governance of coral reef resources in 350 existing
                         COREMAP sites and scale up co-management activities in an additional 100 villages across 8 project
                         districts. New villages will be selected on the basis of priority seascapes under the Coral Triangle
                         Initiative.

                         The first set of activities are focused on COREMAP model scale-up, and will include: (a) community
                         empowerment, consisting of training on sustainable coral reef fisheries, baseline establishment
                         through rapid rural appraisals, community study tours and visits, village facilitation and technical
                         assistance through local level teams, and establishment of village information centers and
                         communication arrangements; (b) community-based coral reef management, consisting of
                         participatory resource assessment and mapping, preparation of village coral reef management plans
                         with legal basis, establishmen tof village sanctuaries (no take zones), community monitoring of reefs
                         and related eco-systems, and collaborative surveillance and enforcement; (c) institutional
                         strengthening, consisting of training implementing agency and government staff on marine protected
                         area and coral reef resources management, updating local legislation and national policy, using bio-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         physical and socio-economic information generated under the project, conducting research, and
                         providing technical assistance and operational expenses support tolocal project management units;
                         and (d) support for preparation of district marine resources strategic plan, networking the marine
                         conservation areas within and across districts, and for co-management of national and smaller marine
                         protected areas. These activities will support preparation of coral reef management plans,
                         surveillance support for marine protected areas, and feasibility studies for sustainable financing of
                         marine protected areas.

                         The second set of activities will involved a demonstration of the eco-system based approach to coral
                         reef management. The project will support innovative initiatives such as: (a) valuation of coral reef
                         eco-system services; (b) marine spatial planning which will focus on district level integrated zoning,
                         licensing, and permitting of tourism, fisheries, conservation, and transport-related activities,
                         including use of GPS-based spatial data and harmonization of key regulations in competing sectors;
                         (c) determination of impacts from ridges to reefs; (d) development and piloting of access-right based
                         governance system in designated zones; and (e) promoting carbon sequestration in coastal areas
                         (REDD+ and Blue Carbon for carbon offsets). These activities will be co-financed by the GEF.

                         The third set of activities will focus on developing a framework for addressing climate variability
                         risk in this sector through vulnerability assessments of 5-6 pilot sites, determination of climate
                         change adaptation strategies, investing in green infrastructure for climate change adaptation, and
                         training coastal communities on climate change adaptation.

                         Component 2: Community livelihoods and Demonstration of Eco-Business Innovation. This
                         component w ill support nature-based revenue-generating activities at the community/village level
                         and eco-business hubs at the district level.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         At the community/village level, the project will support: (a) development of a livelihood
                         diversification strategy based on eco-business opportunities; (b) identification of a menu of
                         potentially marketable products, based on the guiding principle of reducing pressure on coral reefs,
                         improving environmental quality, and sustaining eco-system services and community welfare, in
                         which communities could engage at the community or cooperative level; (c) provision of technical
                         assistance to the locally-formed and operationalized community-based enterprises in the form of
                         market research, eco-certification and branding, preparation of feasibility studies and business plans;
                         (d) provision of venture capital through a revolving fund at the local level or loans through
                         partnership with a local rural financial institution. Support for some of the needed green venture
                         capital would come from GEF co-financing under the Biodiversity Focal Area.

                         At the district level, the project will provide access to finance and technical assistance, including
                         applied research and innovation (see Component 4 below) to support eco-business enterprises.
                         Investment options could include eco-tourism (hi-end low impact boutique resorts eco-tourism; home
                         stays; guided tours/recreation/adventure tourism featuring natural and cultur al amenities of the
                         region dependent on high quality environment), artisan crafts development and marketing (to local
                         eco-resorts or for export), mariculture (large scale/offshore in district-zoned areas; nearshore/
                         community reef-based, reef ranching), fisheri es value chain processing, certification and marketing,
                         REDD+ and Blue carbon markets for mangrove/wetlands conservation, carbon offsets on voluntary
                         market initially (corporate social responsibility for corporations that want to purchase carbon
                         credits), biodiversity conservation premiums for healthy mangrove/coral reef complexes (focus in
                         West Papua and Papua), and investing in Green infrastructure for climate change adaptation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 3: Communication, Dissemination and Replication. This component will continue with
                         the public awareness campaigns and education program, and also support the process of extending
                         the COREMAP approach to the Phase III districts through dissemination of materials and cross-
                         visits, and documenting the COREMAP approach for replication in non-project areas.

                         Component 4: Management, Research and Monitoring, and Coordination. The first set of activities
                         under this component will enhance government institutional structures to implement the project and
                         monitor critical performance indicators. The activities would focus on: (a) supporting the National
                         Coordination Unit in the Ministry of Marine Affairs and Fisheries, and the management capacity of
                         program management units at the district level; (b) coral reef research and reef health monitoring; (c)
                         fisheries research and district level fisheries population and bio-diversity monitoring; (d)
                         continuation of the Sea Partnership program under which sector responsive research areas are
                         funded; and (e) any legal and policy issues.

                         The second set of activities would relate to adaptive research in support of an ecosystem-based
                         approach to management (i.e. designing ecologically resilient networks of Marine Protected Areas
                         and other Marine Spatial Planning, valuation of ecosystem services, and assessing and addressing
                         climate variability and risk) under component 1, and access to needed knowledge and innovation to
                         support the development and marketing of eco-business models under Component 2. These research
                         activities would be supported mainly under a regional GEF Targeted Research and Innovation
                         Project, “Capturing Coral Reef and related Ecosystem Services? (CCRES), under the GEF/WB IW
                         Program Framework, "Scaling up of Partnership Investments for Sustainable Development of Large
                         Marine and Coastal Ecosystems of the East Asia Region" of which COREMAP III would also be a
                         part.

                         The third set of activities will focus on coordination with other projects and government programs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project will support incorporation of the project into the broader CTI framework, and enhance
                         linkages with other related projects and government programs, such as the WB/GEF IW Program and
                         CCRES project noted above, as well as the IFAD Coastal Communities Development Project (in
                         preparation). It will also create an opportunity to link up with Green PMPN (National program of
                         community driven development) as a platform for scaling up the COREMAP model beyond
                         COREMAP project sites. This could conceivably be achieved by Government and PNPM institutions
                         with little direct investment by COREMAP III, other than some training of trainers and community
                         facilitation, leaving much of replication and scaling up to Local Government.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the              safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented in 8 districts under 7 provinces on the Eastern Coast of Indonesia.
                         These are Kabupaten Buton and Wakatobi in Southeast Sulawesi, Kabupaten Pangkep and Selayar in
                         South Sulawesi, Kabupaten Sikka in East Nusa Tenggara, Kabupaten Biak in Papua, Kabupaten Raja
                         Ampat in Papua Barat and the new participating Kabupaten, Minahasa Utara in North Sulawesi.

                         Approximately 450 villages including 350 villages which participated in COREMAP II and 100 new
                         villages located in these areas and dependent on the reefs for their livelihood will be eligible for
                         participation in the program. New villages will be chosen based on ecological criteria and are located
                         in the coral triangle, considered to be the world's best remaining coral reefs. Their involvement in the
                           program is entirely voluntary. Finally, the indigenous people (Bajo) living in the program area are
                           specifically targeted since they are most dependent on the reefs for their livelihood and have the most
                           to gain from increasing the productivity of the reef fisheries through collaborative management and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           sustainable use.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           This is a nationally coordinated and decentralized program in implementation. The Ministry of
                           Marine Affairs and Fisheries (MMAF) will be the project’s main executing agency, with a national
                           level Steering Committee, Technical Committee, and a National Coordination Unit (NCU) for the
                           project implementation. The NCU will work in collaboration with National Project Implementation
                           Unit (NPIU) of the Institute of Sciences (LIPI), and of the Ministry of Forests/DG of Forest
                           Protection and Nature Conservation. At local level, each district has a project management unit with
                           the provincial governments playing a facilitating role.

                            At NCU, there were 3 persons, 2 ministry staff and 1 consultant, assigned to be in charge of
                           safeguards. During 2011, these staff attended safeguard training in the World Bank Jakarta Office
                           and also joined a World Bank safeguard mission to assess existing project compliance with
                           Safeguards and to learn from the field. There is still a need to build capacity on safeguards issues by
                           national and local project implementation units. Additional training workshops will be conducted
                           during the preparation of COREMAP III.

                           Lessons learnt from COREMAP II, including the assignment of a focal contact point at the NPIU
                           endorsed by the NCU, to work closely with the Bank’s safeguard specialist, will be adopted in
                           COREMAP III to guide preparation and implementation of the negative list, ECOPs, IPPF, Process
                           Framework and to design measures to mitigate risks associated with specific social and
                           environmental issues. These include positive actions, like ensuring transparency in the identification
                           of grant recipients under the alternative livelihoods component of the projects, ensuring that all
                           donations of land for construction of Village Information Centers and other public goods are
                           documented by signed affidavits and posted in the Village Information Center. Compliance with
Public Disclosure Copy




                           positive and negative lists will be better monitored under COREMAP III. This can be reinforced
                           through a training program organized by the NCU Safeguards Focal Point for Village mobilizers/
                           facilitators so that the information is extended to community members.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Ninin K. Dewi (EASIS)
                           Krisnan Pitradjaja Isomartana (EASIS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              Based on a review of around 30 proposed sub-
                           BP 4.01                                               activities of the four major project components,
                                                                                 the COREMAP III project is unlikely to have
                                                                                 any large-scale, significant or irreversible
                                                                                 impacts on the environment. The project will
                                                                                 focus on the protection of coral-reef ecosystems
                                                                                 through community empowerment and capacity
                                                                                 building for the ecosystem based management,
                         promoting sustainable alternative livelihoods,
                         communication and networking, coordination
                         with other programs in the region and scaling
Public Disclosure Copy




                         up.

                         Project activities such as community monitoring
                         and surveillance program, study tour, research
                         and eco-tourism activities will take place in
                         some protected areas of the coastal/marine
                         environment. Alternative livelihoods will be
                         developed, based on coral reef and mangrove
                         ecosystems goods and services. The eco-
                         enterprises are meant to relieve pressure on
                         coral reef fisheries, which are currently
                         overfished. These alternative income generating
                         activities include mariculture, pro-poor tourism,
                         handicrafts development and possibly blue
                         carbon verification, monitoring and reporting
                         for carbon offsets from mangrove forests and
                         sea-grass beds in the voluntary carbon markets.

                         Thus, some potential environmental impacts
                         might be generated from the setting up of
                         hatcheries, refurbishing dwellings for for home
                         stays and other tourism activities, solid waste
                         management, waste water treatment, energy
                         management, chemicals handling and hazardous
                         waste management, etc. Although these will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                         site-specific and classified as either Category B
                         or C from the environmental view-point, the
                         environmental instrument to mitigate the
                         impacts shall be prepared.

                         Component 2 of the project will also involve
                         some physical investments under the village
                         grant program such as the construction of public
                         toilets, water wells, simple drainage, road,
                         bridges and water supply system etc. However,
                         the project will not finance any construction or
                         major physical activities that would result in the
                         conversion or degradation of coral-reef
                         ecosystem.

                         Negative list screening will continue to be
                         required for any activities under the Village
                         Grants or micro-projects sub-component to
                         ensure that ineligible activities (including
                                                             unsustainable fishing gear and practices) are not
                                                             funded in the scaling up of this component.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             An assessment of the experience of COREMAP
                                                             II on the application of the Environmental and
                                                             Social Impact Management Framework
                                                             (ESIMF) result in the fact that it was not as
                                                             useful a tool in guiding compliance with the
                                                             Bank Environmental and Social Safeguards as
                                                             intended, therefore a more operational
                                                             instrument will be developed under COREMAP
                                                             III. This will be a simple Environmental Code
                                                             of Practice (ECOP) to cover both the
                                                             Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and
                                                             Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) safeguards, to
                                                             cover the potential environmental impacts
                                                             mentioned above.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   Project activities will take place in some
                                                             protected areas of the coastal/marine
                                                             environment such as community monitoring and
                                                             surveillance program, study tour, research and
                                                             eco-tourism activities. Although the project will
                                                             not finance any construction or major physical
                                                             works in these areas, or activities that lead to the
                                                             conversion or degradation of the reefs and the
                                                             project is eventually aimed to protect the coral-
                                                             reefs ecosystem and to enhance the sustainable
                                                             management, a precautionary principle will still
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             need to be applied and included in the ECOPs or
                                                             SOPs for any activities carried out in this area.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No    The project will not finance activities that would
                                                             involve significant conversion or degradation of
                                                             critical forest areas or related critical natural
                                                             habitats as defined under the policy. No net loss
                                                             of mangroves would occur as a result of project
                                                             activities, to the contrary, the project would
                                                             support management interventions to protect the
                                                             ecological integrity of these systems and allow
                                                             communities to benefit from the ecosystem
                                                             services they provide. Among the alternative
                                                             livelihood activities to be explored under
                                                             COREMAP II would be the possibility of
                                                             developing carbon offsets for carbon stored in
                                                             mangroves wetlands and sea-grass beds (e.g,
                                                             Blue Carbon). If successful in generating
                                                             revenue streams from the sale of Carbon
                                                             Emissions Reduction Credits, Blue Carbon
                                                                 market would create added incentives for
                                                                 communities to invest in protecting these
                                                                 valuable coastal wetlands.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The project will not procure any pesticides, nor
                                                                 will any use of pesticides result from the project.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    Project activities affecting archeological,
                         BP 4.11                                 paleontological, historical, religious, or unique
                                                                 natural values as defined under the policy will
                                                                 not be eligible for support. Standard
                                                                 appropriate clauses will be included in all
                                                                 construction contracts regarding the procedures
                                                                 to be followed in the event of ’chance finds’ of
                                                                 culturally significant artifacts.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   The project is a continuation of the COREMAP
                                                                 II and could have an IP presence in some of the
                                                                 selected villages for project activity. The
                                                                 project will specifically target the indigenous
                                                                 peoples group Bajo in two districts in Southeast
                                                                 Sulawesi (Buton and Wakatobi), where they are
                                                                 the minority, to ensure that they are involved
                                                                 and benefit from the project. Other areas will
                                                                 also have indigenous peoples, including in
                                                                 Papua.

                                                                 Lesson learned from the COREMAP II, in
                                                                 particular in Kabupaten Buton and Wakatobi
                                                                 where the Bajo communities are present,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 demonstrate that no adverse impacts are
                                                                 identified with the implementation of the
                                                                 project. The key issue is that the project will
                                                                 need to ensure the involvement of the
                                                                 indigenous groups, particularly in areas where
                                                                 the IP groups are a minority. The project will
                                                                 ensure that information reaches these IP groups
                                                                 and they get an equal opportunity to benefit
                                                                 from activities initiated by the project.

                                                                 Therefore, a social assessment will be
                                                                 undertaken during project preparation, and will
                                                                 inform the preparation of a simple IPPF,
                                                                 commensurate with the expected project
                                                                 impacts, to ensure that his OP provisions are
                                                                 taken into consideration when preparing sub-
                                                                 projects in areas with indigenous people.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   The project does not anticipate acquiring any
                         4.12                                    land or resettling any people. Any piece of land
                                                               that is acquired will be done through voluntary
                                                               donations. The project will keep a record of all
                                                               such transactions and also ensure that any lands
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                               donated by the local authorities are free from
                                                               squatters.

                                                               Experience of COREMAP II, there were small-
                                                               scale physical activities which requiring land,
                                                               such as for the construction of the Village
                                                               Information Centers. The lands for these
                                                               facilities were donated by land owners in the
                                                               community who are also project beneficiaries. It
                                                               is very likely that in COREMAP III, land
                                                               donation will also take place.

                                                               Any form of involuntary resettlement will not
                                                               be eligible for IBRD-financing under
                                                               COREMAP III. In case acquisition of land is
                                                               required (e.g. for a new construction of a
                                                               meeting place or health centre, etc) a written
                                                               evidence will need to be provided by an elected
                                                               village forum that the land has been voluntarily
                                                               contributed by the community as a whole and
                                                               that no individual will be negatively affected by
                                                               such land acquisition. No sub-projects requiring
                                                               land acquisition (with compensation) or
                                                               involuntary resettlement will be financed under
                                                               the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                               Component 1 will support the establishment of
                                                               village level no-take zones which will provide
                                                               access restriction to villagers from fishing from
                                                               those areas. This proposed access restriction
                                                               caused by the establishment of no-take zones
                                                               triggers the policy. The borrower will prepare a
                                                               Process Framework to address any impacts as a
                                                               result of this access restriction.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37       No    The project will not finance construction or
                                                               rehabilitation of any dams, nor will it rely on the
                                                               performance of an existing dam or a dam under
                                                               construction.
                         Projects on International       No    There are no known project components
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                  involving international waterways as defined
                                                               under the policy. None of the project sites will
                                                               be in the international water boundaries.
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No   The project is not located in any known
                         7.60                                  disputed areas as defined under the policy.
                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Nov-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The project will prepare the following safeguards documents (please also indicate when these
                                      plans will be available)

                                      1.             Environmental Code of Practice (ECOP) for typical village grant program.

                                      During the Project Preparation Mission, the task team will review and the update the negative lists
                                      and environmental codes of practice (ECOPs) needed for the project.

                                      The negative list of activities which will not be supported under the component e.g., collection of
                                      juvenile fish in the wild for grow-out/aquaculture, construction of hatcheries in sensitive habitats),
                                      use of destructive fishing gear, purchase of certain equipment (e.g., boat engines for fishing in
                                      near shore waters), and the sitting of activities incompatible with the stated management
                                      objectives of a given area (e.g., fishing or fish farming in No-Take Zones), which could degrade
                                      the environment, introduce disease or deplete natural populations).

                                      The borrower will also prepare Environmental Codes of Practice (ECOPs) based on the experience
                                      of previous COREMAP projects to mitigate any potential impacts from the small-scale
                                      investments financed under the grant. These include, for example, activities supported with
                                      Village Grants, Micro-credit/Seed Funds for alternative income generation, small civil works
                                      associated with the establishment of the Village Information Center, etc. The same ECOP
                                      instrument would also be used to qualify activities that could be carried out in Natural Habitats
                                      like coral reefs and mangroves with project support, to ensure compliance with the Natural
                                      Habitats Safeguard (OP/BP 4.04).
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      The updated negative list and the ECOPs would be placed in the General Guidelines of
                                      Community Based Management and the technical manual for access to grant or other concessional
                                      funds under the Project in support of Alternative Livelihoods.

                                      2. Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework.

                                      A social assessment will be undertaken during project preparation, and will inform the preparation
                                      of a simple IPPF, commensurate with the expected project impacts, to ensure that his OP
                                      provisions are taken into consideration when preparing sub-projects in areas with indigenous
                                      people.

                                      The IPPF will include simple procedures to ensure that indigenous peoples benefit in culturally
                                      appropriate ways through a free prior and informed consultation process leading to broad
                                      community support for sub-projects. As in COREMAP II, any community-based management
                                      activities would be carried out with the full consent of the communities and enshrined in a Village
                                      decree (Perdes).

                                      The IPPF will be disclosed in local language prior to project appraisal. In areas where indigenous
                                      peoples are the majority beneficiaries of a sub-project the sub-project document itself will include



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             the elements of an IPP. In cases where indigenous peoples are the minority, a simple IPP would
                             be prepared to ensure that they benefit from, and are not adversely affected by, a respective sub-
                             project. The IPPF provisions will also be incorporated into the Operations Manual. Sub-project
Public Disclosure Copy




                             IPPs will be locally disclosed also in the local language of the indigenous peoples groups.

                             3. Process Framework

                             While there will be no physical resettlement under the Project, the possibility of economic
                             displacement may occur to the extent that fishers will be giving up some of their fishing grounds
                             with the voluntary establishment of Village No-Take Zones designed to allow fish stocks to
                             recover, conserve sensitive coral reef habitats and generate benefits to both fisheries and tourism
                             activities. Process Framework for any Economic Displacement will be prepared and linked to
                             Alternative Livelihoods under Component 2 of the Project.

                             4. Timeline
                             All three safeguard documentations (ECOP, IPPF and Process Framework) will be prepared and
                             submitted to the Bank at the end of the appraisal stage in December 2012.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:       Name: Marea Eleni Hatziolos

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan (RSA) Date: 11-Sep-2012
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Franz R. Drees-Gross (SM)             Date: 31-Aug-2012
Public Disclosure Copy
