                                                                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                            APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA348
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Dec-2011

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                       Mozambique                               Project ID:                      P123201
                              Project Name:                  Cities and Climate Change (P123201)
                              Task Team Leader:              Paula Dias Pini
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 19-Dec-2011                                   Estimated Board Date:            15-Mar-2012
                              Managing Unit:                 AFTUW                                    Lending Instrument:              Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                        Sub-national government administration (50%), General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (50%)
                              Theme:                         Climate change (40%), Other urban development (10%), Municipal finance (25%), Municipal governance and
                                                             institution building (25%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                       Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                         0.00
                                   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                              120.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                    120.00
                              Environmental Category:        B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              The PDO is to strengthen municipal capacity for sustainable urban infrastructure provision and environmental management which enhance
                              resiliency to climate related risks.

                              3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                              The proposed project will respond to two distinct but related requests from the GOM: to finance investments which reduce the immediate (and
                              continuing) vulnerability of strategic coastal cities to climate related environmental threats; and to resume Bank support for the development of the
                              national municipal system which has been interrupted since the closing of MDP in 2007. The unifying theme of the project is to assist Mozambique
                              in developing appropriate institutions and financing selected infrastructure improvements and capacity building to strengthen the resilience of
                              selected cities to climate related impacts. Infrastructure investments will consist of the rehabilitation of storm drainage systems and existing
                              coastal protection measures. Institutional investments will include capacity building in: improved urban planning and land use management;
                              increased own-source revenue capacity; effective and transparent municipal financial management; and sustainable service delivery for operation
                              and maintenance of urban drainage and sanitation systems. Component 1 will provide general policy and institutional development assistance to
                              the municipal sector, while Component 2 will finance investments to sustainably improve urban infrastructure in stormwater drainage,
                              environmental management, and operation and maintenance.

                              At the national level, Component 1 will provide technical assistance and capacity building support to continue development of the national policy
                              and regulatory framework for municipal governance, which will strengthen the capacity of National Directorate for Local Government Development
                              (DNDA) within the Ministry of State Administration, and relevant units within the Ministry of Finance. It will also strengthen capacity of the National
                              Municipal Association to provide services to its member municipalities, and establish a Project Implementation Unit within DNDA. At the local level,
                              Component 1 will fund training and technical assistance which strengthen municipal capacities for planning, management, service delivery, and
                              good governance in 20 municipalities. This assistance will enhance the capacity of municipalities to implement the systems and methodologies
                              defined by national policies, especially those related to environmental and fiscal sustainability, supported by the Project's policy-reform efforts. No
                              infrastructure works are expected to be financed from the PIU-managed capacity building budget. Component 1, however, will finance a small
                              Municipal Performance Grant (MPG) program that will be administered by the PIU. The total amount of annual MPG for the majority of the
                              municipalities will on average be approximately US$150,000 per municipality; only 5 municipalities are expected to get more than that.Therefore
                              most of the investments funded by MPGs will be small and simple, consisting mainly of rehabilitation of existing infrastructure.

                              The objective of Component 2 is to enhance municipal capacities in selected cities for sustainable resilience to weather-related environmental
                              threats. Beneficiary cities are selected on the basis of their strategic economic importance and their vulnerability to climate related environmental
                              risks: the first and most important cities satisfying these criteria are the regional port cities of Beira and Nacala. The component will finance
                              specified storm drainage infrastructure improvements to meet existing and climate adaptation deficits and provide the basis for future investments
                              to reduce the threats resulting from climate change. In Beira and Nacala, these will build on the data, feasibility studies, and engineering designs
                              already available or under preparation by the European Union in Beira, and by the Millenium Challenge Corporation in Nacala.

                              Component 2 will also strengthen the resilience of the Maputo Metropolitan Area to control floods by financing the development of a Master
                              Drainage and Sanitation Plan for the Greater Maputo area. It is not expected that the project will finance any major rehabilitation or improvements

                                                                                                                                                                         Page 1 of 5
                         in the existing storm drainage system in the Greater Maputo area, but it may help finance a few urgent or priority repairs or rehabilitation works as
                         identified by the Master Plan.

                         Complementary capacity-building activities will support the sustainable operation and maintenance by municipalities of urban infrastructure and
                         services, especially those contributing to enhanced adaptation to climate related environmental risks. Appropriate institutional arrangements for
                         O&M and systems for both service-related cost recovery and general municipal revenue mobilization will be strengthened. Municipal plans and
                         investment strategies will also enhance the cities economic and revenue bases by promoting the strategic roles of targeted cities in regional
Public Disclosure Copy




                         development.

                         Support to Beira municipality will address the adaptation deficit in infrastructure investments to reduce flooding by: improving the drainage system
                         (detailed engineering designs for upgrading the existing open-air drainage network as well as subsequent works such as rehabilitating, lining, and
                         widening); and further strengthening the municipal sanitation agency, including its financial base, to ensure sustainable operation and maintenance
                         for sanitation, drainage, and coastal management.

                         Support to Nacala municipality will address the adaptation deficit in infrastructure investments to tackle erosion by: developing a drainage master
                         plan; executing priority structural drainage works, and strengthening municipal capacity to maintain the drainage system and other critical
                         infrastructure and environmental management services. The works in Nacala involve stabilizing slopes and stopping erosion along three of the
                         primary storm drainage channels that are currently no more than severely eroding gullies.

                         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         With the exception of the small Municipal Performance Grants program, the activities in Component 1 involve capacity building at the national level
                         and at the local level in 20 municipalities in south and center regions in Mozambique that are not included in complementary, existing bilateral
                         funding. The Municipal Performance Grants are small and will be limited in scope to rehabilitation and repair of existing urban infrastructure and
                         purchase of capital goods for municipal use

                         Component 2 is the primary project activity with Safeguards-related concerns. Component 2 will finance civil works in the urban areas of Beira and
                         Nacala and the Greater Maputo area (including Matola) once a Master Plan for drainage is prepared.

                         In Beira, the works include cleaning and rehabilitation of an existing primary drainage channel, and improving the secondary drainage system,
                         currently consisting of natural channels, in a peri-urban area at the head of the existing primary channel. The key environmental issues in Beira
                         will be temporary construction-related activity during cleaning and rehabilitation, and proper disposal of sludge from the existing storm drainage
                         channel so as to avoid groundwater contamination. Key social issues in Beira will be the potential need to relocate or rebuild structures such as
                         fences or latrines that need to be removed to improve drainage in the peri-urban area.

                         Similar issues may arise for works in the Greater Maputo area. The Master Plan is expected to take into consideration key environmental and
                         social risks and impacts as part of the feasibility and planning process, and to identifying priority interventions in the Greater Maputo area.

                         The ESMF and RPF for Beira is designed to cover any and all Component 2 investments in the Maputo metropolitan region including Matola.

                         In Nacala, the project is to build and install gabions, using manual labor, so as to stabilize the eroding walls of three of the primary drainage
                         channels which currently are no more than natural, highly eroding gullies. Environmental and social impacts in Nacala are expected to be very
Public Disclosure Copy




                         minor in nature. The Beira RPF is applicable to all Nacala investments and the ESMF for Component 1 investments will be used for the
                         Component 2 investments in Nacala.

                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                         Harvey D. Van Veldhuizen (OPCQC)
                         Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS)

                         6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                    Yes        No     Explanation
                         Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                 ✖                The ESMF and RPF prepared for Beira will cover any and all Component 2
                                                                                              investments in the Maputo metropolitan region including Matola. The RPF is
                                                                                              applicable to all Component 2 investments in Beira, Nacala-Porto and the
                                                                                              Greater Maputo Region including Matola.The ESMF for Component 1
                                                                                              investments will also be used for the Component 2 investments in Nacala.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                   ✖
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                                            ✖
                         Pest Management OP 4.09                                       ✖
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                        ✖
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                 ✖
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                 ✖
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                     ✖
                         Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                     ✖
                         7.50
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                         ✖




                                                                                                                                                                    Page 2 of 5
                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                 The overall environmental and social impact is expected to be positive, especially in peri-urban areas where flooding during heavy rains is a
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 serious health and safety issue. Negative impacts, however, may arise during cleaning and rehabilitation of existing drainage channels, or
                                 improvements of natural drainage channels through targeted peri-urban areas.

                                 In Beira the proposed drainage works will be along existing canals or natural drainage channels that eventually drain directly to the sea. The
                                 coastal work in Beira will address control of beach erosion through dune re-vegetation and the rehabilitation and improvements of existing
                                 shoreline protection groynes. In Nacala, the physical works will include the implementation of key components of a drainage master plan by
                                 installing erosion control structures (gabions) on three of the steep-sloped primary drainage channels in the city that drain directly to the sea.
                                 Most of these works can be managed through good engineering practice for design and construction, and disposal of sludge and solid wastes
                                 removed during cleaning operations, especially in Beira. The most sensitive environmental issue will be the disposal of polluted sludge dredged
                                 from the existing drainage channels in Beira.

                                 The most sensitive social issue will be compensation for impacts on fences, latrines, fruit trees, and similar structures or assets that may need
                                 to be temporarily removed or relocated in order to improve drainage in peri-urban areas. In Beira, preliminary census work identified up to 80
                                 structures that might be impacted, depending on the final width of the drainage right-of-way in the peri-urban area and whether a retention basin
                                 will be built. The majority of these structures are fences and latrines around household lots. Preparation of a draft RPF notes that between 50 -
                                 80 residences in the Beira periurban area may have impacted structures. Efforts will be made to minimize the number of potentially impacted
                                 structures and households during final engineering designand before production of a RAP.

                                 In Nacala, approximately 10 households are located near the three gullies that need stabilization against erosion, but preliminary design
                                 indicates no resettlement or compensation is expected because all investments will be stabilization of existing gully walls on steep slopes with
                                 sandy soils, to prevent further erosion. Therefore, the works will occur within the existing gullies and are expected to be done with primarily
                                 manual labor. In the unlikely event that compensation for disturbance of a structure near a gully is required; the RPF is designed to cover all
                                 Component 2 investments in Nacala as well. Component 1 activities are not covered by the RPF because investments that trigger OP 4.12 on
                                 Involuntary Resettlement under this Component are not eligible for the grant financing.


                                 Feasibility and preliminary design engineering studies are being financed by the European Union in Beira and by Millennium Challenge
                                 Corporation in Nacala. Until the final engineering designs for the rehabilitation and improvements are completed during the Bank project, the
                                 site-specific environmental and social impacts are uncertain. Therefore, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a
                                 Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) have been prepared for the civil works at Beira, and these will be the basis for producing an
                                 Environmental Impact Assessment and an Environmental Management Plan, once engineering designs are completed, as well as a
                                 Resettlement Action Plan.

                                 These Safeguards documents would need to be reviewed, approved, and disclosed by the Bank before those works could proceed. The ESMF
                                 and RPF for Beira will also be used for any works financed by the project in the Greater Maputo area once the Master Plan is completed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 These Safeguards documents also would need to be reviewed, approved, and disclosed by the Bank before those works could proceed.

                                 No physical cultural resources have been identified to be at risk by the pre-feasibility studies in Beira and Nacala. The Master Plan in Greater
                                 Maputo will consider this issue and identify known cultural resources near the existing drainage system as well as follow the chance finds
                                 procedures in the ESMF for component 2 investments but it is unlikely that any significant cultural resources would be located within existing
                                 drainage systems in Greater Maputo. It is possible that physical cultural resources such as worship sites are located adjacent to the drainage
                                 system, especially in peri-urban areas. The project is unlikely to adversely affect such nearby sites; rather, the installation of improved drainage
                                 reduces risk of adverse impacts on them caused by flooding during heavy rains. In determining which components of the Greater Maputo
                                 Master Plan can be funded by the current project, once the Master Plan is prepared and adopted, criteria for selection of priority works can
                                 include deferment of any components that might have potentially significant adverse impacts on sensitive resources.


                                 Any proposed Municipal Performance Grant under Component 1 will not be eligible for Bank financing if it involves displacement of peoples,
                                 loss of access to assets, adverse impacts on significant cultural resources, or civil works within a river that is classified as trans-boundary or a
                                 tributary to such a river.

                                 The Municipal Performance Grants are expected to be small-scale in nature, involve repair or rehabilitation of existing city infrastructure (offices,
                                 sidewalks, streets, etc.) because of their small size, and most of them may be considered Category C sub-projects.

                                 The most appropriate Safeguards instrument, if any, for these works would be Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) for construction,
                                 which will be part of a Grants Manual prepared by the PIU.

                                 Therefore, a second ESMF has been prepared for Component 1 activities that describes the institutional arrangements, training, and capacity
                                 building that will be provided by the PIU, a description of environmental issues of concern during small-scale construction activities and
                                 appropriate mitigation measures, and checklists and reporting forms for each Municipality to use in developing its respective EMP.

                                 As noted above, the civil works anticipated in Nacala are also expected to have minimal adverse environmental and social impacts related to
                                 construction. Therefore, the ESMF for Component 1 activities, some of which may require EMPs, is also the guiding document for preparing an
                                 EMP for construction of the Nacala investments, once final engineering designs are completed. Note, the RPF covers all Component 2
                                 investments, including those in Nacala.
                               2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:


                                                                                                                                                                           Page 3 of 5
                           N/A
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                           Pre-feasibility studies have been financed by the European Union for Beira, and by the Millennium Challenge Corporation for Nacala.
                           Alternatives have been assessed as part of these pre-feasibility studies and continue to be considered in preparing final engineering designs. A
                           key objective of the alternatives analysis has included, among other criteria, a desire to minimize the need for and cost of relocation or
                           compensation for structures or assets.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                            and implement the measures described.
                           The Borrower has implemented several Bank financed projects as well as projects funded by other donors which follow the Bank's safeguard
                           policies, and has demonstrated an adequate capacity to apply the safeguard policies through their projects. The municipalities that would be
                           financed through this project will need additional capacity on safeguards. AIAS, which will be the implementing agency, will benefit from the
                           assistance of environmental and social specialists from FIPAG, a sister agency that has extensive capacity and experience with Safeguards
                           procedures and requirements as an implementing agency for WB financed projects in the water supply and delivery sector, as well as MCC-
                           financed projects, which follow WB Safeguard Policies as well.

                           The MPGs will be administered by the PIU, and one of the conditions for eligibility of the municipalities to access the Grants will be signature of
                           a Grants agreement and formal municipal acceptance of the rules and procedures outlined in the Grants Manual. The Grants Manual will
                           include the pertinent Safeguards requirements and procedures from the ESMF for Component 1. Each municipality will be required to formally
                           designate an Environmental and Social Impact Officer (ESIO) and at least two supporting technicians (ESITs). The PIU will provide training and
                           technical support as well as oversight on compliance with the Grants Manual through routine monitoring and supervision visits
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                            on potentially affected people.
                           Mozambique has a well established culture of consultation as set forth in the Directive for the General Case on Public Participation in the EIA
                           Process (Ministerial Directive no. 130/ 2006 of July 19) and the Regulation on the Process of Environmental Impact Assessment (Decree
                           45/2004). Mozambique requires that public consultation includes all interested and affected parties. During consultation people are provided
                           with project information and provided an opportunity to comment, ask questions, and express concerns. The Directive established a general
                           methodology that should govern the public participation process to ensure effective consultation. The five steps for participation include: 1)
                           identification of stakeholders and affected persons, 2) dissemination of information, 3) dialogue with stakeholders and affected persons, 4)
                           incorporate comments raised during consultations, and 5) provide feedback.

                           The EIA Regulation also requires that public consultations are advertized 15 days prior to the meeting. It is recommended that the
                           announcement, especially radio announcements, include information on where people can access documents that have been prepared and will
                           be discussed during consultation meetings.

                           Extensive consultations with stakeholders and directly affected people have already occurred as part of the pre-feasibility and feasibility studies
                           financed by the European Union and the MCC. Although these consultations included a broader range of investments in the water, sanitation,
                           and drainage sector, they included consultations on alternative drainage schemes. These consultations were held to present project objectives,
                           explain main project activities, and describe potential impacts identified based on biological and socio-economic environment. The presenters
                           then noted main issues raised by stakeholders so that their concerns could be addressed in final documents.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           In Nacala two focus groups of special interest were identified - women and community leaders. Focus group meetings were held in Nahua,
                           Nachicuva, and Muconia neighborhoods. Open public meetings were also held in these same neighborhoods. Two different series of
                           consultations were held involving the focus groups and public meetings: presentation of the Pre-Feasibility Study and Scoping Phase; and
                           presentation of the Preliminary Report of the Environmental Impact Study. These meetings presented the main findings arising from visits to the
                           project area, potential impacts identified, and study findings.

                           These consultations continue during preparation of the ESMF and RPF, and subsequent EMPs and RAPS.

                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                            Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                               09-Nov-2011
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                           08-Dec-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                            08-Dec-2011
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                           Directors
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                            Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                               09-Nov-2011
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                           08-Dec-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                            08-Dec-2011
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                         disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                                                                                                                                                                   Page 4 of 5
                            C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                              Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?              Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]

                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Public Disclosure Copy




                              If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the      Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?              Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language      Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for   Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?              Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard    Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same        Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Signed and submitted by:                                                Name                                                 Date
                            Task Team Leader:                    Rildo Santos                                                             27-Dec-2011
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:     Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                              27-Dec-2011
                            Comments:
                            Sector Manager:                      Alexander E. Bakalian (SM)                                               27-Dec-2011
                            Comments:     This is cleared from the SMU. Thanks.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                                                 Page 5 of 5
