                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC3071

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Mar-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 22-Mar-2013, 25-Mar-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          India                           Project ID:      P128421
                            Project Name:     INTEGRATED FLOOD AND EROSION MANAGEMENT IN NORTHEAST
                                              REGION (P128421)
                            Task Team         Abedalrazq F. Khalil
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       04-Feb-2014                       Estimated        27-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: SASDI                              Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                              Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%), Public administration-
                                              Agriculture, fishing and forestry (10%), Public admin istration- Water,
                                              sanitation and flood protection (10%), Flood protection (30%), General water,
                                              sanitation and flood protection sect or (30%)
                            Theme(s):         Water resource management (30%), Climate change (25%), Environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                                              policies and institutions (10%), Natural disaster management (2 5%),
                                              Biodiversity (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    150.00                   Total Bank Financing:        150.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                              Financing Gap:                  0.00
                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                150.00
                              Total                                                                      150.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed development objective is to improve soil and watershed management practices and
                         flood management systems in selected states of the Brahmaputra River Basin (i.e., Nagaland, Assam,
                         and Meghalaya). This will contribute to improved long-term resilience of selected communities to
                         flood and erosion risks.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Project Description
                         Future development and growth of the region depends on how water resources are managed in the
                         region in general and in the Brahmaputra River basin in particular. Management of water resources
                         in the Brahmaputra River will require a multi-sector approach to benefit from the risks and
                         opportunities it brings along. Currently, the existing institutional arrangements, technical knowledge
                         and capacity for integrated water resources management are inadequate. The project will aim to
                         address these gaps and will build knowledge, bring global experience and best practices as well as
                         significant financing to strengthen the institutional structure and capacity at selected states within the
                         catchment of Brahmaputra River basin (i.e., Nagaland, Assam, and Meghalaya).

                         The proposed project will help to lay the foundation for developing a pragmatic water resources
                         management approach and ensuring economic growth benefits to local communities and long-term
                         sustainability of investments. Specifically the project will build on the following pillars:

                         i.      Improvements of Institutional and Technical Capacity. Investment in institutional
                         strengthening at both regional and state level to improve management of flood and erosion through
                         using advanced modeling platforms and cutting edge applied research.

                         ii.       Watershed management. Rehabilitation of the watershed and erosion control measures in the
                         hill states is critical to the sustainable management of the Brahmaputra River. This project will aim
                         to promote participatory management of watersheds and provide alternatives to unsustainable
                         agricultural practices through integrated basin management and livelihood promotion activities.

                         iii.     Hydromet Modernization and Development of DSS for Early Warning. This effort will aim
                         to deliver a decision support system (DSS) and early warning tools for integrated river basin
Public Disclosure Copy




                         management that cuts across different disciplines. The project will put emphasis on building data
                         collection systems and protocols important to manage water and land systems.

                         iv.      Vulnerability Reduction. Community led initiatives to strengthen preparedness and improve
                         resilience. Erosion control measures, early warning systems and measures to build flood resilience at
                         community level would play integral parts in the strategy to reduce vulnerability to flood and erosion.

                         A wider consultation with environmental groups, NGOs, community associations, and academia is
                         essential to fine tune the project outline and elicit a project design that responds effectively to the
                         needs of the communities. Based on the pillars discussed above the project is likely to consist of the
                         following areas of engagement:


                         Component 1: Integrated Watershed Management.

                         The objective of this component is to rehabilitate degraded watershed and improve production and
                         water use efficiency.

                         Activities under this component will be executed at the state level and would focus on promoting
                         livelihood and community engagement. The final design of the component would be driven by state
                         specific issues, from among the hill states; as well as the guidance provided under the centrally
                         funded Integrated Watershed Management Program. Activities under this component will include:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1.      Strategic Catchment Planning: The aim is develop a state-wide watershed management
                         strategy to provide a common foundation for both state government and communities to plan and
                         work towards effective watershed management.
                         2.      Micro-Catchment Intervention: This will aim to support the livelihood activities towards the
                         development of sustainable farming practices to increase farmer incomes through watershed
                         improvement activities.

                         Component 2: Flood Management and Information Systems.

                         The objective of this component is to develop the knowledge base and the analytical tools for
                         proactive flood and embankment management. Some of the specific activities which would be
                         considered:

                         1.       Strengthening Flood Information Systems: Development of knowledge system and science
                         base to inform integrated planning of structural and nonstructural measure to manage flood.
                         2.       Embankment Management Systems: This would focus primarily on reducing the risk of
                         embankment breach and failure.
                         3.       Early Warning System: The aim of this is to build effective systems to provide successful
                         forewarning of impending flood incidence to exposed communities.
                         4.       Community Climate Resilience: The aim here is improve the preparedness of vulnerable
                         communities to prepare, respond, withstand, and recover from floods risks.

                         Project implementation responsibility would be with the respective state governments of the
                         participating states. The project will cover the establishment of project implementation units (PIUs)
                         or the incremental cost associated with use of existing government agencies at State and District
                         levels. Activities to be carried out by PIUs include: monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         establishment of baseline; development of procurement and financial management information
                         system (MIS); development of social and environmental safeguards frameworks.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project area consists of the floodplains of the Brahmaputra basin in Assam, and hill areas of the
                         Brahmaputra watershed in Meghalaya and Nagaland.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The implementation of the project will reside within the states. The details of the institutional
                         arrangement for project implementation are not finalized yet. Assessment of the implementing
                         agencies safeguard capacities will be carried out at the preparation stage. Given the overall limited
                         capacity of northeastern states, a close monitoring of triggered safeguard policies, laws during
                         project preparation and implementation and adequate staffing of the selected implementing agencies
                         with both social and environmental staff will be emphasized.
                         F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                         Satya N. Mishra (SASDS)
                         Pyush Dogra (SASDI)
                         Sharlene Jehanbux Chichgar (SASDI)
                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies             Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes          The project impacts are mostly positive due to
                           BP 4.01                                     improved sustainability of water and sediment
                                                                       management. Because the project consist of a
                                                                       series of subproject and the impacts cannot be
                                                                       determined until subproject details have been
                                                                       identified, an Environmental and Social
                                                                       Management Framework (ESMF) is prepared in
                                                                       accordance with World Bank policy
                                                                       requirement. This ESMF sets out principles,
                                                                       guidelines and procedures to assess
                                                                       environmental and social impacts. The ESMF
                                                                       will contain measures and plans to reduce,
                                                                       mitigate, and/or offset adverse impacts and
                                                                       enhance positive impacts, provisions for
                                                                       estimating and budgeting the costs for of such
                                                                       measures, and information on the agency or
                                                                       agencies responsible for addressing the project
                                                                       impacts.
                                                                       Activities to be undertaken include prevention
                                                                       of soil erosion, reducing run off, promoting
                                                                       proper water resource management,
                                                                       development of arable lands, and restoration of
                                                                       the watershed. If not implemented properly,
                                                                       such activities could have adverse impacts on
                                                                       the soil and hydrologic regime of the area, such
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       as changes in surface flow, impact on water
                                                                       quality, slope instability etc. Given the fact that
                                                                       many impacts of sub-projects are unknown
                                                                       ahead of time and will be revealed during the
                                                                       course of implementation, an environmental and
                                                                       social framework for evaluating sub-projects
                                                                       will contain measures and plans to reduce,
                                                                       mitigate, and/or offset adverse impacts and
                                                                       enhance positive impacts, provisions for
                                                                       estimating and budgeting the costs for of such
                                                                       measures, and information on the agency or
                                                                       agencies responsible for addressing the project
                                                                       impacts.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    Yes          The project will focus on improvement of
                                                                       critical/natural habitats in the watershed areas.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36             Yes          There is a significant portion of the Hill areas
                                                                       which is forested, and much of the proposed
                                                                       project area will involve communities that rely
                                                                       on forests.
                                                                 The watershed component proposed in the
                                                                 project promotes afforestation, enhances
                                                                 environmental contribution offorest areas, while
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 at the same time encouraging economic
                                                                 development. Logging operations are not part of
                                                                 Project activities. Most of the area where project
                                                                 is to be implemented is categorized as forest
                                                                 land.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           TBD   Watershed management in hill areas will
                                                                 support the livelihood activities towards the
                                                                 development of sustainable farming practices to
                                                                 increase farmer incomes through watershed
                                                                 improvement activities. The project will directly
                                                                 or indirectly promote more intensive and
                                                                 diversified agriculture, which will require a Pest
                                                                 Management Plan.
                                                                 Application of pesticides is envisaged under the
                                                                 project to promote production of high value
                                                                 crops and increase farm incomes. Care must be
                                                                 taken in order to ensure proper handling of
                                                                 pesticides and avoid harm to humans, livestock
                                                                 and the environment.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   During preparation and appraisal stage it will be
                         BP 4.11                                 decided whether any of the interventions has
                                                                 ramifications on physical cultural resources.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     TBD   The Project will be implemented in a region
                                                                 inhabited by population groups designated as
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 Scheduled Tribes (ST) by the Indian
                                                                 Constitution, which are considered the
                                                                 equivalent of IPs in Bank projects. As the actual
                                                                 project locations have not been finalized, their
                                                                 impact on any specific tribal group is not known
                                                                 as yet. A Social Assessment will be undertaken
                                                                 to confirm if OP 4.10 is to be triggered and a
                                                                 Tribal Action Plan prepared if and as required.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    TBD   The Project is not anticipated to cause
                         4.12                                    Involuntary resettlement impacts as structural
                                                                 risk reduction measures are not proposed to be
                                                                 undertaken. However, in case the social
                                                                 assessment indicates any such impacts,
                                                                 appropriate mitigation measures will be built
                                                                 intothe design.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

                         Projects on International         No
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 20-Dec-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The Project envisages a socially inclusive approach to flood risk reduction through community
                                      ownership and participation in watershed management and other preparedness initiatives. The
                                      Project is least likely to cause any involuntary resettlement impacts, however, this is not fully
                                      ruled out at this stage as the specific activities and their locations are not known. Similarly, the
                                      project may affect tribal groups living in the areas covered by its activities, however, the affected
                                      IPs have not been identified as the specific locations are yet to be identified. A Social Assessment
                                      will be undertaken as a part of Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) to study
                                      the social issues and risks associated with the project with analyzing the local context,
                                      stakeholders and their roles, gender and social heterogeneity, community participation, any
                                      adverse impacts including involuntary resettlement and IP issues. Accordingly, the SESA will
                                      include a Social Management Framework with necessary actions proposed in compliance Bank
                                      policies (OP 4.10 and 4.12--if required) and addressing gender and social inclusion measures.

                                      The Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA) work will be conducted at an overall level for
                                      the project as part of project preparation. Requirements for additional data collection and analysis
                                      will be assessed during initial phase of preparation. Where necessary the ESA and associated
                                      specific safeguard documents will be prepared in consultation with stakeholders and publicly
                                      disclosed prior to project appraisal.
                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Abedalrazq F. Khalil

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Zia Al Jalaly (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 25-Mar-2013
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Herbert Acquay (SM)                                                                                                  Date: 23-Mar-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
