                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC1277

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Sep-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           India                            Project ID:      P128921
                            Project Name:      Partial Risk Sharing Facility in Energy Efficiency (P128921)
                            Task Team          Ashish Khanna
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          15-Mar-2013                      Estimated        07-May-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASDE                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Focal Area:        Climate change

                            Sector:         Energy efficiency in Heat and Power (100%)
                            Theme:          Climate change (80%), Other Financial Sector Development (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           20.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                            19.80
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Total                                                                        39.80
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                             B. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                           To achieve energy savings by mobilizing private sector in energy efficiency industry of India.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed project under the India Low Carbon Partial Risk Sharing Facility (PRSF) will follow
                           on the current initiatives the government has pursued through its Partial Risk Guarantee Fund for
                           Energy Efficiency (PRGFEE), part of the NMEEE described above, albeit with some crucial
                           differences to improve performance. Other WBG projects have shown that project adoption is fastest
                           when there are sophisticated lenders and borrowers in the field who are already undertaking some
                           investments. This project will focus on lenders who have shown some initiative in lending to the
                           clean energy sector and build upon their experience in creating a risk-sharing facility.
                         The project will incorporate a risk-sharing facility fund as well as technical assistance for partner
                         commercial banks and other agencies to develop low carbon lending tools. The proposed components
Public Disclosure Copy




                         are as follows:

                         •        Component 1: Funded Partial Risk Sharing Facility ($66 million): This funding will work in
                         conjunction with commercial banks to increase the access to finance for ESCOs and/or industries that
                         can invest in projects to reduce energy consumption of large industries, SMEs and commercial
                         buildings. As with the government’s own PRGF, we expect that this pool will assume 50% of the
                         default of a bank’s portfolio in the sector, with a 10% first loss. These numbers are based on similar
                         operations in other countries and consultations with financial institutions. This first loss facility is
                         crucial to help banks assume risks they would not normally be able to price.

                         Distinct from the NMEEE’s PRGFEE, a competitively selected fund manager will manage the CTF-,
                         GEF- and IBRD-supported fund. The Bank’s other projects have shown that having the guarantee
                         fund holder individually approve each transaction discourages uptake of projects, due to the high
                         transaction costs such an apporach imposes on the ESCOs. Thus, this fund will sign agreements with
                         participating commercial banks to develop guidelines on which loans will be made, whose
                         cumulative exposure will be shared with the fund. This fund would extend the government’s own
                         efforts to involve private financing in low-carbon projects.

                         •        Component 2: Technical Assistance for Monitoring and Verification and Capacity Building
                         of Financial Institutions ($2 million): Another subcomponent of the project will provide technical
                         assistance (TA) and capacity building to the several stakeholders in the project (commercial banks,
                         project developers, etc.). This TA facility will be designed in consultation with the client BEE and
                         industry stakeholders. Bank staff will closely monitor this facility in order to realize the benefits of
                         the project. This subcomponent will also finance preparation of codes for the energy savings
                         performance contracting market, including associated monitoring and verification (M&V) protocols.
                         M&V of actual savings is often contested by the client and the implementing ESCO, leading to a loss
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of trust and poor contracting that does not delineate risks properly. In the absence of a system of
                         quick judicial remedies, resolution of disputes can take years, discouraging investments in projects
                         with inherent information asymmetry. The TA component will assist in preparation of improved
                         M&V procedures and creating awareness for ISO 50001 for the different client types (municipalities,
                         buildings and industries, etc.) to reduce contestability. The project will focus on capacity building of
                         FIs engaged in the clean energy sector.
                         This project will be scheduled to coordinate with the expansion and deepening of India’s PAT
                         Scheme, which will require seven industrial sectors to reduce energy consumption, using a market
                         mechanism to ensure compliance. Other WBG projects have shown that countries with a strong
                         government mandate to support energy efficiency are able to quickly adopt such measures, as
                         evidenced in the China Utility-based Energy Efficiency (ChUEE) project, whose success was due in
                         part to a strong push from the Chinese government for energy efficiency in the industrial sector. This
                         project will promote energy-efficient technologies and will focus on investments from larger
                         companies, after which smaller industries can take advantage of lower costs. Extensive consultations
                         with stakeholders like ESCOs, equipment manufacturers, lenders, etc. have shown that
                         implementation of performance contracting requires incentives to be aligned for all the players in the
                         value chain, which has been reflected in the project design.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the             safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                               E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                               F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                               Mridula Singh (SASDS)
                               Sita Ramakrishna Addepalli (SASDI)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                                 Safeguard Policies                                                Triggered?                    Explanation (Optional)
                                 Environmental Assessment OP/                                      Yes
                                 BP 4.01
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No
                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 29-Oct-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Environmental Safeguard Issues

                         The proposed PRSF will be intermediated through a fund manager [appointed by Bureau of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Energy Efficiency (BEE)] to several commercial Banks participating in the program. The
                         participating commercial banks lend directly to host institutions and/or to Energy Service
                         Companies (ESCOs). The risk sharing facility will be used for energy efficiency (EE) achievement
                         through technology upgradation in target sectors – large industries, SMEs and Commercial
                         buildings. In specific, the PRSF will cover large industries under recently-notified under Perform
                         Achieve Trade (PAT) Scheme of the BEE. Under the PAT, the government has provided energy
                         consumption and energy savings benchmarks and targets to 478 designated consumers, including
                         aluminium, cement, chlor alkali, fertilizer, iron and steel, pulp & paper, and textile industries.
                         Thus, the project will support brown field industries leading to EE benefits, as well environmental
                         co-benefits. However, the current status of target sectors vis-à-vis environmental performance
                         would be of importance from the regulatory and reputational risks point of view. In addition, the
                         environmental impacts of proposed technology upgradation in target sectors also cannot be ruled
                         out. Thus, the fund manager as well as the commercial Banks extending the risk sharing facility
                         under the project needs to integrate safeguards mechanism as part of appraisal of PRSF
                         transactions.

                         Considering the target sectors under the project, the environmental issues/risks could be wide
                         ranging, which are not be amenable for upfront identification for designing a particular
                         environmental management plan. Also, there could be practical limitations (in some sectors) in
                         retrofitting the environmental performance complying with the EHS guidelines of the World Bank
                         Group, especially in case of industrial sector investments as: (a) the project facility supports
                         marginal investments, in the context of overall size and turnover of industrial units and hence
                         limited leverage; (b) the industrial units expected to be covered under the project are brown-field
                         in nature and any environmental retrofits, in case if required, would be time consuming and may
                         face practical difficulties.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Given the foregoing, the prudent means to address the environmental safeguard issues would be to
                         use a risk based environmental approach, considering the country environmental standards and
                         formulation of an environmental management framework, which includes environmental appraisal
                         and risk management mechanisms. Following this approach, the project will administer the
                         institutional arrangements to identify the environmental risks and mitigation measures as part of
                         FI’s lending process. The process will follow the principles of IFC performance standards, duly
                         concurred by World Bank Board for application in case of FI projects.

                         Social Safeguard Issues

                         The project does not trigger OP 4.12 and OP 4.10. The proposed investment is to promote market
                         transformation for energy efficiency (EE). This implies that financial support will be provided to
                         financial intermediaries, Energy Service Companies (ESCOs). These are third party private
                         enterprises that implement technological, process-linked and managerial improvements to reduce
                         energy consumption in industrial and commercial units. Hence the project does not intend to apply
                         involuntary land acquisition nor will have any adverse impact on indigenous people.

                         The proposed project focuses on enhancing access to commercial credit to promote EE measures
                         and technical assistance to focus on institutional and transactional issues that prevent scale up of
                             the ESCO industry. Perhaps it is important to take into account perceived risks associated with
                             implementation of EE projects. Effective communication strategy will help systems to disseminate
                             information on the concept; rules of engagement; associated risks; etc to promote confidence
Public Disclosure Copy




                             building measures. Although incorporation of communication plans in similar projects has begun,
                             a pro-active approach may be considered early in the stage of project preparation.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:      Name: Ashish Khanna

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Sanjay Srivastava (RSA)                         Date: 13-Sep-2012
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Jyoti Shukla (SM)                               Date: 12-Oct-2012
Public Disclosure Copy
