                                                                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                             CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC441
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 20-Dec-2011

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        Africa                                   Project ID:                       P120370
                              Project Name:                   Southern Africa Trade and Transport Facilitation Project (P120370)
                              Task Team Leader:               Richard Martin Humphreys
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 29-May-2012                                    Estimated Board Date:             11-Oct-2012
                              Managing Unit:                  AFTTR                                    Lending Instrument:               Adaptable Program Loan
                              Sector:                         Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (50%), Public administration- Transportation (20%), General industry
                                                              and trade sector (20%) , Public administration- Health (10%)
                              Theme:                          Trade facilitation and market access (70%), Regional integration (25%), HIV/AIDS (5%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                         Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                           0.00
                                   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                               160.00
                                   IDA Grant                                                                                                                    5.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                     165.00
                              Environmental Category:         B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              B. Project Objectives

                              The proposed project development objective has been identified as the following: to contribute to economic growth in the eastern and southern
                              Africa through facilitation of the movement of goods and people and the fostering of regional integration among the countries served by the
                              corridor.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              C. Project Description

                              The proposed SATTF project is conceived as a multi-country, multi-sector, and multi-phase project intended to further facilitate trade integration in
                              the region by addressing institutional, legal, policy and infrastructure constraints. Hence the SATTF would support Bank and country goals for
                              improved management of public and private resources through promoting a more efficient operation of road and rail transport, enhancing border
                              crossing and sea-ports operations, supporting regional integration by increasing cooperation between the border crossing agencies, as well as
                              harmonizing procedures and enhancing transparency for all aspects of transit operations, including customs revenue collection.

                              Given the multiple countries potentially involved, the scope of the program and the temporary inability of some countries to participate, it is
                              proposed to prepare operations that would cover institutional and policy issues and address corridor-wide priorities but concentrate infrastructure
                              works in one country at a time. Eventually, projects would be prepared to cover all countries that wish to participate. The initial phase of the project
                              will be focused on Tanzania and the traditional Dar corridor, given the issues related to the transport of goods for DRC, Zambia and Malawi, to and
                              from Dar es Salaam port. The components of this first phase may include:

                              Component 1: The Physical Infrastructure. The first component comprises three sub-components involving civil works on the corridor:

                              (i) the rehabilitation of the 142km Mafinga? Igawa road section of the Tanzam highway. This section is located in Iringa and Mbeya regions; with a
                              122km section being in Iringa region while a 20km section lies in Mbeya region. The road in Iringa region was upgraded in 1972 to bitumen
                              standard using crushed rock base and asphalt concrete wearing course including improvement of vertical and horizontal alignment. The road has
                              since deteriorated drastically due to pavement ageing, with defects such as severe potholes, rutting deformation, corrugations, extensive cracking
                              (alligator cracks) and depressions. The road is classified as a Trunk Road reflecting its importance as an international corridor. The existing
                              carriageway width varies between 6 and 6.5 m, with shoulders varying from 0.75 to 1.5 m. The SATCC Draft Code of Practice for the Geometric
                              Design of Trunk Roads of September 1998, reprinted July 2001, recommends a minimum lane width of 3.4 m and 1.5 m wide shoulders for
                              intermediate levels of traffic. The proposed intervention is envisaged to require no expropriation, with all activities taking place entirely within the
                              existing right of way (ROW);

                              (ii) The design and establishment of a One-Stop Border Post (OSBP) on the border with Malawi at the Songwe/Kasamulu crossing. The Tanzanian
                              Revenue Authority (TRA), the body responsible for border post operation and development, were advised formally of the Bank’s interest in
                              financing this improvement, and they agreed to initiate discussions with their Malawian counterparts to draft a Memorandum of Understanding
                              confirming the willingness of both parties to work towards the agreed objective; and

                              (iii) The identification and alleviation of key accident blackspots, in the form of improved junction layouts etc., along the entire corridor between Dar
                         es Salaam and the western borders.

                         Component 2 – The Social Infrastructure. The second component also has two sub-components:

                         (i).       Road Safety Initiatives on the Corridor - the following interventions are envisioned by the project in Tanzania: the undertaking of a Road
                         Safety Audit to identify accident blackspots along the Tanzanian portion of the corridor and design specific interventions to address them, and
                         secondly, the identification of a pilot ‘safe corridor’ initiative for the corridor – which could potentially include branding and signage, harmonized
Public Disclosure Copy




                         driver licenses, together with improved education and enforcement along the corridor – in parallel with other stakeholder bodies; and

                         (ii) HIV/AIDS Initiatives on the Corridor - the objective of the HIV/AIDS sub-component is to promote activities conducive to the reduction of
                         infection and transmission risks of HIV/AIDS and other sexually transmitted diseases (STD) and infections among the high risk groups along the
                         NSC corridor, targeting truck drivers and affected local populations. This component is provisionally envisaged to include: the Establishment of
                         Voluntary Counseling and Testing (VCT) wellness centers at the rest stops and other high risk sites (populated residential settlements) along the
                         corridor, with a special focus on border-crossing points; and the Implementation of educational campaigns and training on HIV/AIDS prevention
                         practices and treatment services for truck drivers, commercial sex workers, border control officials, and residents, especially at border crossings,
                         through promoting counseling for voluntary testing, distributing condoms, etc. In addition, the standard health and safety clause will be included in
                         the bidding documents, and monitored, to ensure that the contractor takes all necessary steps to mitigate increased incidence of HIV/AIDS during
                         the civil works themselves.

                         Component 3 – The Facilitation of Trade. This component would potentially support the following activities: (i) the procurement of consultants to
                         define the scope and framework for the introduction of a regional customs bond; (ii) a detailed disaggregate assessment of the existing non-tariff
                         barriers on the Dar and Central corridors, to act as a baseline to the removal efforts; (iii) a review of the cross-border operating arrangements for
                         the DCC country railways, and the development of potential improvements; (iv) a diagnostic of the implementation of the tripartite agreements on
                         trade facilitation, together with current bilateral agreements, and actual practice; (v) other priority studies as agreed.

                         Component 4 - Implementation Assistance and Institutional Support. This component would provide necessary project management and
                         implementation assistance to the project implementation unit. Provisionally, the following sub-components were identified for potential inclusion in
                         the project: (i) the procurement of a qualified firm to supervise the civil works components; (ii) the procurement of additional consultants to build/
                         add capacity in certain defined areas to assist in the implementation of the project components; and (iii) the procurement of consultants to prepare
                         the detailed design, ESIA, and supervision of works for the OSBP at Songwe.

                         Component 5 – Support to the Establishment and Operating Costs of the DCC. The regional IDA grant would be used to fund the establishment
                         and initial operating costs for a defined and limited period for the DCC, until the agreed proposal for sustainable financing was implemented and
                         operational. The Bank team is keen to avoid the problem currently being faced by the CCTTFA where a funding decision has been taken and a
                         scheme approved, but actual implementation and the commencement of revenue collection and payment, had not been implemented by TPA at
                         the time of the misison. This component would also include the definition and establishment of a Corridor Performance Monitoring System, based
                         in the DCC, together with support for the hardware and software to introduce such a system.


                         IMPLEMENTING AGENCY ASSESSMENT

                         TANROADS, MoID, and the Tanzania Revenue Authority (TRA) will be the implementing entities, for the Tanzania activities with overall fiduciary
Public Disclosure Copy




                         responsibility                                     for project execution. All agencies have experience with previous corridor pro jects and can follow
                         Bank procedures. The responsibilities of TANROADS will incl ude (i) the management of the designated account; (ii) financial management and
                         reporting on the overall project; (iii) ensuring the execution of the audit of t he project; (iv) preparation of quarterly financial and bi-annual progress
                         repor ts (with inputs from MoID); and (v) oversight of the procurement and contract ma nagement activities of the other executing agencies. MoID
                         would focus on monitor ing and evaluation. TRA would execute the OSBP, cargo tracking and other facili tation interventions. The project will
                         potentially engage a Project coordinator that can help bridge the relationships with other sector agencies within the cou ntry, with other countries
                         involved in the program, and with the regional author ities.

                         PROJECT STAKEHOLDER ASSESSMENT

                         The complexity of the project arises partly from the fact that stakeholders come from a variety of groups. Project design will have to pay special
                         attention                                   to coordinating the myriad interests of the different public institutions, and private actors involved. This
                         includes a number of donors that have on-going ini tiatives in the areas covered by this project, including DFID, DANIDA, and USAID . Also many
                         private stakeholders, truckers, freight forwarders, clearing agents, private operators, etc. may have vested interests that need to be taken into ac
                         count and managed throughout the process. For the specific components of the pro jects, there will be a careful social assessment that identifies
                         any potential e ffects that can negatively affect project beneficiaries. Throughout implementation, the team will convene with different stakeholders
                         to understand their cl aims and discuss potential solutions that can maximize the results of the projec t investments.

                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         Tanzania (Dar es Salaam corridor)


                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

                         The implementing agencies, especially TANROADS, have sufficient capacity to manage the potential environmental and social impacts of the
                         proposed project. These                                agencies have managed large corridor and road transport projects that were financed by
                         IDA. Environmental and social assessments for the proposed investments will identify any additional capacity building needs that might be
                         required.

                         A generic Sector Environmental Assessment has been prepared and in use since 2006 (financed under the Central Transport Corridor Project)
                         and is still relevant. Based on this, MoID has prepared and published Road Sector Environmental Protection Regulations in February 2009 that are
                         now binding for all road sector works. The ESIA to be prepared for this project will take these regulations and guidelines into account. The main
                           environmental impacts from the project will arise from the road rehabilitation component and are not expected to be major, give n the scope of the
                           rehabilitation. There could be some interference with wildlife movements but these would not be new impacts since the TANZAM highway is a
                           relatively well trafficked road.

                           The social impacts are also expected to be modest since road rehabilitation will be done along existing alignments with limited widening in selected
                           locations and within the existing right of way which has not been encroached by settlers. The MoID has prepared Road Sector Compensation and
                           Resettlement Guidelines of February 2009 which were vetted by the Bank and found to be in line with the requirements of OP4.12. These
Public Disclosure Copy




                           guidelines were disclosed in-country in February 20 09 and were disclosed in the Bank's Infoshop on February 2, 2010. Should any re settlement
                           materialize, (e.g. for establishment of a contractor#s camp) these guidelines would apply. Potential HIV/AIDS infections may increase in the
                           project area given the influx of people during the road construction and greater activity at border crossings. As part of their contract, construction
                           companies will establish HIV/AIDS education and sensitization plan and implement it in collaboration with the district health officers. Education
                           campaigns will also be carried out for transporters, although one of the goals of the project is to reduce truck waiting times and hence reduce
                           opportunities for HIV/AIDS spread.

                           In order to help mitigate against the risk of increased road accidents due to increased vehicular traffic, measures will be incorporated in the design
                           of the roads, including (i) adequate road signing and signaling; (ii) speed bumps and rumble strips at key locations to help alert drivers and reduce
                           speeds in built-up areas; (iii) provision of shoulders in zones close to villages so as to provide adequate facilities for pedestrians; and (iv) building
                           of adequate bus stops and approach areas.

                            F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

                           Helen Z. Shahriari (AFTCS)
                           Jane A. N. Kibbassa (AFTEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

                            Safeguard Policies Triggered                       Yes        No        TBD                                  Explanation
                            Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                 ✖                           This policy may be triggered due to the planned rehabilitation of
                                                                                                            road sections, including the addition of passing lanes and shoulders
                                                                                                            in locations to be selected. To mitigate potential adverse
                                                                                                            environmental and social impacts assessments (ESIA) will be
                                                                                                            prepared for the Mafinga-Igawa road component.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                              ✖      This will be determined by the environmental studies
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                                             ✖
                            Pest Management OP 4.09                                        ✖
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                                   ✖      The ESIA reports will indicate whether physical cultural resources
                                                                                                            are likely to be affected by the project and appropriate guidance will
                                                                                                            be provided.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                  ✖
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                 ✖                           The ESIA report will indicate the degree of involuntary resettlement
                                                                                                            and appropriate guidance will be provided, and a Resettlement
                                                                                                            Policy Framework provided as necessary.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                      ✖
                            Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                      ✖
                            7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                          ✖
                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                           A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Mar-2012
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
Public Disclosure Copy




                              should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                The contract for the detailed design of the Mafinga-Igawa road, which is financed by IDA under the Transport Sector Support Project, (TSSP),
                                was signed on August 18, 2011 between TANROADS and the consultants, Kyong Dong Engineering Co. Ltd in association with Ambicon
                                Engineering. In addition to the detailed engineering design the consultant will prepare the preliminary environmental and social impact
                                assessments, economic evaluation and tender documents. Drafts will be available in mid-January 2012.

                                It is understood that should the project be classified as a Category A operation, a new consultant will be recruited to prepare the ESIA or,
                                should the project team keep the existing consultant, a Board waiver will be submitted to the Executive Directors. If the project remains a
                                Category B operation, an independent review will be undertaken of the ESIA.

                         IV. APPROVALS
                            Signed and submitted by:
                            Task Team Leader:                                Name: Richard Martin Humphreys                                                                        Date: 04-Jan-2012
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                 Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                     Date: 06-Jan-2012
                            Comments:
                            Sector Manager:                                  Name: Supee Teravaninthorn (SM)                                                                       Date: 04-Jan-2012
                            Comments:          The submission is approved as all comments from ASPEN were incorporated.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                             form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
