                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC763

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Jun-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Djibouti                        Project ID:      P131194
                            Project Name:      DJ Improving Health Sector Performance (P131194)
                            Task Team          Sami Ali
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          00-undefined-0000               Estimated        28-Mar-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     MNSHD                           Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector:            Health (100%)
                            Theme:             Health system performance (40%), Child health (25%), Population and
                                               reproductive health (25%), HIV/AIDS (5%), Other communicable dis eases
                                               (5%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              International Development Association (IDA)                                  7.00
                              Total                                                                        7.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective is to improve utilization of quality health care services for
                           maternal and child health and communicable disease control programs (HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis and
                           Malaria).
                           C. Project Description
                           Building on the reform efforts in the health sector and on the achievements of the current Health
                           Sector Development Project, the proposed Project would provide financial and technical assistance to
                           further improve the health sector performance.

                           The Project would have the following two components:
                         Component One: Improving health service delivery performance (US$3.5 million): this component
                         will support the delivery of sustainable improvements in: (i) child health services such as
Public Disclosure Copy




                         immunization, Integrated Management of Childhood Illnesses (IMCI), and treatment of malnutrition;
                         (ii) maternal child health services such as perinatal care, family planning, skilled-attended delivery,
                         and emergency obstetric care; and (iii) prevention and treatment services of HIV/AIDS and other
                         prevalent communicable diseases such as Voluntary Counseling and Testing (VCT), Directly
                         Observed Treatment Short-course (DOTS), and malaria cases. This component will finance
                         healthcare services by disbursing project proceeds to health providers based on specific quantifiable
                         outputs of the health facilities that are directly linked to the achievement of the health-related MDGs,
                         through a “Results-based Financing? (RBF) mechanism.

                         Component Two: Strengthening health systems, program management and monitoring and
                         evaluation capacity (US$3.5 million): this component will support activities aimed at strengthening
                         the MOH management capacity and improving the performance of the different health systems in
                         support of health services. These include different MOH Directorates such as the health regions,
                         health promotion, human resources, and information systems directorates. This component will also
                         support the Project Management Unit (PMU) in managing project activities and fiduciary functions,
                         including financial management, procurement, and environment. The component will also strengthen
                         the monitoring and evaluation of the program, including financing independent technical audits to
                         validate and verify the achievements of health facilities outputs on a quarterly basis, and independent
                         health surveys on a bi-annual basis, as well as health facility and client satisfaction surveys.
                         Specifically, this component would provide the necessary funds for limited medical equipment,
                         office equipment, office supplies, capacity building, and technical assistance, and will support
                         demand creation activities such as social mobilization and community outreach.

                         Lessons learned from previous IDA projects show that capacity building is a critical component of
                         every project. Therefore, this Project will include capacity building activities to ensure transfer of
                         knowledge - learning by doing.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Project would also take into account the activities of other partners supporting the health sector
                         in Djibouti. The project concept was discussed with members of the Health Partners Group that was
                         established under the auspices of the MOH. It includes multilateral and bilateral institutions such as
                         World Health Organization (WHO), United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), World Food
                         Program (WFP), Agence française de développement (AFD), and United States Agency for
                         International Development (USAID). There was general agreement that the objectives and
                         components of the Project are in line with the development needs of the sector and complement
                         ongoing and future donor support.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the              safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project will mainly finance incentives to health providers for specific quantifiable outputs of the
                         health facilities that are directly linked to the achievement of the health-related MDGs, through a
                         “Results-based Financing? (RBF) mechanism. It will also finance technical assistance and limited
                         medical equipment. It was confirmed that the project would not finance civil works or any activities
                         requiring the involuntary acquisition of land and/or the involuntary displacement of people leading
                         potentially to loss of resources and income. Therefore the project will not trigger OP 4.12.

                         Improving the performance of the health sector would increase the overall production of medical
                           waste, which is the main environmental impact of the project.
                           The project is given environmental category “B? (limited impact) according to the World Bank’s
                           Environmental Assessment Operational Policy (OP 4.01).
Public Disclosure Copy




                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Government is increasingly committed to tackling environmental issues. In the National
                           Development Initiative (INDS), environmental protection, climate change and biodiversity are
                           highlighted as priority areas of action. An institutional and regulatory environmental framework
                           exists, with some gaps and poor implementation due to both financial and human resource
                           constraints.

                           The proposed Project will focus on reinforcement of capacity in terms of human and material
                           resources. However, an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was prepared for the on-going
                           Health Sector Development Project and, if effectively implemented and resourced, would represent
                           an effective risk management strategy. In addition, under the previous project, a medical waste
                           management plan was prepared. The EMP and waste management plan will be reviewed and
                           updated, as needed, in light of the potential impacts of the current project. The Project has recruited
                           an environmental specialist to assess potential environmental impacts, evaluate the existing EMP and
                           waste management plan, and update them as required. The plans would be implemented under the
                           proposed project to address the issue of medical waste and how to appropriately manage and monitor
                           its disposal.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Nicolas Kotschoubey (MNSF1)
                           Fatou Fall (MNSSO)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             It is expected that as the health sector grows, so
                           BP 4.01                                              will medical waste increase. The existing
                                                                                medical waste management plan is expected to
                                                                                be updated and implemented under the proposed
                                                                                project. There is also an environmental
                                                                                management plan that was prepared under the
                                                                                previous project that will be updated for the
                                                                                proposed project.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No

                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No

                           Pest Management OP 4.09              No

                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No

                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       No
                           4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 16-Jul-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      No safeguard-related studies are anticipated.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Sami Ali

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (RSA)                                                                                            Date: 14-Jun-2012
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Enis Baris (SM)                                                                                                      Date: 13-Jun-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
