                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA3182
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Apr-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-Apr-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Turkey                           Project ID:    P130864
                            Project Name:     TR Third Access to Finance for SMEs (SME III) (P130864)
                            Task Team         Ilias Skamnelos
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         04-Apr-2013                      Estimated   26-Jun-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    ECSPF                            Lending     Financial Intermediary Loan
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        SME Finance (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       375.00              Total Bank Financing: 300.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                            Financing Gap:          0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                     Amount
                              Borrower                                                                               75.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                 300.00
                              Total                                                                                 375.00
                            Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve access to medium and long-term finance
                           for small and medium enterprises through lease financing.
                            3. Project Description
                           The single project component will provide US$300 million to be intermediated by Ziraat Bank
                           through leasing companies and commercial banks targeting SMEs through lease financing. The

                                                                     Page 1 of 6
                         credit line, guaranteed by the Turkish government, will be intermediated by Ziraat Bank, which will
                         be the Borrower and implementing agency for this project. Ziraat Bank will in turn on-lend funds
                         through PFIs, which can be banks and leasing companies. Ziraat Bank will select PFIs pursuant to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         criteria agreed between Ziraat Bank and the World Bank, and subject to no objection by the World
                         Bank. The selected PFIs will in turn make sub-loans to private SMEs, the final beneficiaries of the
                         credit line. The PFIs will assume the credit risk of the sub-borrowers who will be selected based on
                         agreed upon selection criteria. Ziraat Bank will have exposure only to the selected PFIs and will
                         assume the credit risk for lending funds to PFIs. The credit line will finance medium- to long-term
                         investment leases. There will be no sectoral or geographical restrictions. In accordance with the
                         requirements of OP 8.30, credit would be extended on market terms to avoid any distortion.

                         The project design incorporates co-financing and reflow utilization aiming to broaden the impact of
                         the IBRD financing. Ziraat Bank and/or PFIs will provide at least 25 percent of the Loan amount as
                         additional co-financing to on-lend to SMEs. In addition, Ziraat Bank will channel at least US$300
                         million of the project reflows to PFIs for on-lending to SMEs for the same purpose and under the
                         same terms and conditions. These two innovative features will help expand the availability of long
                         term funding to SMEs.

                         Ziraat Bank (the Borrower) will be responsible for implementation of the project and was selected
                         based on its experience with SMEs and the World Bank. Ziraat Bank, a public sector bank with a
                         lending portfolio of about US$40 billion, has extensive experience in offering credit to SMEs in all
                         regions of Turkey, based on its strong branch presence and focus on the SME sector. Additional
                         criteria for selecting Ziraat Bank included the bank’s financial soundness, the performance of its
                         credit portfolio, and its good performance as one of the Borrowers in the ongoing SME II credit line
                         project financed by the World Bank.

                         The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) at Ziraat Bank will operate under the overall supervision of a
                         Deputy General Manager. Its responsibilities will include: (i) selection of and on-lending to PFIs; (ii)
                         monitoring of PFIs to ensure compliance with project criteria; (iii) responsibility for adherence to all
Public Disclosure Copy




                         fiduciary and safeguard requirements of the World Bank for final borrowers; and (iv) monitoring and
                         evaluation based on key project development indicators.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented by Ziraat Bank as the FI bank through the PFIs. The sub-project
                         (SME beneficiary) locations are not defined at this stage and are expected to be all over Turkey.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Zeynep Durnev Darendeliler (ECSSO)
                         Esra Arikan (ECSEN)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes               The Environmental Category of the project is FI,
                          BP 4.01                                              as all the investments under the project will not
                                                                               be identified until project implementation.
                                                                               Environmental issues of sub-borrowers and their
                                                                               sub-projects will be addressed through the sub-
                                                                               loan environmental eligibility assessments.



                                                                       Page 2 of 6
                                                                    Environmental assessments will be carried out in
                                                                    accordance with both Government of Turkey
                                                                    Environmental Assessment (Regulation on
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    Environmental Impact Assessment, from the
                                                                    Ministry of Environment and Urbanization-
                                                                    MoEU) and World Bank EA (OP 4.01)
                                                                    requirements. Due to the nature of the project,
                                                                    working capital or investment loan applications
                                                                    are expected that will include machinery
                                                                    purchase/replacement or small scale construction
                                                                    works. Therefore, it is expected that there will be
                                                                    no large scale significant and/or irreversible
                                                                    impacts. Sub-projects in environmental Category
                                                                    A will not be eligible for funding. Moreover,
                                                                    since the policy on international waterways is not
                                                                    triggered, there will be a positive list of
                                                                    watersheds in Turkey in the framework which
                                                                    will guide the FI and the PFIs for the eligible
                                                                    locations of the actions. The environmental
                                                                    assessment (including environmental due
                                                                    diligence) procedures will be conducted
                                                                    according to the environmental review framework
                                                                    which will be prepared by Ziraat Bank and
                                                                    approved by WB. The environmental review
                                                                    framework will also include evaluation forms for
                                                                    assessing the environmental due-diligence of the
                                                                    existing facilities (SMEs) which will be applying
                                                                    for working capital or investment loans. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    framework will provide guidance for additional
                                                                    requirements if the investment loan includes
                                                                    activities which will then lead to a classification
                                                                    of 'Category B' of the sub-projects. The
                                                                    framework will also include a methodology for
                                                                    'implementation support missions'. It is expected
                                                                    to have a prior review for an initial set of projects
                                                                    whereby WB will review all safeguard
                                                                    documentation, and then it is planned to have a
                                                                    sampling system where WB's environmental and
                                                                    social safeguard specialists will conduct site visits
                                                                    and safeguard documentation assessment for
                                                                    randomly selected sub-projects.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09       No




                                                            Page 3 of 6
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No
                            BP 4.11
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       No               Land acquisition is not eligible under the
                            4.12                                                 proposed project so OP 4.12 is not triggered.
                                                                                 Still, the social safeguard specialist will be
                                                                                 included in the project team and she will be
                                                                                 expected to provide guidance to Ziraat Bank (and
                                                                                 to PFIs if necessary) regarding the Bank's land
                                                                                 acquisition policy, in order to eliminate any
                                                                                 incompliance with land acquisition aspects. The
                                                                                 specialist will also attend the 'implementation
                                                                                 support missions' to assess the sampled sub-
                                                                                 project's scope and documentation proving there
                                                                                 was no land acquisition conducted.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The project is subject to environmental assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01). The Environmental
                              Category of the project is FI, as all the investments under the project will not be identified until
                              project implementation. Environmental issues of sub-borrowers and their sub-projects will be
                              addressed through the sub-loan environmental eligibility assessments. Environmental assessments
                              will be carried out in accordance with both Government of Turkey Regulation on Environmental
                              Impact Assessment and World Bank EA (OP 4.01) requirements. National laws and regulations
                              under environmental law will also be monitored while conducting the due-diligence studies for the
                              existing facilities applying for sub-loans. No large scale significant and/or irreversible impacts are
                              anticipated within the scope of the project. Sub-projects in environmental category A will not be
                              eligible for funding. The procedures and institutional responsibilities are all delineated in the
                              Environmental Review Procedures Documents of each borrower. The project may include small
                              scale construction works related to buildings renovation and construction. The possible
                              environmental impacts associated with these small scale rehabilitation or reconstruction works are
                              minor, short-term and mainly during the construction phase (including temporary emissions of
                              particulate matter/dust to the air, noise pollutions, etc.).
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                               This will be evaluated in individual sub-loans EAs as needed.


                                                                         Page 4 of 6
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             This will be evaluated in individual sub-loans EAs as needed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             As part of the Operations Manual, the borrower ZiraatBank has prepared the Environmental
                           Review Procedures which serve as the Environmental Assessment Framework (EAF) and define
                           the environmental assessment procedures for the project. Although PFIs have not yet been
                           identified, the prospective PFIs will be required to use the procedures outlined in the EAF in
                           reviewing and appraising sub-borrowers/sub-projects, and to inform SMEs of the environmental
                           requirements for sub loan appraisal, so that sub-projects can be implemented in an
                           environmentally sound manner. The sub-borrowers will be responsible for carrying out any
                           environmental analysis and for confirming that the proposed sub-projects comply with national
                           environmental guidelines, and for obtaining the necessary clearance from the appropriate licensing
                           authorities. Once the analysis is performed and recommendations incorporated into the sub
                           project, the PFI will appraise the proposed sub-loan package which would include, where
                           appropriate, an environmental mitigation plan. The implementation of the mitigation plan will be
                           monitored by the PFI. The overall review process will be monitored by ZiraatBank as the FI. In
                           addition, the subsidiary loan agreements between Ziraat and the PFIs will include a covenant
                           committing the PFIs to ensuring that the sub-borrowers will comply with all requirements
                           specified in the operations manual, including environmental requirements. Ziraat Bank is familiar
                           with WB safeguard policies since they have participated in previous SME lines and will soon start
                           implementing SME Energy Efficiency Project with the WB. Still, to enhance their institutional
                           capacity, safeguards training will be conducted in May 2013 to all PIUs including ZiraatBank.
                           ZiraatBank will then train the PFIs' relevant staff with the support of Bank's environmental
                           specialist.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The EAFs were disclosed in country in Turkish and in English through the website of Ziraat
                           Bank. In case sub-loan applications are categorized as 'B' and public consultation is necessary,
                           these will be conducted while the sub-project EMPs are being prepared.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      29-Mar-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   03-Apr-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Turkey                                                           03-Apr-2013
                           Comments: Disclosed in Turkish and English in Ziraat bank's website
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.


                                                                     Page 5 of 6
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Ilias Skamnelos
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Samuel Munzele Maimbo (SM)                   Date: 10-Apr-2013




                                                                       Page 6 of 6
