INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA502
b  Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Feb-2012
0
1 1. BASIC INFORMATION
U)    1. Basic Project Data
0
0
.U,
Q      Country:               Malawi                       Project ID:             P117617
.      Project Name:         Malawi: Shire River Basin Management Program (P117617)
Task Team Leader:      Nagaraja Rao Harshadeep
Estimated Appraisal Date: 06-Feb-2012               Estimated Board Date:   15-May-2012
Managing Unit:        AFTEN                         Lending Instrument:     Adaptable Program Loan
Sector:                General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (40%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (30%),
Flood protectio n (10%), Public administration- Water, sanitation and flood protection (10%), Irrigation and drainage
(10%)
Theme:                Water resource management (30%), Other environment and natural resources management (30%), Rural services
and infrastructure (20%), Biodiversity (10%), Natural disaster management (10%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Financing Source                                                                      Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                       11.30
International Development Association (IDA)                                             125.00
Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                        6.58
Total                                                                                   142.88
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
Is this a Repeater project? No
2. Project Objectives
The overall Program Development Objective of the Shire River Basin Management Program is to generate sustainable social, economic and
environmental benefits by effectively and collaboratively planning, developing and managing the Shire River Basin's natural resources. The
program would support the Government's Shire basin Policy Letter, and would have a duration of 12-15 years. The first phase project - the Shire
0     River Basin Management Project (SRBMP) - would establish coordinated inter-sectoral development planning and coordination mechanisms,
undertake the most urgent water related infrastructure investments, prepare additional infrastructure investments, and develop up-scalable
CJ' systems and methods to rehabilitate sub-catchments and protect existing natural forests, wetlands and biodiversity. Future phases would
0
0     consolidate Basin planning and development mechanisms and institutions, undertake further infrastructure investments, and up-scale catchment
.     rehabilitation for sustainable natural resource management and livelihoods.
The Project Development Objective (PDO) and the Global Environmental Objective (GEO) of the SRBMP would be to develop a Shire River Basin
planning framework and improve land and water management for ecosystem and livelihood benefits in target areas. The project would: (a)
strengthen the institutional capacities and mechanisms for Shire Basin monitoring, planning, management and decision support systems; (b) invest
in water related infrastructure that sustainably improves water resources management and development; (c) reduce erosion in priority catchments
and sedimentation and flooding downstream, while enhancing environmental services, agricultural productivity and improving livelihoods; (d)
improve flood management in the Lower Shire and provide community level adaptation and mitigation support; and (e) protect and enhance
ecological services in the Basin.
3. Project Description
The project will address the interlinked challenges of poverty and a deteriorating natural resource base in the Shire River Basin to halt the process
of environmental degradation and improve the productive potential of natural resources. The project will promote integrated climate resilient
investment planning in the basin, including institutional capacity building to plan and monitor changes in land use patterns at a basin level. Project
activities will support strategic planning and implementation of large-scale infrastructure investments; adoption of sustainable land, forest and
water management practices to reduce land degradation in production and natural landscapes, to build resilience to climate risk and to improve the
productivity and incomes of smallholder farmers in priority catchments. The project will also improve flood management in the Lower Shire. Project
investments will be designed to support the GoM's economic growth and development plans for the basin.
The first phase of the program will have a duration of five and a half years and is organized in three components: (a) Shire Basin Planning, (b)
Catchment Management, and (c) Water-Related Infrastructure.
Component A: Shire Basin Planning (US$M 37.4) has the objective to lay the foundation for more integrated investment planning and system
operations for the Shire Basin. It would finance development of a modern integrated Shire Basin knowledge base and analytical tools, as well as
well-planned structured stakeholder consultation processes, in order to facilitate investment and systems operation planning. This component is
critically required to move from the current fragmented approach to investments and systems operation, to a more coordinated and holistic
Page 1 of 8


﻿approach based on a shared and sustainable vision for the development and management of the Shire Basin. A modern knowledge base with
associated knowledge products will be created along with modeling tools to support this planning. The component will support institutional
coordination mechanisms for basin planning and management for the basin's socio-economic development and environmental sustainability. It is
organized in four sub-components.
(a)     Sub-component A.1: Development of Basin Planning Framework, with two activity sets:
(i)     Preparing an inter-sectoral Shire River Basin Plan, including a basin- wide consultative development planning process
>,    supported by planning and operational decision support systems, acquiring datasets (satellite imagery etc.), and training for water resources
O     planning and management. This will include (a) development of a DSS based on a further developed Malawi Water System Simulation Model,
complemented with a rainfall-runoff module, a flood routing module, improved DEM and mapping data; and a water allocation and use
a)    administration system); (b) continuous refining of the Integrated Flood Risk Management Plan (IFRMP) for the Shire Basin that is being prepared
ca    by DODMA and MAIWD with Bank support under the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR); (c) survey and mapping of
0
natural habitats with incremental GEF support to allow for the contribution of ecological infrastructure to river basin functions to be assessed and
.Ln   reflected in Basin planning; and (d) production of technical and interpretive biodiversity and ecosystem knowledge products; and
Q              (ii)   Strengthening inter-sectoral Shire Basin coordination and management institution(s), initially in the form of a Shire River
Catchment Management Authority under the Water Resources Board and perhaps later in the form of a Shire Basin Authority or similar, under an
expanded legal mandate and functions for integrated water resources management in the basin, with provisions for civil works (building), staffing,
.      equipment, operational costs, communications, workshops, research and innovation. Support to the agency shall gradually decrease in follow-up
phases as the agency is established and generates revenue. Critical for coordination within the institutional reform will be the establishment of the
Shire Basin Stakeholder Forum, with representatives from multiple stakeholders in basin management, which will form a critical platform for debate
and basin vision development. The Forum will be linked to the basin management institution; and its specific mandate will be developed in unison
with the institution.
(b)     Sub-component A.2: Build institutional capacity for coordinated basin management, will strengthen the different line agencies involved in
Shire basin management to more effectively carry out their respective roles, in particular: (i) Department of Water Resources (DWR), MAIWD; (ii)
Department of Irrigation (DI). MAIWD; (iii) Department of Land Resources Conservation (DLRC), MAIWD; (iv) Department of Forestry (DF) of the
Ministry of Natural Resources, Environment and Energy (MNREE); (v) Department of Climate Change and Meteorological Services (DCCMS),
MNREE; (vi) Surveys and National Spatial Data Centre (SNSDC) of the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development (MLHUD); (vii)
Department of Disaster Management Affairs (DODMA) of the Office of the President and Cabinet (OPC); (viii) Department of National Parks and
Wildlife (BNPW) of the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Culture (MTWC); (ix) Malawi Forest Research Institute; (x) National Botanical Gardens and
Herbarium; and (xi) external knowledge partners in areas such as forest planning, biodiversity assessment and fisheries.
(c)     Sub-component A.3: Improve water resources information systems, with two sets of activities:
(i)     Rolling out the framework water resources information system, as proposed under the National Water Development Program,
to monitor water flows and discharges, water quality and sediment loads, as well as groundwater, using real time low-cost modern communications
such as GSM or WMO supported satellite telemetry in combination with traditional gauging stations, complete with installation of operational
control systems within the Basin and on critical points along the Lake and its upstream catchments. Activities will include the design of a
sustainable and scalable solution for data collection, communication and dissemination.
(ii)    Flood Forecasting and Early Warning Systems, including hosting, improving and utilizing hydrological and hydraulic flood zone
modeling, as well as community level early warning systems. The community level early warning system will be developed from the real-time
monitoring system described in (i) above as well as the consideration of the integration of other water resource related observation tools such as
0.    radar. The eventual system will include the harmonization of technology with regional centric capacity to achieve protection from impending floods.
0
These information systems would also be used to refine and update the operational regime of the Kamuzu Barrage and the Integrated Flood Risk
a)    Management Plan.
0     (d)     Sub-component A.4: Program management, monitoring and evaluation, to ensure efficient and timely delivery of project resources in
05     accordance with the project's objectives. A multi-sector and multi-agency Technical Team has been formed and located in MAIWD, led by a
.U)   Project Coordinator who reports directly to the Permanent Secretary. The project will provide funding for professional and support staff to
Q
a     strengthen the Technical Team and facilitate its operations, including an environmental and social safeguards specialist, an institutions specialist,
GIS and modeling experts, economist and water resources planner, as well as a diverse range of short term expertise and annual external audits.
3     There are also provisions for workshops, short training courses and formal training (in hydrology and land resources). Specific provisions for M&E
includes baseline, mid-term and end-of-project surveys. A Mid-Term Review will review project implementation arrangements and assess project
performance in addressing outcomes and objectives.
Component B: Catchment Management (US$M 48.2) has as objective that targeted sub-catchments and protected areas are rehabilitated and
managed for reduced erosion and improved livelihoods. Development of community-based natural resource management systems is a long-term
process that requires sufficient time to build the necessary capacity and ownership. Since the activities promoted ideally require a longer time
horizon than the project duration, this project will institutionalize a successful approach and show early results that will be expanded upon and
consolidated through the next phase in the program. There would be three stages at the micro-catchment level: (i) building conditions for micro-
catchment rehabilitation and alternative livelihood development, including community sensitization, social mobilization and capacity building to
ensure ownership and a strong foundation for subsequent interventions; (ii) implementation of micro-catchment development plans and alternative
rural livelihoods; (iii) continuing financial and technical support for catchment rehabilitation and livelihood activities while phasing out project
activities.
(a)     Sub-component B.1: Sub-catchment planning and monitoring institutional capacity, with five sets of activities: (i) strategic planning and
facilitation will support the development of broad sub-catchment plans covering approximately 30,000 hectares each and including 10-12 Group
Villages (in pre-identified catchments), and will include some strengthening of management coordination for the southern Shire protected areas
cluster; (ii) participatory micro-catchment planning at the Group Village level to develop integrated plans covering approximately 3,000 hectares
each; (iii) development of (project & national) guidelines and detailed field manuals and training on their use; and (iv) monitoring and evaluation.
The monitoring model that is proposed for catchment management planning and implementation would apply remote sensing and GIS along
withfield based data collection and surveys to track program inputs and outputs, institutional performance, impacts and outcomes. Support will be
provided for NGOs to be recruited to help interface between government and community activities in catchment management.
(b)     Sub-component B.2: Sub-catchment rehabilitation, will finance interventions identified in micro-catchment plans prepared under sub-
Page 2 of 8


﻿component B.1, including: (i) soil and water conservation for more sustainable and productive agriculture; (ii) forestry and rural energy
interventions to restore forest cover and reduce firewood consumption within the sub-catchments; (iii) stream and water control, including
checkdams and small earth dams to support improved water management through smaller-scale structures built by community members. Larger
infrastructure investments at sub-catchment level will be based on a strategic feasibility assessment.
(c)     Sub-component B.3: Alternative rural livelihoods would support demand and market driven income-generating activities, with special
targeting of women, youth and landless groups, to gradually decrease dependency on low performance agriculture and unsustainable harvesting
O     of forest and wetland products as sources of income. This includes: (i) area-specific market demand and value chain transaction support studies;
agricultural fairs aimed at identification of and linkages with markets; (ii) development and start-up of alternative livelihoods through support to
a    common interest groups (CIG) for commercially oriented income-generating activities, including capacity building and mentoring to build
cn    organizational, technical, financial and business capacities; (iii) mini and small scale irrigation, fish and farm ponds on both hills and flatter arable
0
lands to assist farmers in drawing water from small storage structures to support agricultural intensification, particularly related to agri-business
.U)    development; (iv) district level infrastructure in each sub-catchment based on initial strategic assessments, for instance rural roads, market
Q      infrastructure and community-level facilities for post-harvest storage; and (v) access to rural finance through creation of a community fund where
o   CGs can apply for loans to support scaling up of their small-scale enterprises after demonstrating successful business performance and solid
business plans for growth.
(d)     Sub-component B.4: Ecological Management. Incremental GEF support will provide for strengthened management of large natural
habitat blocks with the Shire Basin, including selected infrastructure and capacity investments in Lengwe and Liwonde National Parks to increase
their long-term revenue flows, and introduction of community forest management and monitoring / patrolling systems to Eastern Escarpment,
Tsamba, and Mangochi Forest Reserves. Where possible, these activities will complement the IDA-funded SLWM investments in predominantly
agricultural lands under B2 to form part of an integrated landscape management approach.
Component C: Water Related Infrastructure (US$M 58.3) has as objective that new investments enable improved regulation of Shire flows and
strengthen climate resilience. Development of critical infrastructure is essential to overcome annual and long-term variability in water resources
availability for communities, environment and economic sectors. The Shire Basin has a unique resource base as it is the outflow of one of the
largest Lakes in the World; with very complex climate response dynamics; and at the same time virtually the entire economy of the country is
based on this resource making improvements to water resources management a must. The component will build on the basin planning carried out
under Component A, and the priorities as set out in the national Water Resources Investment Strategy prepared in 2011. The component is
organized in three sub-components.
(a)     Sub-component C.: Kamuzu Barrage will support:
(i)     The construction and construction supervision of the Kamuzu Barrage upgrade at Liwonde. The major intended functions of
the upgraded Barrage are to: (1) regulate water flow in the Shire River to meet demands from downstream water users, most importantly water
supply, energy and irrigation; (2) improve weed management and reduce handling cost; (3) regulate water levels upstream to meet environmental
and socio-economic conditions; (4) influence, to a certain degree, the water level in Lake Malawi for additional storage; and (5) improve safety and
traffic circulation by physically separating road traffic from areas needed for gate operation (operation and weed handling currently takes place on
the road, which is a major North-South corridor). Influence on Lake levels is limited as the Barrage can only regulate the Lake Levels within a
certain range of Lake Levels, which does not cover the historic variations. The component will therefore improve the effects of the regulation as far
as possible by slightly increasing the highest regulated water level at the Barrage (up to 40 cm, still within the natural range of variation of 7
meters); and by operational measures based on improved hydrological observations, hydraulic modeling, decision support on water demand and
O.    ability to operate the Barrage in real time. This central piece of water resources infrastructure can start when the detailed design and independent
Environmental and Social Impacts Assessment (ESIA) are finalized, which is expected by April 2012 (currently in draft) under the Second National
a     Water Development Project implemented by MAIWD.
(ii)    The activities of the National Dam Safety Review Panel, a separate and independent group of experts, to review the quality of
U)    the engineering and construction, in order to guarantee that they reflect international best practice and standards with respect to dam safety.
_Z_            (iii)  The implementation of the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), and Resettlement Action Plan (RAP); on
U)    basis of the independent Environmental and Social Impacts Assessment (ESIA), conducted at design stage.
-      (b)    Sub-component C.2: Flood Management in the Lower Shire in collaboration with other initiatives, to support the implementation of the
a     Integrated Flood Risk Management Plan (IFRMP) for the Lower Shire (see also Component A for description of interlinked flood forecasting and
early warning systems): (i) priority flood mitigation interventions, such as river bank stabilization, dykes, culverts, flood diversion structures etc; (ii)
community awareness raising and planning based on flood mapping and zoning; (iii) community level support to the design and construction of
adaptation measures, such as flood demarcation, elevated platforms, shelters and safe havens, connectivity to and training on the Flood
Forecasting and Early Warning Systems; (iv) communication and transport equipment for Civil Protection Committees and rescue teams; and (v)
planning and pilot investments in ecological flood mitigation and climate resilient livelihoods in the Elephant Marshes. Incremental GEF/LDCF
support will provide for studies of the ecology, hydrology and natural resource exploitation in the Elephant marshes, and participatory planning to
establish management aimed at enhancing the value of the area for environmental services (particularly flood attenuation), livelihoods and
biodiversity. Some community natural resources management pilot activities will also be included.
(c)     Sub-component C.3: New Water Investments within the Shire Basin will support feasibility and design studies for additional water related
infrastructure works. There is ample demand, scope and need to further develop the Basin's resources for different economic sectors, such as:
agriculture in general and irrigation agriculture in particular, aquaculture, urban and rural water supply, hydropower, transport and disaster
resilience. Special attention could be given to the design of a set of measures for flood mitigation in the Ruo River, the notoriously forceful flooding
tributary to the Lower Shire, for possible financing in a second phase or a different initiative, based on the recommendations of an ongoing
integrated flood management plan.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)
From a planning perspective, the project area includes the entire Shire River Basin (including all catchments and tributaries), which encompasses
most of the southern quarter or so of the land area of Malawi, along with Lake Malawi itself (bordered by Malawi, Mozambique, and Tanzania). In
terms of on-the-ground Project interventions, the upgraded Kamuzu Barrage at Liwonde would (at times) influence (i) upstream water levels along
the Shire River, Lake Malombe, and Lake Malawi and (ii) downstream flows in the entire Shire River (until its confluence with the Zambezi River).
Catchment management activities would cover selected sub-catchment areas in the upper to middle reaches of the Shire Basin. Forest
Page 3 of 8


﻿conservation and management activities would take place in the vicinity of the Liwonde and Lengwe National Parks and selected forest reserves
(Eastern Escarpment, Tsamba, and Mangochi). Flood management works would be located along selected shorelines and tributaries of the lower
Shire River, while pilot wetland conservation and management investments would focus on the Elephant Marshes (alongside a portion of the lower
Shire).
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
George Campos Ledec (AFTEN)
O     Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTCS)
6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
O      Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01  Yes        The project involves a series of interventions and investments that range in scope
Z)                                                     and scale from micro-irrigation projects and community-based soil and water
.U,
Q                                                      conservation pilot activities to rehabilitation of Kamuzu Barrage and identification
of priority multi-purpose investments for initial preparation. In addition, the project
will support strategic planning of large-scale infrastructure investments. The
complexity of this multi-sector operation will require a number of safeguard tools to
properly minimize and mitigate any and all potentially adverse environmental and
social impacts generated by specific project investments. For some investments,
the precise location and nature of the works is known (e.g., rehabilitation of
Kamuzu Barrage), however in other instances, the exact location, scope and scale
of specific project investments is unknown at this stage. As such, the Borrower will
prepare a set of safeguard tools, including: For the rehabilitation of Kamuzu
Barrage, the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and a
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) has been prepared by the Borrower for this
investment with financing from the ongoing Malawi National Water Development
Program. For the overall project, an , Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) with an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP)
provides the criteria and procedures for screening sub-project investments and
follow-up environmental and social management measures, as needed. Similarly,
a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) with a Process Framework (PF) outlines
the measures to be carried out to address any potential resettlement or loss of/
restriction to access to livelihoods, although the scope of any such impacts is
expected to be minor, and often site specific. To support developing a long-term
basin wide perspective and institutional assessment, a Strategic Environmental
and Social Assessment (SESA) has also been prepared.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        Yes          Although numerous positive environmental and social impacts will be generated by
the project, the upgrading of the Kamuzu Barrage will affect dry-season water
levels in the upstream Liwonde National Park, with a reduction in some wildlife
habitats such as sandbars and floodplain grasslands. Impacts of the Barrage on
other protected areas are expected to be insignificant (such as water levels within
Lake Malawi National Park). Conversely, the project's catchment and floodplain
management activities are expected to be environmentally and socially highly
a)                                                     beneficial by improving the management of the Liwonde and Lengwe National
Parks; the Eastern Escarpment, Tsamba, and Mangochi Forest Reserves; and the
Elephant Marshes in the lower Shire Basin. The ESMF has made provision to
mitigate any potential negative impacts induced by project activities.
.U,
o      Forests OP/BP 4.36                  Yes         Project investments under Component B are specifically targeted at forest sector
interventions to improve the quality of forests in priority catchments in the basin.
The forest sector investments are aimed at improving the health and quality of
natural forests in degraded production landscapes throughout the basin; many of
which are adjacent to critical natural habitats. The aim of these investments is to
enhance the quality of natural forests and to reduce environmental degradation,
soil erosion and sedimentation into the Shire River and its tributaries. Project-
supported investments would be carefully screened with guidance from the ESMF,
so as not to cause any significant harm to forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09            Yes          The project involves specific investments in the agriculture and fisheries sectors
aimed at enhancing production. The project would not procure any pesticides in its
investments, in particular the rural livelihoods activities supported under
component B. In cases where pesticides are used within existing production
systems, the project would promote (as appropriate) the use of integrated pest
management and the safe use, storage, and disposal of agro-chemicals as
described in the project's ESMF.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11  Yes     Project investments may occur in areas that contain archaeological relics, fossils,
or other physical cultural resources. In the event that any such items are
uncovered during construction of the Kamuzu Barrage or in other project-
supported civil works, contractors and construction workers would be required to
follow chance finds procedures, as specified in the ESIA for the Kamuzu Barrage
and the ESMF for the overall project.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No           No ildigenous Peoples are associated with project area or activities.
Page 4 of 8


﻿Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12  Yes       Small-scale resettlement is expected at the Kamuzu Barrage construction site, for
which a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) has been prepared. Otherwise, the
project could affect other socioeconomic assets both at Liwonde and along the
Shire River due to the Barrage operations. Additionally, a limited area of existing
agricultural lands, along with some rural livelihoods that are based on
unsustainable natural resource uses could be also be affected. The project would
provide support for maintaining and enhancing production systems and
0                                                     accessibility to livelihoods and other natural resources in an environmentally and
socially sustainable manner, in accordance with the Resettlement Policy
Framework and Process Framework (RPF+PF). A RAP for the Kamuzu Barrage,
U)                                                    as well as a RPF and PF for the overall project have been prepared and disclosed
0
in January 2012, both in-country and at the World Bank's InfoShop.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          Yes         Although the Kamuzu Barrage is only about 4 m in height ( less than the 10 m
threshold for large dams), it has great strategic importance for Malawi and partially
influences water levels in Lake Malawi, one of the world's largest freshwater lakes.
Accordingly, the World Bank's Safety of Dams Policy (OP 4.37) was triggered and
the Bank's Lead Dam Specialist has provided strategic advice on measures to be
taken to improve dam safety. Rehabilitation of the barrage will also involve
application of generic dam safety measures and will be based on the advice of an
international panel of experts and the recommendation of the Bank's quality
assurance group, including the Africa Safeguards Enhancement Team (ASPEN).
The project will not finance the construction of other large dams. Under
Component B, the project may finance construction of small earthen dams, farm
and fish ponds as source of income generating activities for local beneficiaries, for
which the application of generic dam safety measures will apply.
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP  Yes  Malawi, Tanzania and Mozambique are co-riparian countries of the Shire River.
7.50                                           Namibia, Angola, Zimbabwe, Botswana and Zambia are co-riparian countries
above the confluence of the Shire and Zambezi Rivers in the greater Zambezi
Basin. Riparian notifications have been communicated by the World Bank (per
Government request) to all co-riparian countries of the Shire and Zambezi Rivers
as specified by this OP.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60  No      No project activities in disputed areas.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant andlor irreversible impacts:
Kamuzu Barrage Upgrading (Sub-component C.1): The upgrading of the Kamuzu Barrage at Liwonde is the most environmentally sensitive
0        project component, and the reason for why the overall project is classified as Category A. The most significant environmental and social
impacts relate to anticipated changes in the upstream levels of the Shire River and Lake Malawi, as well as downstream Shire River flows.
The Barrage upgrading will not have any impact on the extreme high or low levels of the upstream Shire River or Lake Malawi and will have
0        some impact, depending on operation, in between the levels of 473.5 m and 475.7 m (meters above sea level). In particular, the Kamuzu
Barrage upgrading will, at particular times (mainly during dry seasons in this range), enable the levels of the upstream Shire River and Lake
Q        Malawi to be raised by up to 40 cm higher than is possible under the existing barrage. This could affect the surface area and distribution of
a        certain ecosystems within the upstream Liwonde National Park (particularly river sandbars, sandy river banks, and floodplain grasslands), with
-O       corresponding impacts on certain wildlife species. Although the level of Lake Malawi would still be subject to large natural fluctuations, the
levels could managed differently, implying changes in the proportion of the time at each Lake level range. The flooding of additional land along
Lake Malawi and Lake Malombe could also marginally affect seasonally cultivated lands. Downstream of Liwonde, the upgraded barrage will
provide greater opportunities that presently exist to regulate Shire River flows, with potentially greater environmental and social impacts than
under the more limited river regulation that is possible with the existing barrage. Barrage construction activities at Liwonde will also produce
localized environmental and social impacts during construction, including (i) land acquisition on both banks of the Shire River, including the
likely demolition of at least a few houses, disruption of a few businesses, and the removal of trees and crops on both river banks; (ii) disruptions
to aquatic life and the fishing patterns of local communities due to the construction of temporary coffer dams; (iii) traffic disruptions and other
temporary disturbances related to construction activities; and (iv) extraction and disposal of rocks, earth, and other construction materials.
Following construction, bridge traffic over the Shire River at Liwonde is expected to flow more smoothly and safely than is presently the case,
due to reduced congestion.
Flood Management (Sub-component C.2): The proposed flood mitigation civil works in the lower Shire Basin are expected to have
fairly minor adverse environmental or social impacts, because they are relatively small-scale and localized. Nonetheless, attention will be
needed to address a range of environmental and associated social issues, such as ensuring sufficient river access and crossing points for
animals (domestic and wild) and people since the embankments tend to be rather steep-sided. The wetland conservation and management
activities planned around the Elephant Marshes are expected to be highly positive from an environmental and social standpoint.
Catchment Management (Component B): The investments and activities planned under this component are expected to be
environmentally and socially positive overall, without significant adverse environmental or social impacts. These include (i) check dams,
gabions, and other small civil works intended to reduce erosion and slow down stream runoff; (ii) alternative livelihood promotion and income-
generating activities, which will be screened to rule out any environmentally or socially problematic investments; (iii) community management of
natural forests and woodlands on village lands and within the Mangochi, Eastern Escarpment, and Tsamba Forest Reserves; and (iv) protected
areas management investments in and around the Lengwe and Liwonde National Parks.
Page 5 of 8


﻿New Water Investments (Sub-component C.3): New water investments planned or designed under the project might be sensitive
from an environmental and/or social standpoint. In general, the project is intended to promote increased focus on the environmental and social
implications of any proposed new investments, based on the capacity-building activities within Component A. Moreover, the project would
support preparation of the environmental and social impact assessments that might be needed for any such new investments.
Shire Basin Planning (Component A): The planning, information management, and capacity-building activities to be supported under
Component A are all intended to facilitate increased awareness raising, understanding, and mainstreaming of environmental and social
O        considerations within water resources planning for the Shire River Basin. The long-term water resources planning enabled in this Component
will also help better manage the cumulative impacts of development trends in this basin.
2. Describe any potential indirect andlor long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
0
In general, this project and the associated longer-term program are intended to improve the management of water and other natural resources
an       within the Shire River Basin. To the extent that this project could indirectly lead to the preparation of future large-scale investments (perhaps a
Q        new irrigation scheme to take advantage of increased water availability from the Shire River), such new investments would be subject to their
.o own environmental and social assessments.
M      3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
There were many alternatives considered during project preparation, including:
(a) The project will lead to the development of new Operating Rules for the upgraded Kamuzu Barrage. Alternative water release schedules
would have different upstream and downstream environmental and social implications. The project, as well as the longer-term Shire River Basin
Program (of which this project is the first phase of 5.5 years), will seek to optimize between different environmental, social, and economic
considerations in adjusting the system of water releases from the Barrage.
(b) An option always to be considered is the "no-project" approach. This would imply continued deterioration of the catchment lands, not being
able to provide a foundation for the long-term sustainable development and management of the Shire River Basin, continued vulnerability of
populations to floods and droughts, continuing poor land productivity, continued loss of biodiversity and inability to benefit from it effectively,
major conflicts across water allocations for new investments without an information or analytical basis for such choices, continued degradation
of the existing Kamuzu Barrage, and inadequate preparation of important new water resource investments. The project is thus expected to be
highly beneficial overall, even though certain environmental and social impacts will need close monitoring and appropriate mitigation measures.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
and implement the measures described.
As part of project preparation, the following safeguards-related instruments have been or are being developed:
a. A Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) of the Shire River Basin has been completed. The SESA is intended to
assess the environmental, social, economic, and institutional implications of development policies, plans, and programs for the Shire River
Basin.
b. An Independent Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) (including an Environmental and Social Management Plan,
ESMP), and a Resettlement Action Plan, (RAP) of the Kamuzu Barrage Upgrading have been publicly disclosed.
O               c. An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) of the Shire River Basin Management Project is close to
0        completion (with a publicly disclosed draft) to address the expected environmental and social impacts of the overall Project (aside from the
a.. Kamuzu Barrage). The ESMF indicates the corresponding mitigation and enhancement measures for each type of environmental and social
impact identified (whether negative or positive). This includes (mostly highly positive) impacts upon natural habitats, issues relating to
0        integrated pest management and careful pesticide use, and chance finds procedures for any physical cultural resources that might be
U)       discovered during construction activities. This ESMF serves as a companion volume to the Independent ESIA of the Kamuzu Barrage
Q        Upgrading.
-O               d. The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), including a Process Framework, (PF) for the overall project will (i) complement the
Resettlement Action Plan for the upgrading of the Kamuzu Barrage; (ii) specify the basic principles and procedures to be followed if other
components of the project (besides the Kamuzu Barrage work) would lead to involuntary relocation of some project affected people, loss of
assets or access to assets, and/or (in the case of people living near National Parks and Forest Reserves) new restrictions regarding access to
natural resources used to maintain their livelihoods. The RPF and PF have been publicly disclosed.
e. At the request of the Government of Malawi, the World Bank has sent Riparian Notification Letters to the governments of all the
other Zambezi River Basin riparians (i.e., Mozambique, Tanzania, Angola, Botswana, Namibia, Zambia, and Zimbabwe), since the Shire river
flows into the Zambezi. This notification and request for any official comments is to ensure compliance with OP 7.50 on Projects in International
Waterways.
f. Dam Safety: The SRBMP will finance rehabilitation of Kamuzu Barrage. Although this barrage is a relatively small dam structure by
itself (only 4 m high), it has great strategic importance for Malawi and partially influences water levels in Lake Malawi, one of the world's largest
freshwater lakes. Accordingly, it has been decided to apply the World Bank's Safety of Dams Policy (OP 4.37) and the Bank's Lead Dam
Specialist has provided advice on measures to improve dam safety. The project will not finance the construction of other large dams. Under
Component B, the project may finance construction of small earthen dams, farm and fish ponds, for which the application of generic dam safety
measures will apply. The construction or rehabilitation under the project of such water retention structures requires the project to be in
accordance with small dam guidelines, which include the existing regulations and the generic guidelines in the FAO Technical Guide for Small
Earth Dams (FAO, 2010). These technical guidelines will be adopted early in the project before such structures are built, in order to
complement the national requirements and guidelines for construction, maintenance, and safety of small dams.
As a result of project preparation, along with experience with other World Bank-supported projects (including the National Water Development
Program), the Government agencies responsible for this project are becoming increasingly familiar with the World Bank's environmental and
Page 6 of 8


﻿social safeguard policies. Additional safeguards training for project staff and other relevant stakeholders is planned to take place during the first
year of project implementation, with refresher training in subsequent years.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
on potentially affected people.
Stakeholders for the program include those from Government, civil society, private sector, local communities, academia, and other
development partners. The above-mentioned environmental and social safeguards studies have been, or are being, carried out with extensive
consultation of a wide range of Malawian stakeholders, along with documentation of the consultation events held and the organizations and
0        interest groups represented. These safeguards documents have been (or shortly will be) publicly disclosed, both within Malawi and at the
World Bank's InfoShop in Washington prior to appraisal.
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
0
U      Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Q        Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                  Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                    09-Dec-2011
0.       Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                 16-Jan-2012
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                 29-Dec-2011
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive  03-Feb-2012
Directors
Resettlement Action PlanlFramework/Policy Process
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                  Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                    23-Jan-2012
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                23-Jan-2012
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                 03-Feb-2012
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                  NA
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                    NA
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                NA
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                 NA
If the project triggers the Pest Management andlor Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Auditior EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Integrated with ESA and ESMF that has been disclosed.
0
O      C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
0        Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?  Yes [ X ]  No [  ]  NA [
U)     OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
o        If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) natural  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [ X]
.0       habitats, does the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
a--    OP 4.09 - Pest Management
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or SM? Are  Yes [] No []  NA [X]
PMP requirements included in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts on  Yes [ X ]  No [  ]  NA [
cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the  Yes [ x ]  No [  ]  NA [
plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include provisions for  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [ X]
certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements been made  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [ X]
for public awareness and training?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                    Yes[   ]     No[   ]     NA[ X
Page 7 of 8


﻿The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?  Yes [ X ]  No [  ]  NA [
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language  Yes [ X ]  No [  ]  NA [
that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for  Yes [ X ]  No [  ]  NA [
0       the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?  Yes[ X  No[  ]  NA[
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard  Yes [ x]  No [  ]  NA [
0
o       impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
.U,
o        Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same  Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA [
o       been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?
0  Ill. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader:          Nagaraja Rao Harshadeep
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Name:                                             Date:
Sector Manager:            Name                                                    Date:
0
CP)
a)
0
U
Page 8 of 8


