                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC796

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Apr-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 21-Apr-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Indonesia                       Project ID:      P129002
                            Project Name:      Indonesia Water and Sanitation Investment Facility Project (P129002)
                            Task Team          Irma Magdalena Setiono
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          03-Jul-2014                     Estimated        29-Jan-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASIS                           Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Water supply (65%), Sanitation (35%)
                            Theme(s):          Urban services and housing for the poor (60%), Municipal governance and
                                               institution building (20%), Municipal finance (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    140.00                    Total Bank Financing:        100.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                               Financing Gap:                 0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                     10.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                       100.00
                              Bilateral Agencies (unidentified)                                            30.00
                              Total                                                                       140.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           12. The project development objective (PDO) is to increase service coverage and improve water
                           supply and sanitation services in selected LGs and PDAMs. This will be achieved through the
                           establishment of a facility that could be accessed by LGs and PDAMs that are not eligible for
                           accessing existing funding mechanisms . The facility could provide funding for investments as well
                         as technicalassistance and capacity building activities to improve the performance of PDAMs and
                         LGs in water and sanitation services delivery.
                         C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The PDO will be measured by a combination of output and outcome indicators such as: (i) additional
                         number of household water connections constructed; (ii) additional number of households with
                         access to improved sanitation services; and (iii) number of PDAMs and LGs assisted by the Facility.

                         The PDO will be achieved through the implementation of two components as follows:

                         Component A: Water Supply and Sanitation Investment (US$100 million), which will finance the
                         following:
                         •        Water supply: construction of new water intake and transmission pipelines, construction of
                         new water treatment plants (capacity <250 l/sec), rehabilitation and upgrading of existing water
                         treatment plants, expansion and rehabilitation of distribution networks and house connections,
                         implementation of activities to improve operational performance (such as reduction of Non Revenue
                         Water, energy efficiency, customer database and GIS, etc.), including preparation of the relevant
                         detail engineering designs and bidding documents.
                         •        Sanitation: construction of new wastewater treatment facilities (capacity <11 m3/day),
                         rehabilitation of existing wastewater treatment facilities, expansion and rehabilitation of sewerage
                         system and house connections, rehabilitation and increase coverage of septage collection and
                         disposal systems, expansion and rehabilitation of drainage system, as well as preparation of the
                         related detail engineering designs and bidding documents.

                         This component will be implemented in two phases as follows: (i) Phase 1 investments identified
                         during the project preparation will be ready for implementation soon after project effectiveness; and
                         (ii) Phase 2 investments will be identified and implemented in subsequent years during project
                         implementation. The selection criteria for participation of provinces and municipalities, which will
                         be based on specific financial and technical considerations (including environmental and social
Public Disclosure Copy




                         safeguards aspects), will be agreed upon as part of project preparation and will also be aligned with
                         Indonesia's Master Plan 2011-2025. The loans qualified under the Project will consider investments
                         requested by a LG/PDAM, which will amount maximum $10 million each.

                         Both phases will be completed within the five year life cycle of the project, if the choice of the
                         lending instrument is the specific investment loan (SIL) instrument. However, the government will
                         also have the option to consider the Program-for-Result (P4R) instrument. The proceeds of the loan
                         may also be on-lent or on-granted to the participating municipalities depending on the institutional
                         and implementation arrangements agreed upon, the relevant national regulations and other
                         considerations. There is also a possibility to set up an investment grant mechanism linked to the
                         results of the project enhancement support in Component B (described below). All these aspects will
                         be explored during preparation of the project.

                         Component B: Technical Assistance (TA) to Support Sustainable Management of the IWSIF and
                         Service Delivery Improvement (US$40 million), which will finance the TA required to support the
                         institutional framework needed to sustainably operate and maintain the effective management of the
                         facility and to improve the performance of PDAMs and Local Governments. Activities financed by
                         this component would include technical support for project implementation, capacity building for
                         central Government for the operation and management of the IWSIF, and improvement of a web-
                         based National Water and Sanitation Monitoring and Evaluation System that is aimed to increase
                         public awareness. This component will also include project enhancement support activities (e.g.,
                         consultant services, trainings and capacity building to enhance PDAMs' and local governments'
                         managerial and technical skills) implemented in parallel and funded by other donors (such as
Public Disclosure Copy




                         AusAID). Details of this TA and capacity building component will be agreed upon during project
                         preparation but will include an incentive based mechanism (linked to the investment component) to
                         improve management of these operations.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will cover urban areas in selected districts throughout the country but specific locations
                         will be known once the participant PDAMs will be selected in accordance with the selection criteria
                         set forth during the project preparation. The exact sub-project locations for Phase 1 investments will
                         be selected and decided by appraisal, while those for the Phase 2 will be known during project
                         implementation. Therefore, the exact overall environment and social potential impacts at all sub-
                         project specific locations will be difficult to be evaluated at this time. However, sub-project locations
                         that relate to rehabilitation and upgrading of existing water treatment plants (WTP) and wastewater
                         treatment plants (WWTP) usually develop at land that is legally acquired by PDAMs, hence potential
                         issues related to land acquisition or resettlement as well as environment protection are expected to be
                         manageable.

                         The construction of new transmission pipelines, new sewerage systems (trunk systems), new water
                         intakes, new WTPs and WWTPs and new house connections or septic tanks could have potential but
                         known environment and social issues (hydrology of the water source, land acquisition for
                         transmission line, quality of water, soil, and air, cultural resources, etc.) that will be dully assessed
                         and mitigations proposed as part of the related environmental and social safeguard documentation
                         (EIAs, EMPs, RAPs, etc.). For the construction of new domestic WWTPs the project location shall
                         also consider the effect of odor from the plant to surrounding community as well as consultation with
                         all affected persons.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed project will involve stakeholders at multiple levels of government (Central
                         Government ministries, local governments, and PDAMs), the affected communities and civil society
                         (NGOs, community groups, etc.). The main technical counterparts (MoPW), municipal governments
                         and PDAMs, acquired certain experience in addressing safeguard policies’ provisions during
                         implementation of previous projects such as UWSSP and other Bank’s funded MoPW projects.
                         However, there is need to continue strengthening the Borrower capacity on Bank safeguards
                         implementation. The project encourages the need to appoint a safeguard focal contact point at the
                         CPMU level or at the advisory consultant to coordinate all relevant project safeguard management
                         process (e.g., guide the environmental screening and assessment process, design measures to
                         mitigate risks associated with specific social and environmental issues, include safeguard aspects into
                         sub-projects’ operating manuals, produce related SOP/ECOP and help improve overall project
                         monitoring evaluation and reporting efforts). The safeguard focal point will work closely with the
                         Bank’s specialist on addressing project safeguards aspects.

                         Further, the project envisage to provide resources (TA) to strengthen the capacity of the borrower
                         who needs increased technical capacity to carry out key environmental assessment related function
                         such as review and screening of environmental assessment, environmental monitoring, supervision
                         and/or management of mitigation measures. A web-based monitoring and evaluation mechanism
                         would be utilized to allow open information as well as encouraging participation of the communities
                           and civil society in monitoring the progress of project implementation and capacity building of their
                           respective LGs/PDAMs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           A Grievance Redress Mechanism will be provided in the ESSF, with the responsible unit will be set
                           up under the project implementing agency.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Ninin K. Dewi (EASIS)
                           Krisnan Pitradjaja Isomartana (EASIS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The project is classified as category “B? as it is
                           BP 4.01                                              unlikely to have significant irreversible adverse
                                                                                environmental impacts that are sensitive,
                                                                                diverse or unprecedented. This project relates to
                                                                                the rehabilitation and/or extension of existing
                                                                                water supply and sanitation infrastructure (e.g.,
                                                                                distribution systems, treated water pumping
                                                                                stations, transmission networks, water intake,
                                                                                pre-treatment and treatment water facilities,
                                                                                sanitation systems, and WWTPs), or to newly
                                                                                constructed WTPs and WWTPs. The proposed
                                                                                investments would primarily affect areas at or
                                                                                around the sites or facilities subject to physical
                                                                                works. The generic environmental aspects are
                                                                                typical from construction and rehabilitation
                                                                                water and sanitation infrastructure activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                such as construction waste management, waste
                                                                                sludge management from filtration process or
                                                                                septic tank cleaning, water intake activity, odor
                                                                                from the operations of the WTTP, etc. The
                                                                                potential temporary environmental impacts
                                                                                could be on water pollution and health issues
                                                                                from poor sludge management, water resources
                                                                                scarcity due to intake activity, impacts and risks
                                                                                associated with leaks and spills of chlorine and
                                                                                other chemicals; dust, noise, vibration,
                                                                                temporary access restriction and temporary
                                                                                closure of traffic during works; chance finds of
                                                                                physical cultural resources. The sludge and
                                                                                sediments generated from the treatment process
                                                                                of the new WTP will be disposed off in line
                                                                                with the national requirements. To limit and
                                                                                mitigate the impact above, the WSIF project
                                                                                will limit the project financing to maximum US
                                                                                $10million and will develop EIA/EMP/SOP
                         related to the nature and scale of the impact.

                         The criteria for selecting the participating
Public Disclosure Copy




                         provinces and municipalities will be agreed
                         upon during project preparation. Phase 1
                         investments will be ready for implementation
                         soon after project effectiveness (e.g., Q1 2015)
                         while Phase 2 investments will be implemented
                         subsequently in line with agreed selection
                         criteria. Consequently, the EA safeguard
                         documents and provisions applicable to this
                         project are as follows:

                         (i)      For investment sub-projects that are
                         identified during project preparation (primarily
                         Phase 1) the safeguards documents (EIA/EMP/
                         SOP) will be prepared (with the consultation of
                         sub-project stakeholders including the local
                         community/affected people/NGOs, etc.) and
                         cleared by the Bank by project appraisal; these
                         documents will also be disclosed locally in
                         Indonesia and at InfoShop by appraisal.

                         The project will follow the already well-
                         established country system i.e. KepMenLH
                         5/2012 that clearly categorizesas follows: for
                         investments at a plant with capacity < 250liters/
                         second for WTP and <11m3/day for WWTP;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         transmission length (<10km) and coverage area
                         (<500Ha) for projects including septic tank
                         plant, the borrower should consult with project-
                         related ministerial decrees (MoPW or others) or
                         governor/district decrees whether the project
                         requires UKL-UPL (EMP) or not as per
                         stipulated in the PerMenLH 13/2010 about
                         UKL-UPL especially on Appendix 1.

                         For projects that do not require UKL-UPL, the
                         project shall prepare SOP (Standard Operating
                         Procedures)/ECOP (Environmental Code of
                         Practice) from the activities causing
                         environmental impact and need to sign the
                         SPPL (Surat Kesanggupan Pengelolaan dan
                         Pemantauan Lingkungan).

                         (ii)   For investment activities that will
                         remain undefined during project preparation, a
                                                                 stand-alone Environmental and Social
                                                                 Safeguards Framework (ESSF) document will
                                                                 be prepared and cleared by the Bank by
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 appraisal. The ESSF shall include the result of
                                                                 consultations with project stakeholders. and

                                                                 Furthermore, as sub-projects are identified, the
                                                                 necessary institutional capacity building and
                                                                 associated sub-project preparation activities
                                                                 should be undertaken during project
                                                                 implementation according to the procedures
                                                                 specified in the ESSF.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       TBD   TBD as part of the EA process; however, no
                                                                 works will be undertaken that could affect
                                                                 protected or vulnerable natural habitats. This
                                                                 kind of proposed activities will be eliminated
                                                                 during the environmental screening process.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    The project will not finance activities that would
                                                                 involve significant conversion or degradation of
                                                                 critical forest areas or related critical natural
                                                                 habitats as defined under the policy.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The project will not procure any pesticides, nor
                                                                 will any use of pesticides result from the project.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    Project activities affecting archeological,
                         BP 4.11                                 paleontological, historical, religious, or unique
                                                                 natural values as defined under the policy will
                                                                 not be eligible for support. Thus, no major
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 impacts on PCRs are expected during the
                                                                 project implementation, yet attention will be
                                                                 paid to the possibility of built PCR or chance
                                                                 finds being affected by dust and vibration
                                                                 during works. Standard appropriate clauses will
                                                                 be included in all construction contracts
                                                                 regarding the procedures to be followed in the
                                                                 event of ’chance finds’ of culturally significant
                                                                 artifacts.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     TBD   The project will not affect IPs. However,
                                                                 construction of new facilities might coincide
                                                                 with IP locations or might be included as
                                                                 beneficiaries. Therefore, an IPF may be
                                                                 prepared, which will be part of the ESSF.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   The project does not anticipate large land
                         4.12                                    acquisition as most physical construction
                                                                 activities will be carried out in the existing area
                                                                 belongs to PDAMs/local governments.
                                                                 However, relatively small land acquisition
                                                                                                                                 outside of PDAM -or Local Government owned
                                                                                                                                 land may be required for construction of new
                                                                                                                                 water supply and sanitation infrastructure
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 facilities. For land requirements outside of
                                                                                                                                 PDAM- or Local Government owned land, the
                                                                                                                                 borrower prepares a LARPF and LARAPs for
                                                                                                                                 determined sub-project sites, which will be part
                                                                                                                                 of the ESSF.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         TBD                           The project will not finance construction or
                                                                                                                                 rehabilitation of any dams, nor will it rely on the
                                                                                                                                 performance of a dam under construction.
                                                                                                                                 However, there might be a possibility that the
                                                                                                                                 project will depend upon any dam/reservoir as
                                                                                                                                 the water sources for some sub-projects. This
                                                                                                                                 shall be identified during project preparation
                                                                                                                                 and shall be confirmed prior to appraisal.
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            Project sites are not expected to affect
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            international waterways. The proposed water
                                                                                                                                 supply systems rely on sources that are linked to
                                                                                                                                 rivers or springs inside the country. The
                                                                                                                                 additional amount of water to be extracted due
                                                                                                                                 to project interventions will be in line with the
                                                                                                                                 allowable amount and approved by relevant
                                                                                                                                 government authority. The team will consult the
                                                                                                                                 project lawyer on the applicability (or not) of
                                                                                                                                 this policy (e.g., exception) given the proposed
                                                                                                                                 water rehabilitation/construction works.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project is not located in any known
                                 7.60                                                                                            disputed areas as defined under the policy.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Jan-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS is January 2014. ESSF document
                                      (including the Grievance Redress Mechanism) and RPF shall be completed by appraisal and also
                                      the EIA/EMP/SOP for Phase 1 investment stage sub-projects.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Irma Magdalena Setiono

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 17-Apr-2013
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: George Soraya (SM)                                                                                                   Date: 21-Apr-2013



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
