                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA1224
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Sep-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Lao People's Democratic                     P130512
                                                                          Project ID:
                                              Republic
                            Project Name:     Lao PDR Second Trade Development Facility Project (P130512)
                            Task Team       Richard James Lowden Reco
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       10-Sep-2012                          Estimated   04-Dec-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: EASPT                                 Lending     Technical Assistance Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector:           General industry and trade sector (50%), Other domestic and international trade
                                              (25%), Public administration- Industry and trade (25 %)
                            Theme:            Trade facilitation and market access (30%), Regional integration (25%), Export
                                              development and competitiveness (25%), Legal institut ions for a market
                                              economy (10%), Other Private Sector Development (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                               Financing Source                                                           Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                     4.00
                              Trust Funds                                                                   9.00
                              Total                                                                        13.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a         Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           The proposed project development objective is to support the implementation of government's trade
                           and integration priorities outlined in the 2012 DTIS Action Matrix/Roadmap, and in particular to
                           contribute to improved competitiveness and diversification, focusing outside the natural resource
                           sectors.
                            3. Project Description
                           The proposed operation is a follow-on to the First Trade Development Facility (TDF-1), with a


                                                                       Page 1 of 6
                         deepened focus on addressing the binding constraints to increased Lao integration into the regional
                         and multilateral trading system. A highly selective approach has been taken with the identification of
                         activities to be financed under the project, with a reduced scope allowing for a fuller engagement in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         selected areas. A number of feasible activities have been excluded from the project to ensure a
                         focused operation with transactions costs minimized to the extent possible. The proposed project has
                         three main clusters as summarized below.

                         (A) TRADE FACILITATION, TRADE POLICY AND REGULATIONS

                         This builds on the success of trade facilitation and trade policy activities under TDF-1, and will
                         consist of a number of inter-related activities aimed at improving transparency, predictability and
                         lowering associated compliance costs for traders. International evidence strongly suggests that high
                         costs of trade act as a major brake on investment, particularly in the type of diversified trade that has
                         greatest potential to facilitate equitable growth, generate jobs and reduce poverty.

                         Trade facilitation activities will focus primarily on improving inter-agency coordination and
                         supporting the adoption of modern risk based approaches to managing regulatory compliance in non-
                         customs agencies, including reform of non-tariff measures. Investments financed under this
                         component will be closely linked to and complement broader customs reform and modernization
                         efforts including the ongoing Customs and Trade Facilitation Project, and the proposed Lao National
                         Single Window Support Program, financed by the World Bank.

                         The trade policy aspect of the project will focus on the provision of essential and continued technical
                         assistance in support of WTO accession related efforts, but progressively shifting to a “beyond
                         WTO? agenda focused on effective implementation of goods and services commitments at both the
                         WTO and ASEAN levels, including a strong emphasis on private sector engagement.

                         Component A1: Trade facilitation support
                         This will include three main subcomponents building on results achieved under TDF-1, with
Public Disclosure Copy




                         activities focusing on (i) trade facilitation secretariat and action plan implementation support; (ii)
                         capacity building for middle to senior managers in trade related agencies; and (iii) trade portal
                         support and development.

                         Component A2: Non tariff measures review and rationalization
                         The proposed non tariff measures (NTM) activities similarly build on ongoing government efforts to
                         streamline, simplify and harmonize non-customs border agency processes. Activities will include (i)
                         making information transparent and available; (ii) reviewing and streamlining domestic NTMs; and
                         (iii) assessing NTMs faced by Lao exporters.

                         Component A3: Trade in services
                         Lao PDR has undertaken, and will continue to undertake, a number of reforms aimed at reforming
                         and liberalizing the economy, including on services trade. This component will complement these
                         efforts by strengthening the governance of the regulatory environment affecting services trade.
                         Activities will include (i) improving general understanding through services regulatory assessments;
                         and, (ii) improving access to services regulations.

                         Component A4: Trade in goods
                         This component will support the main challenges associated with implementation of WTO
                         obligations, effective participation in ASEAN, and taking full advantage of trade opportunities made

                                                                        Page 2 of 6
                         available by participation in the multilateral and regional trading system. This will require new
                         arrangements for conducting trade policy, including improved inter-ministerial coordination to
                         ensure trade policy coherence and private sector participation. Activities will focus on (i)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         strengthening trade policy coordination mechanisms; (ii) disseminating commitments; (iii) building
                         capacity on trade remedies; and (iv) further strengthening the legal framework for sanitary and
                         phytosanitary measures.

                         (B) DIVERSIFICATION AND COMPETITIVENESS

                         This includes a new set of activities aiming to support improved private sector capacity to compete in
                         international markets, focusing on the non natural resources sectors. Activities will adopt a “Making
                         Markets Work Better for the Poor? approach, in order to facilitate more effective participation of
                         small and medium sized enterprises in the international economy, pro-poor growth and support to
                         women’s economic empowerment.

                         Component B1: Business assistance unit
                         The objective of this component is to support individual firms in building their skills and experience,
                         so as to become more competitive internationally. The intention is not only that firms in Lao PDR be
                         able to export more, but also that those selling in the domestic market be able to compete more
                         effectively against imports, particularly with the coming of the ASEAN economic community.
                         Activities will include (i) direct consulting services advising individual firms on business growth
                         plans; (ii) matching grants to assist individual firms financially in purchasing specialized business
                         development services in support of growth plans; and (iii) rigorous impact evaluation of services
                         provided.

                         Component B2: Skills and productivity
                         Building on activities in the garments sector under TDF-1, as well as the wider experience of the
                         “Better Work/Better Factories? approach, this component will aim to improve productivity,
                         competitiveness and labor standards focusing on the garments manufacturing sector, an industry
Public Disclosure Copy




                         where the vast majority of workers are female. Activities will include (i) a factory standards
                         improvement scheme; and (ii) the transition of the Garment Skills Development Centre towards
                         financial and operational independence.

                         (C) MAINSTREAMING AID-FOR-TRADE

                         This will provide for support to the next generation of Lao PDR’s “aid-for-trade? governance
                         framework as part of efforts to move to a full program based approach for trade and private sector
                         development.

                         Component C1: National Implementation Unit, and Trade and Private Sector Development Working
                         Group
                         Building stronger technical capacity on trade and private sector development policy within MoIC is a
                         key objective of TDF-2, to support more effective implementation of activities not just financed
                         under TDF-2, but more widely as part of a movement towards a program based approach. This
                         component will include further capacity investments in the NIU, including support to its role as
                         secretariat to the Trade and Private Sector Development Working Group.

                         Component C2: DTIS action matrix/roadmap challenge facility
                         A challenge facility will be established making resources available to support implementation of

                                                                      Page 3 of 6
                           smaller priority activities identified within the DTIS action matrix/roadmap on a demand-driven
                           basis. Resources will not be pre-identified under this component, but will remain available to support
                           pro-poor activities proposed on an ongoing basis.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Component C3: Research and policy analysis
                           Building on successful activities under TDF-1, the objective of this component will be to support
                           improved trade and private sector development policy formulation, and better measurement of the
                           impact of policy. Activities will include investments in (i) research methodology and capacity
                           building; and (ii) a research facility to commission high quality policy relevant research.
                            4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)


                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Satoshi Ishihara (EASTS)

                            6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/        No                No safeguard policies are triggered.
                            BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No                No safeguard policies are triggered.

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No                No safeguard policies are triggered.

                            Pest Management OP 4.09             No                No safeguard policies are triggered.

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No                No safeguard policies are triggered.
                            BP 4.11
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No                No safeguard policies are triggered.

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No                No safeguard policies are triggered.
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No                No safeguard policies are triggered.

                            Projects on International        No                   No safeguard policies are triggered.
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                   No safeguard policies are triggered.
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential l arge scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The Project does not have any safeguard issues since it will only finance consulting services,
                              goods, training and workshops. The project will not finance any civil works or any other activities



                                                                        Page 4 of 6
                           that will have environmental implications. Given the nature of the project it also has no impact on
                           social safeguards such as Involuntary Resettlement and Indigenous Peoples.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                           in the project area:
                             None foreseen.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             Not applicable.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             Not applicable.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Not applicable.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date
                         Technical Assistance Project
                         For a TA project which will finance the preparation of a specific safeguards instrument, please
                         indicate type of document disclosed, if any.

                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:

                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?




                                                                     Page 5 of 6
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Richard James Lowden Reco
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Mathew A. Verghis (SM)                    Date: 11-Sep-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 6 of 6
