                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                  Report No.: ISDSA692
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Mar-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-May-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Brazil                              Project ID:    P126452
                            Project Name:       Rio Grande do Norte: Regional Development and Governance (P126452)
                            Task Team           Maria de Fatima de Sousa
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           22-Feb-2013                         Estimated   14-Jun-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                         Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      LCSAR                               Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                    Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (30%), Public administration-
                                              Information and communications (20%), General educati on sector (20%),
                                              Health (20%), Irrigation and drainage (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural markets (40%), Public expenditure, financial management and
                                              procurement (20%), Gender (10%), Education for the knowledge econo my
                                              (10%), Health system performance (10%), Municipal governance and institution
                                              building (10%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     400.00           Total Bank Financing:                    360.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                       Financing Gap:                             0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                       40.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                         360.00
                              Total                                                                                         400.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The objectives of the Project are to support the Borrower's efforts to: (i) increase food security,

                                                                         Page 1 of 21
                         access to productive infrastructure, and access to markets for family agriculture; (ii) improve access
                         to, and quality of, health, education and public security services; and (iii) improve systems for public
                         expenditure, human resource and physical asset management in the context of a results-based
Public Disclosure Copy




                         management approach.
                         3. Project Description
                         1.      The proposed Project would be a US$ 360 million Specific Investment Loan (SIL) to support
                         implementation of the State’s Strategic Development Plan (PPA) and its Poverty Reduction Strategy
                         (RN Sem Miséria) over a five-year period. The Project design represents the State’s integrated
                         approach to promote social and economic development to stimulate sustainable and inclusive growth,
                         and the reduction of poverty and extreme poverty. The Components would be organized in the
                         following fashion in support of the State’s strategy:

                         2.      Component 1: Sustainable Regional Development and Productive Inclusion (US$ 200.5
                         million of which US$ 180.3 million IBRD financing). This Component aims to reduce regional
                         inequalities and increase productive inclusion in support of the State’s Sustainable Regional
                         Development Strategy through the following Subcomponents:

                         i)       Subcomponent 1.1: Strategic Investments and Local Governance Strengthening (US$ 130.2
                         million, of which US$ 117.0 million IBRD financing) to support the expansion, improvement and
                         integration of regional socioeconomic infrastructures (e.g. innovation, technology and trade centers,
                         irrigation systems upgrading, pisciculture stations, phyto-sanitary inspection units, physical facilities
                         and equipment for production of seedlings and breeding animals, etc.) This Subcomponent will also
                         include activities to strengthen the capacities of municipal and territorial government agencies to
                         implement the Sustainable Regional Development Strategy through, inter alia: strategic studies,
                         diagnoses, and business plan development; capacity building of Technical Assistance and Rural
                         Extension Services (ATER); increased information dissemination and marketing support, etc.

                         ii)     Subcomponent 1.2: Productive and Socio-Environmental Subprojects (US$ 70.4 million, of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         which US$ 63.3 million IBRD financing) to support to Producer Organizations (within selected
                         APLs), Social Organizations and Networks of Social Organizations (such as community associations
                         and women’s groups), to increased productive inclusion of the target populations in the State’s
                         lagging development regions. Sub-projects under this Component will support actions to strengthen
                         and consolidate the enterprises of small farmers and their organizations in an economically, socially
                         and environmentally sustainable manner. The provision of Sub-Project grants and technical
                         assistance support will focus on improving and increasing productivity and market access (including
                         through fair trade initiatives), enabling increased integration of family farmers in higher value-added
                         production chains (agricultural and non-agricultural). In addition to market-oriented ‘Productive Sub-
                         Projects’, this Sub-component will also support ‘Socio-environmental Sub-projects’ aimed at
                         promoting food security and good environmental practices through the recovery of environmentally
                         degraded areas and/or enhancement of climate resilience. Subproject categories are described further
                         in Annex 2 (Detailed Project Description.)

                         3.      Component 2 – Improving Public Services (US$ 130.0 million of which US$ 116.9 million
                         IBRD financing) aims to improve the quality of, and access to, basic public services and would be
                         divided into three subcomponents

                         i)      Subcomponent 2.1: Health. This component would support three strategic priorities for the
                         health sector, through the SESAP in the Borrower’s territory, namely:: (a) the reduction of maternal


                                                                       Page 2 of 21
                         and infant mortality rates; (b) increased availability of early detection and quality treatment for breast
                         and cervical cancer patients; and (c) establishment of a State-wide, regionalized, emergency health
                         services network.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         ii)      Subcomponent 2.2: Education. This subcomponent would promote the basic education
                         quality improvement and regional development for the education sector, in the Borrower’s territory,
                         through: (i) the provision of support to SEEC; and (ii) the provision of support to School Councils
                         (SC) for Schools Subprojects design and implementation to promote educational innovations at the
                         school level.

                         iii)    Subcomponent 2.3: Public Security. This subcomponent would support integrated
                         management processes within the Secretaria de Segurança e da Defesa Social (SESED) to enhance
                         the secretary’s capacity to provide citizen security. It will also help to strengthen public security
                         information systems and promising state programs focused on violence prevention and education.

                         4.       Component 3 – Public Sector Mana gement (US$ 65.5 million of which US$ 58.9 million
                         IBRD financing) would provide support for the modernization of the State’s public sector
                         management in strategic sectors in order to strengthen the efficiency and effectiveness of central
                         budget, finance and planning resources and management, as well as in service delivery in health,
                         education and public security sectors. It would be divides into three subcomponents:. (i)integrated
                         and results-oriented planning, budgeting and finance management; and (ii) modernization of State
                         Institutions and administrative systems; and (iii) Strategic and Efficient Human Resources, Assets
                         and ICT Management.

                         Component 1: Sustainable Development and Productive Inclusion.

                         5.       As described above, this first Component holds priorities investments focused on the
                         implementation of key elements of the development strategy of the state in the actions of economic
                         and social inclusion,. The beneficiaries of these actions would be organizations/cooperatives/
Public Disclosure Copy




                         networks/ formal alliances of family farmers, waste pickers organizations of recyclable materials,
                         individual entrepreneurs engaged in productive activities both agricultural and non-agricultural and,
                         also including youth and women, remaining quilombolas, indigenous and gypsies.

                         6.       Potential activities to be supported under this first component are expected to include, for
                         subcomponent A.1, inter alia: (i) improving the competitiveness and productive inclusion of Local
                         Productive Arrangements (APL) with focus on access to markets in priority areas; (ii) promoting of
                         good environmental practices with emphasis on sustainability, coexistence with the semiarid and
                         environmental preservation; (iii) implementation of civil works of water supply, sanitary sewage,
                         solid waste management (creating a unit manager and technical solid waste at state level, as an
                         instrument of advice to municipalities, encouraging installation of Public Consortia, the participation
                         of citizen and waste pickers; and also the priority in conducting studies on the treatment and final
                         disposal of health services waste; not including the construction of new landfills or plants), and also
                         the recovery of degraded areas and the implementation of groundwater dams and others hydro
                         environmental works; and, (vi) strengthening governance both focused on sustainable regional
                         development; aiming at fostering sustainable agriculture in those micro-catchment areas most
                         susceptible to environmental degradation. Regarding the spatial distribution of investments, some
                         activities are spread out across the state, with 8 development regions already defined by the State’s
                         government, and others are more concentrated. Most of investment followed the regional strategic
                         development plan proposed by the state, which is organized around three axes: (i) the recovery of the

                                                                       Page 3 of 21
                         ancient center of the region's dynamic Seridó - antigo centro dinâmico da região do Seridó, (ii) the
                         development of the State’s central region – cinturão central, characterized by a real void of
                         development, and (iii) the development of the west Potiguar – faixa ocidental, characterized by an
Public Disclosure Copy




                         absence regarding the provision of public services and very limited penetration of formal economic
                         activity.

                         Component 2: Improving Public Services.

                         7.       This Component holds priorities investments focused on the expansion and implementation
                         of logistics infrastructures of health, education, such as the building of rural schools, productive
                         infrastructures with small facilities to support production and health facilities. In the health sector,
                         the beneficiaries would be the two spheres of the SUS – Sistema Único de Saúde management in Rio
                         Grande do Norte (the State and Municipal Health), and its service users. Beneficiaries would also be
                         students and education professionals from public state and local education.

                         8.       For this second Component, project activities include, inter alia: (i) construction, renovation
                         and provision or upgrading of health care equipment, (ii) construction of the Infant and Maternal
                         Hospital in Mossoró; (iii) implementation of continuous training program for the family health
                         teams; (iv) improvement of the Referral Center of Diagnosis on Cancer Diseases; (v) structuring of
                         state labs for cancer tests and diagnosis; and, (vi) implementation of continuous training and
                         educational program for health professionals and managers. For subcomponent A.3, project activities
                         include, inter alia: (i) development of a new curricula and programs for basic education; (ii) promote
                         educational innovations at the school level through the design of school subprojects (iii) finance a
                         monitoring and evaluation system, by establishing an Education Observatory to monitor school
                         quality and a State Education Evaluation System to assess students and schools’ performances (iv)
                         implement minimum operational standards in basic education schools; and (v) develop instruments
                         and actions to support regional development activities, including construction of rural schools;
                         provision of literacy and technical-vocational training programs for youth and adults participating in
                         productive inclusion activities. Activities to be supported under the third subcomponent, Public
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Security management, includes: investments in technologies to strengthen SESED public security
                         management capacity; investments in technologies to improve the Integrated Center for Public
                         Security Operations; and, investment in materials, equipment and technologies to support specific
                         ongoing drug and violence prevention efforts and support to victims of violence against women, the
                         elderly and minorities (including LGBT).

                         Compone nt 3: Public Sector Management

                         9.      This Component supports the modernization of the State’s public sector management.
                         Central themes of this component include: (i) introducing integrated results-based planning and
                         management systems, (ii) modernization of administrative structures and systems, (iii) strategic
                         human resources, integrated assets and ICT management, and (iv) improvement of public security
                         management. This component will require careful sequencing, alignment, and coordination of actions
                         by central and line secretariats to achieve results through measures grouped around the following
                         four subcomponents:

                         10.      Subcomponent 3.1: Results-based Planning, Budgeting and Finance Management
                         Integration. Strengthening planning capacity, monitoring, evaluation and policy making will also be
                         supported under this subcomponent. The new administration has already initiated efforts to revamp
                         its planning capacity and use the multi-year plan (PPA) as a tool for expressing the State’s policy

                                                                      Page 4 of 21
                         intentions, as per the available fiscal space. These efforts have made clear that some sectors will need
                         additional help in clarifying their key goals and strategies, as well as defining intermediate and
                         results indicators. Activities to strengthen the budgeting procedures and to allow for strategic
Public Disclosure Copy




                         allocation of resources to policy priorities will also be supported. Activities under this sub-
                         component include: (i) Process of alignment of planning and medium with long-term strategic
                         management, focusing on result-oriented management, comprising staff training, envisaging the
                         necessity of redistributing HR; and (ii) design, development and implementation of a dashboard hall,
                         based on the PEFA model, and a bureau of projects to monitor the management of strategic programs
                         and projects, comprising the definition of indicators, strengthening of infrastructure, purchase of
                         software, and changes and improvements in the State’s financial system.

                         11.      Subcomponent 3.2: Institutional Modernization of State Institutions and Administrative
                         Systems. As part of its strategy, the State intends to undertake a functional review, identifying the
                         key roles of its agencies and promoting a discussion on alternative service delivery modes.
                         Modernization efforts will focus on updating administrative structures, procedures and processes,
                         with the aim of increase efficiency and alignment with the new integrated results-based management
                         systems introduced under Subcomponent B1, with special focus in SESED, SESAP and SEEC,
                         including sector investment addressed to improve management. The State is also interested in a
                         review of the role and administrative structure of government entities which can inspire a
                         rationalization of the current structure of the same Government. Activities under this subcomponent
                         will include: (i) identification and revision of macro-processes and processes of the Secretariats of
                         Education, Health and Public Security and Social Defense, with the objective of maximizing
                         administrative effectiveness, activity leaded by SEPLAN in cooperation with the three mentioned
                         sector Secretariat to guarantee the coherence of the model; (ii) diagnosis for the State’s Government
                         on the suitability of structures and distribution of competences of all the State Secretariats, to identify
                         possible dis-functionalities proposing corrective measures; and (iii) a package of sector investments
                         coordinated by SENPLAN to improve infrastructure and management.

                         12.      Subcomponent 3.3: Strategic and Efficient Human Resources, Assets and ICT Management.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         A more effective and efficient public administration would require strengthening the State’s
                         workforce more strategically by focusing on attracting and retaining professional personnel, in
                         particular in the center-of-government institutions. Rio Grande do Norte’s aspires to be a
                         performance-based and equal opportunity employer with the goal of moving goal should be to move
                         gradually from a pyramidal to a quasi-diamond-shaped staff structure, increasing the quality of
                         personnel expenditures. Professionalization efforts would require, in turn, putting in place adequate
                         controls over the State’s payroll to create the fiscal space needed. The State also needs to establish an
                         integrated assets management (including planning purchases, register, management, maintenance,
                         and defense) to optimize the use of its patrimony according to an advanced model more complex that
                         the traditional simple register and assets accounting. Finally, the State’s ICT (INFOVIA) shall also
                         be optimized, arriving to all the units in an effective manner. Activities under this subcomponent will
                         include: (i) improvement of HR management through the implementation of management and payroll
                         auditing modules, planning of HR resources and design of a result-based management model
                         (including a gender and minorities approach) and its implementation through a contractual system;
                         (ii) implementation of the integrated assets management system, including the register of all the
                         assets; and (iii) Modernization of the State’s Archive for a better treatment of its content. This
                         subcomponent also comprises all the training activities needed for the implementation of its
                         activities; and (iv) improvement of State’s ICT INFOVIA to face deficiencies in territorial
                         connectivity. This subcomponent also comprises all the training activities need for the
                         implementation of all the activities comprised in the project.

                                                                       Page 5 of 21
                         13.      As described, this second component will provide technical and financial support in sector
                         priority actions that are part of the Government's strategy to promote: greater efficiency in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         management and delivery of public services, reduction of current expenditure; elevated rate of public
                         investment; unblocking bottlenecks and conditions to promote a more favorable and attractive, in the
                         form of positive externalities, for increasing private investment and conducive to social and
                         economic development of RN society on a sustainable basis.

                         14.      Potential activities to be supported under this second component are expected to include,
                         inter alia: (i) planning of medium and long strategic management, focusing on result-oriented
                         management; (ii) design, development and implementation of a dashboard hall, based on the PEFA
                         model, and a bureau of projects to monitor the management of strategic programs and projects; (iii)
                         identification and revision of macro-processes and processes of the Secretariats of Education, Health
                         and Public Security and Social Defense; (iv) improvement of HR management through the
                         implementation of management and payroll auditing modules, planning of HR resources and design
                         of a result-based management model (including a gender and minorities approach), among others,
                         such as monitoring and assessment systems for the planning and implementation of HRM reforms.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         15.       For Component 1 – Integrated Economic and Human Development, the project interventions
                         will be located across the State territory. Most of investment followed the regional strategic
                         development plan proposed by the state, which is organized around three axes: (i) the recovery of the
                         ancient center of the region's dynamic Seridó - antigo centro dinâmico da região do Seridó, (ii) the
                         development of the central region of the RN State – cinturão central, characterized by a real void of
                         development, and (iii) the development of the west Potiguar – faixa ocidental, characterized by an
                         absence regarding the provision of public services and very limited penetration of formal economic
                         activity.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         16.      The selection of targeted beneficiaries and areas were based on explicit demands from
                         vulnerable groups and in sensitive environmental areas, as well as on beneficiaries below extreme
                         poverty line. In order to promote more efficient allocation of resources, the borrower created a
                         strategy of focus and scope of the Project Sustainable RN based on the spatial distribution of fifteen
                         indicators related to the areas of intervention and also the premise of recovery/consolidation of urban
                         areas as polarizer’s regional development. The preparation, by the client, of the Project’s
                         Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) was also an exercise and a good practice to
                         help support integration of environmental and social aspects of projects into the decision making
                         process.

                         17.     Component 1 includes some proposed activities such as the building of rural schools,
                         productive infrastructures with small facilities to support production, health facilities, and the
                         expansion of logistics infrastructures, such as feeder roads rehabilitation for better connectivity
                         between areas of production and consumption.

                         18.       Regarding environmental physical characteristics relevant to the Project, it should be
                         emphasized aspects related to access to water, fertile soil, the supply of natural resources especially
                         minerals and the existing areas in undergoing desertification process. Desertification is in moderate
                         stage in the Alto Oeste region and part of the Sertão do Apodi; severe form of the remainder of the
                         latter, the Acu-Mossoró region, in significant part of the Sertão Central and Litoral Norte, and about


                                                                       Page 6 of 21
                         half the territory of Mato Grande; and, very serious in almost all of the territory of Seridó, which
                         includes a core of desertification in its eastern portion. Actions planned by the project, especially
                         those of Typology 2, seek to promote environmental recovery actions in these areas, as previously
Public Disclosure Copy




                         described.

                         19.      The Project does not entail any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible negative
                         impacts. For Component A – Social and Economic Development, with an integrated and sustainable
                         development focus, the Project has statewide relevance focused on reducing regional inequalities and
                         enhanced efficiency of health and education public services in support of an integrated and
                         territorially balanced development of the State of Rio Grande do Norte. As key benefit, the Project is
                         expected to contribute to increased competitiveness of the productive organizations in the priority
                         areas, as well as encouraging good environmental practice especially in the semiarid region.

                         20.     While most direct impacts on environment from the projects are expected to be limited in
                         time and localized near the interventions sites, cumulative impact with potential pressure on
                         environment might result from the regional economic growth expected as an outcome of the Project.
                         Notwithstanding, the Project, under Component B for public sector management, will encompass a
                         wide strengthening planning capacity, monitoring, evaluation and policy making, also including
                         environmental institutions.

                         21.     The most commonly expected negative impacts would arise from the construction activities
                         under Component A, which includes interventions to improve feeder roads rehabilitation for better
                         connectivity between areas of production and consumption implementation of civil works of water
                         supply, sanitary sewage, solid waste management, not including the construction of new landfills,
                         and also the recovery of degraded areas and the implementation of groundwater dams and others
                         hydro environmental works, with no construction of new dams. Impacts from these interventions are
                         expected to be limited, transitory and of short duration. In this sense, the environmental risks
                         associated with this project are limited due to the nature of the proposed interventions, which will
                         mostly take place in sites associated with projects.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         22.      To better address issues that arise from the ESIA, the Borrower prepared a set of mandatory
                         Implementation Manuals to be applied for all types of interventions: Works Environmental Manual,
                         Social Communication Plan, Environmental Education Plan, and also a Natural Disaster Prevention
                         Plan (Annex 1 of ESIA). The ESIA report comprises three main parts: (i) Part A: an Environmental
                         and Social Assessment; (ii) Part B: an Environmental Management Framework; and, (iii) Part C: an
                         Institutional Strengthening Program to support environmental and social management demands
                         coming from the project.

                         23.      Recently, the economy of the state of Rio Grande do Norte has grown faster than the
                         Northeast Region and Brazil, but this economic development has not been homogeneous among the
                         state regions and, indeed, has increased inter-regional inequalities, favoring the territories
                         surrounding the two major cities (Natal and Mossoró) and been detrimental of the most rural
                         economies of the semi-arid territories. Although the extreme poverty rate has been reduced from
                         34.3 percent in 1995 to 12.8 percent in 2010 (lower than the regional average), this fast economic
                         growth has not speeded up the rate of poverty reduction in rural areas, and the state continues to rank
                         low in the country when key socio-economic indicators – such as the Human Development Index, the
                         average per capita monthly family income and social inequality indicators – are considered. The
                         urbanization rate has also increased and reaches 78 percent, but the capacity of the urban labor
                         market to absorb the new waves of workers has not improved.

                                                                      Page 7 of 21
                         24.      One fourth of the state population lives in rural areas with limited access to basic
                         infrastructure and public services. The probability of being poor is much higher among those who
Public Disclosure Copy




                         work on the agriculture. The poor population comprises small-landholders and family farmers,
                         sharecroppers and landless workers, whose livelihood strategies still heavily rely on subsistence
                         crops and are much more vulnerable and less resilient to rain shortages as they lag behind in terms of
                         access to modern technologies for processing and storing their production as well as in terms of
                         access to technical assistance and financial markets.

                         25.      The most vulnerable social groups in rural areas include the families single-headed by
                         women, indigenous peoples (three ethnic groups), and quilombola communities (twenty-one
                         communities certified by the Palmares Foundation). Indigenous peoples are present in the project
                         area and will be among the potential beneficiaries. Adverse effects are not expected for them under
                         this project. The Borrower conducted a social assessment that underscored the pressures and threats
                         faced by these indigenous peoples in their livelihoods and their degree of social and economic
                         vulnerability. The main constraints they face are related with land constraints due to sluggish
                         processes of land regularization, encroachment and land conflicts, land inadequate use and
                         degradation; inadequate housing and sanitation conditions; poverty and food shortage; social
                         discrimination and outside resistance to acknowledge their cultural identities; lack of technical
                         assistance and barriers to their access to markets and finance; lack of income alternatives and huge
                         dependence upon retirement pensions and governmental cash transfer programs.

                         26.      The Rio Grande do Norte Regional Development and Governance project will address the
                         main reasons of the reproduction of poverty in the state s rural areas and will promote the dynamism
                         of local economies, by focusing its actions on the regional areas characterized by the greatest
                         challenges in promoting the generation of jobs and incomes, highest concentration of rural poor
                         people and vulnerable social groups, and highest risks of environmental degradation. The project will
                         prioritize poor family farmers. It aims to enhance productive inclusion, to improve their food
                         security, and to promote environmental sustainability. It will address key bottlenecks to poverty
Public Disclosure Copy




                         reduction by productive inclusion in rural areas which are related with low competitiveness and
                         precarious access to markets given poor family farmers lack of technological innovation and low
                         access to proper technical assistance, their low managerial and productive skills, their low
                         organizational capacity, their low human capital development and precarious access to quality public
                         services, which result in poorer living standards in rural areas as well as in low resilience to cyclical
                         natural hazards (related the most with water shortage and desertification processes).
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa (LCSSO)
                         Clarisse Torrens Borges Dall Acqua (LCSEN)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes               According to OP 4.01 Environmental
                         BP 4.01                                               Assessment, mandatory safeguard policy, the
                                                                               Borrower has addressed safeguards policy issues
                                                                               by conducting a regionally focused
                                                                               Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
                                                                               (ESIA). An Environmental and Social
                                                                               Management Framework (ESMF) was also


                                                                       Page 8 of 21
                                 prepared to outline the set of guidelines,
                                 procedures and criteria to be used for screening
                                 activities and ensure that such activities will not
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 cause any potential large scale, significant and/or
                                 irreversible negative environmental and social
                                 impacts. Therefore, criteria and screening
                                 procedures for the selection of interventions to be
                                 financed was defined during preparation and the
                                 final selection of interventions will be done
                                 during implementation. The Borrower would
                                 apply the environmental “screening? before the
                                 final selection of each investment subproject, as
                                 an action of support to decision making process
                                 during implementation. The final documents of
                                 this study was reviewed by the Borrower, and
                                 approved after the Bank team analysis.
                                 Component 1 of the proposed project may
                                 support small and medium-scale investments in
                                 rural development, health and educational
                                 infrastructure, as well as actions to promote
                                 regional development. Possible negative impacts
                                 from these investments are expected to be small,
                                 localized and reversible. Given these
                                 characteristics of the project, a category B is
                                 proposed.
                                 The ESMF focused on project-specific aspects,
                                 such as institutional arrangements and capacity,
                                 regulatory framework, environmental screening
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 procedures and criteria and licensing. The ESMF
                                 also provides guidance on: (i) identifying the
                                 potential impacts associated with the typology of
                                 subproject investments; (ii) minimizing potential
                                 impacts for productive and infrastructure projects;
                                 (iii) specifying procedures to be used in assessing
                                 environmental and social impacts during the
                                 subproject design stage; and (iv) addressing
                                 identified impacts during the subproject
                                 implementation. The study, to be finalized prior
                                 to Project Appraisal, will include a budget and
                                 implementation schedule, both of which will be
                                 integrated into the overall project operational
                                 manual.
                                 The Borrower also carried out an Environmental
                                 and Social Management Strengthening Program,
                                 to better support demands for building capacities,
                                 after doing an institutional capacity assessment of
                                 the borrower, defining the main functions related



                         Page 9 of 21
                                                                      to Environmental Management Project: (i)
                                                                      Coordination of Environmental Management:
                                                                      exerted by the PMU (linked to SEPLAN),
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      supported by subproject executing units linked to
                                                                      different state departments partner (UES –
                                                                      Unidades Executoras de Subprojetos); (ii)
                                                                      Environmental Monitoring Works: exerted by
                                                                      UES, which are responsible for monitoring,
                                                                      tracking and targeting of environmental action
                                                                      plans relating to Basic/Executive Plans contained
                                                                      in Environmental Manual for Construction and
                                                                      mitigation measures indicated in the
                                                                      environmental permits and detailed set of actions
                                                                      in this Environmental Management Framework;
                                                                      and (iii) Environmental Planning Works: the
                                                                      actions of environmental planning of the works
                                                                      are the responsibility of the construction
                                                                      companies that must follow the Manual of
                                                                      Environmental Works and implement mitigation
                                                                      measures contained in the environmental licenses
                                                                      and bidding documents. The implementation
                                                                      agency has shown adequate procedures and
                                                                      capacity to identify and mitigate similar impacts
                                                                      under the previous Bank funded operations.
                                                                      Principles of OP 4.01 with regards to proper
                                                                      consultation was applied as part of project
                                                                      preparation and ESMF was reviewed by the Bank
                                                                      and publicly disseminated prior to appraisal.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Given the multiple stakeholders and third parties
                                                                      affected by the activities to be supported by this
                                                                      project, the ESMF was supported and informed
                                                                      by high quality social assessment and robust
                                                                      consultation processes. This social assessment
                                                                      will include: an initial socio-cultural scoping;
                                                                      stakeholders mapping, broad information and
                                                                      consultation; and the analysis of risks and
                                                                      potentially beneficial and adverse impacts.
                                                                      A draft ESIA was submitted to the Bank and
                                                                      published on the Borrower’s website (www.
                                                                      seplan.rn.gov.br) prior to public consultations.
                                                                      The final version was disclosed on the Borrower's
                                                                      website (www.seplan.rn.gov.br), on February 15,
                                                                      2013 and will be disseminated in the Bank
                                                                      website after the Decision Meeting.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes              The Natural Habitats policy safeguard (OP 4.04)
                                                                      was triggered and the ESIA addressed the
                                                                      safeguard requirements, screens out all



                                                             Page 10 of 21
                                                             subprojects resulting in any significant
                                                             conversion or degradation of critical natural
                                                             habitats, and includes provisions to regenerate
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             and reforest degraded area, as well as
                                                             Management Plans for Protected Areas, as
                                                             needed,
                                                             Component 1 of the proposed project may also
                                                             support investments for the recovery of degraded
                                                             areas in rural areas, whose selection activities will
                                                             follow the prioritization and definitions of the
                                                             State Program to Combat Desertification and also
                                                             the provisions of the Brazilian Forest Code.
                                                             Furthermore, all planed activities in areas
                                                             considered by the state to be environmentally
                                                             sensitive (i.e., in riparian areas) - Permanent
                                                             Preservation Areas (APP) and Legal Reserves
                                                             (RL), will undergo an environmental screening
                                                             and any potential direct or indirect impacts on
                                                             those areas will be assessed). The OP 4.04 is
                                                             triggered and all planning activities that may
                                                             affect natural habitats must follow World Bank
                                                             policies, identifying monitoring and management
                                                             activities to prevent or mitigate any possible
                                                             negative impact.
                                                             Springs and river margins areas are classified as
                                                             Permanent Preservation Areas (APP) and legally
                                                             protected by Brazilian Legislation (Federal Law
                                                             4771/65). APP use for water systems
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             development, intake and pipelines, requires
                                                             specific permitting, mitigation and regeneration
                                                             measures. Despite the expected positive impacts,
                                                             the ESIA and ESMF include clear guidance
                                                             regarding direct and indirect impacts on natural
                                                             habitats.
                                                             Special attention will be given to areas where
                                                             desertification process was already identified by
                                                             the State (SEMARH, PAE, 2010). In all the
                                                             activities planned for the subcomponent 1.1 are
                                                             the recognition and dissemination of good
                                                             practices with an emphasis on environmental
                                                             sustainability in the coexistence with the semiarid
                                                             and environment preservation. The more critical
                                                             area is the desertification process in Seridó,
                                                             considered one of the three strategic priorities for
                                                             intervention.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36   Yes              OP 4.36 was triggered as a precautionary basis,
                                                             particularly focused on Subcomponent 1.1, as



                                                    Page 11 of 21
                                                                  needed, as particular local development activities,
                                                                  unknown at preparation, could imply using forest
                                                                  in a productive fashion and/or using water
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                  resources from existing dams.
                                                                  Finally, to further mitigate Project environmental
                                                                  risk, a negative list, recorded in the ESIA, was
                                                                  agreed with the Borrower, with types of project
                                                                  activities that will not be supported by the loan as
                                                                  described in the ISDS.
                                                                  Activities under the Project Component 1.1 –
                                                                  subproject for productive chains will include a
                                                                  Negative List (as defined by the ESIA and
                                                                  ESMF) and also consistent with the Brazilian
                                                                  Forest Code. The Negative List includes types of
                                                                  project activities that will not be supported by the
                                                                  loan, including: (i) productive activities that
                                                                  require commercial forest harvesting, wood
                                                                  extraction or firewood use in the production
                                                                  chain; (ii) interventions that include purchase of
                                                                  equipment for use in tropical forests; (iii)
                                                                  interventions that promote degradation of critical
                                                                  natural habitats, deforestation or loss of native
                                                                  vegetation; (iv) interventions in the productive
                                                                  chains located in areas under the process of
                                                                  degradation without the adoption of appropriate
                                                                  management plans; (v) interventions in areas of
                                                                  high risk of natural disasters; (vi) interventions in
                                                                  areas of dispute and/or petition for recognition as
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                  indigenous lands; and (vii) interventions in water
                                                                  supply and irrigation that rely on existing dams
                                                                  15 meters or more in height. So, subprojects with
                                                                  the potential for conversion or degradation of
                                                                  natural forest or other natural habitats that are
                                                                  likely to have significant adverse environmental
                                                                  impacts, which are sensate, diverse or
                                                                  unprecedented, are ineligible. Nevertheless, OP
                                                                  4.36 is triggered given the potential for
                                                                  rehabilitation activities for APPs and Legal
                                                                  reserves.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09   Yes              The Project would not finance any pesticides or
                                                                  other chemical amendments that would trigger
                                                                  OP 4.09. Nevertheless, minor amounts of
                                                                  pesticides would probably continue to be used in
                                                                  the short term by a small portion of targeted
                                                                  small-scale farms. The Project would encourage
                                                                  and support technical assistance for the adoption
                                                                  of organic agriculture and of proven,



                                                         Page 12 of 21
                                                                          economically-and environmentally-sustainable
                                                                          Integrated Pest Management (IPM). This
                                                                          approach would increase farmer’s productivity,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                          reduce input costs and human health risks, and
                                                                          minimize adverse environmental impacts through
                                                                          the virtual elimination of pesticide use. The IPM
                                                                          approach further improves the sustainability of
                                                                          agro-ecosystems by focusing on the knowledge
                                                                          and skills of farmers to better enable natural
                                                                          resource management.
                                                                          The need to use pesticides or herbicides will be
                                                                          indicated in each subproject, as well as the IPM
                                                                          measures to be adopted. When the use of
                                                                          pesticides or herbicides is justified, an analysis of
                                                                          potential negative impacts resulting from the use
                                                                          of these chemicals and the risks associated with
                                                                          the inappropriate handling or storing of their
                                                                          containers will be conducted. The projects will
                                                                          also include measures to reduce those risks, in
                                                                          compliance with Law No. 7,802/89.
                                                                          A Pest Management Plan (PMP) will be prepared
                                                                          and incorporated into the ESMF and the Project
                                                                          Operational Manual. The PMP would make use
                                                                          of the World Health Organizations
                                                                          Recommended Classification of Pesticides by
                                                                          Hazard and Guidelines to Classification
                                                                          (GENEVA; WHO 1994-95). The PMP would
                                                                          also exclude finance under the proposed project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                          for formulated products that fall into WHO
                                                                          classes IA and IB, or formulation of products in
                                                                          Class II, if: (i) the country lacks restrictions on
                                                                          their distribution and use, or (ii) they are likely to
                                                                          be used by, or be accessible to, lay personnel,
                                                                          farmers, or other without training, equipment, and
                                                                          facilities to handle, store, and apply these
                                                                          products properly.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes             Project implementation would not cause any
                         BP 4.11                                          negative impact on known physical cultural
                                                                          resources (PCR). Proposed sub-projects with
                                                                          expected direct and negative impact on known
                                                                          archaeological, paleontology’s, historical or other
                                                                          culturally significant sites will not be eligible.
                                                                          However, they may include historical sites and/or
                                                                          archaeological findings. As such, impacts and
                                                                          procedures for "chance findings" from specific
                                                                          investments under Component 1 (if applicable)
                                                                          assess within the ESIA, and the ESMF includes



                                                                 Page 13 of 21
                                                                        relevant provisions to mitigate any potentially
                                                                        adverse impacts. Such provisions includes
                                                                        compliance with the guidelines defined by the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        National Institute for Historical and Cultural
                                                                        Heritage (IPHAN) regarding historical sites and/
                                                                        or archaeological findings.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10   Yes              OP 4.10 – Indigenous Peoples has been
                                                                        triggered. A screening was carried out using
                                                                        information from the Brazil’s National Indian
                                                                        Foundation (FUNAI) and the Socio-
                                                                        Environmental Institute (ISA) indicating that
                                                                        presently seven social groups declare to have
                                                                        indigenous ancestry and claim the recognition of
                                                                        their indigenous identity in the State of Rio
                                                                        Grande do Norte. FUNAI has opened a Technical
                                                                        Office at the state and started studies to recognize
                                                                        these indigenous groups and works for assisting
                                                                        them. They comprise about 3,170 people and live
                                                                        in seven communities.
                                                                        Indigenous groups will be eligible to project
                                                                        actions according to their expressed interest in
                                                                        participating. Proposals must originate from
                                                                        indigenous demands validated by their respective
                                                                        communities and organizations, through
                                                                        participatory processes. Project actions involving
                                                                        indigenous groups are expected to contribute to
                                                                        (a) reduce their social and economic
                                                                        vulnerability; (b) promote development
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        alternatives that are ethnically, culturally and
                                                                        environmentally adequate, and sustainable in the
                                                                        short, medium and long term; and (c) revert the
                                                                        processes of impoverishment, economic
                                                                        exploitation, discrimination, social exclusion, and
                                                                        cultural devaluation.
                                                                        A broadly consulted Indigenous Peoples Policy
                                                                        Framework was prepared to define the ways and
                                                                        means of project involvement with indigenous
                                                                        groups and ensure adequate procedures for the
                                                                        participation of this population in the project,
                                                                        which will focus on culturally appropriated
                                                                        dissemination activities and capacity building and
                                                                        institutional strengthening strategies, aiming to
                                                                        promote the effective participation of Indigenous
                                                                        Peoples in social networks and in the project’s
                                                                        territorial and deliberative councils.
                                                                        A Indigenous Peoples Policy Framework was
                                                                        submitted to the Bank and published on the



                                                               Page 14 of 21
                                                                         Borrower’s website (www.seplan.rn.gov.br) prior
                                                                         to public consultations. The final version was
                                                                         disclosed on the Borrower's website (www.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         seplan.rn.gov.br), on February 15, 2013 and will
                                                                         be disseminated in the Bank website after the
                                                                         Decision Meeting.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes              OP 4.12 – Involuntary Resettlement has also
                         4.12                                            been triggered. The project is not expected to
                                                                         fund any subprojects that could potentially cause
                                                                         significant physical displacement and economic
                                                                         losses. In principle, the project will seek to avoid
                                                                         involuntary resettlement, wherever possible.
                                                                         Nonetheless, The team has evaluated the types of
                                                                         subprojects proposed under Component 1 and
                                                                         concluded that some proposed activities (such as
                                                                         the building of rural schools, productive
                                                                         infrastructures with small facilities to support
                                                                         production, health facilities, and the expansion of
                                                                         logistics infrastructures, such as feeder roads
                                                                         rehabilitation for better connectivity between
                                                                         areas of production and consumption) might
                                                                         require land acquisition and, consequently, could
                                                                         potentially cause involuntary resettlement. It is
                                                                         expected that, in these cases, the potential
                                                                         numbers of people who might be affected would
                                                                         be quite small and any land acquisition would be
                                                                         relatively small. Given that the subprojects to be
                                                                         developed under the project and the potential sites
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         of intervention are not yet known and will not be
                                                                         selected until during project implementation, a
                                                                         Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was
                                                                         chosen as the adequate instrument and prepared.
                                                                         It will serve as the guide to the site-specific
                                                                         formulation of Resettlement Action Plans (RAP),
                                                                         if needed.
                                                                         A RPF was submitted to the Bank and published
                                                                         on the Borrower’s website (www.seplan.rn.gov.
                                                                         br) prior to public consultations. The final version
                                                                         was disclosed on the Borrower's website (www.
                                                                         seplan.rn.gov.br), on February 15, 2013 and will
                                                                         be disseminated in the Bank website after the
                                                                         Decision Meeting.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        Yes              The OP 4.37 is triggered as a precautionary
                                                                         measure, not to limit any eventual possibility of
                                                                         using existing water sources in subcomponent
                                                                         1.1, with interventions in productive activities.
                                                                         Possible investments may include the use of


                                                                Page 15 of 21
                                                                                water from existing dams for irrigation or for
                                                                                water supply. However, no new dam construction
                                                                                will be financed by this operation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                The Borrower has prepared a conceptual
                                                                                framework of procedures to be adopted during the
                                                                                implementation phase of the project. If needed,
                                                                                the Borrower should arrange for one or more
                                                                                independent dam specialist to: (i) inspect and
                                                                                evaluate the safety status of the existing dam, its
                                                                                appurtenances, and its performance history; (ii)
                                                                                review and evaluate the owner’s operation and
                                                                                maintenance procedures; and (iii) provide a
                                                                                written report of findings and recommendations
                                                                                for any remedial work or safety-related measures
                                                                                necessary to upgrade the existing dam to an
                                                                                acceptable standard of safety. Previous
                                                                                assessments of dam safety or recommendations of
                                                                                improvements needed in existing dam may also
                                                                                be accepted by the Bank. If the Borrower
                                                                                provides evidence that (i) an effective dam safety
                                                                                program is already in operation, and (ii) full-level
                                                                                inspections and dam safety assessments of the
                                                                                existing dam, which are satisfactory to the Bank,
                                                                                have already been conducted and documented.
                            Projects on International        No                   Not applicable.
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  Not applicable.
                            7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The Project does not entail any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible negative
                              impacts. For Component 1 – Sustainable Regional Development and Productive Inclusion, with an
                              integrated and sustainable development focus, the Project has statewide relevance focused on
                              reducing regional inequalities and enhanced efficiency of health and education public services in
                              support of an integrated and territorially balanced development of the State of Rio Grande do
                              Norte. As key benefit, the Project is expected to contribute to increased competitiveness of the
                              productive organizations in the priority areas, as well as encouraging good environmental practice
                              especially in the semiarid region.

                             While most direct impacts on environment from the projects are expected to be limited in time and
                             localized near the interventions sites, cumulative impact with potential pressure on environment
                             might result from the regional economic growth expected as an outcome of the Project.
                             Notwithstanding, the Project will encompass a wide strengthening planning capacity, monitoring,
                             evaluation and policy making, also including environmental institutions.

                                                                       Page 16 of 21
                          The most commonly expected negative impacts would arise from the construction activities under
                          Component A, which includes implementation of civil works of water supply, sanitary sewage,
Public Disclosure Copy




                          solid waste management, not including the construction of new landfills, and also the recovery of
                          degraded areas and the implementation of groundwater dams and others hydro environmental
                          works, with no construction of new dams. Impacts from these interventions are expected to be
                          limited, transitory and of short duration. In this sense, the environmental risks associated with this
                          project are limited due to the nature of the proposed interventions, which will mostly take place in
                          sites associated with projects.

                          To better address issues that arise from the ESIA, the Borrower prepared a set of mandatory
                          Implementation Manuals to be applied for all types of interventions: Works Environmental
                          Manual, Social Communication Plan, Environmental Education Plan, and also a Natural Disaster
                          Prevention Plan (Annex 1 of ESIA). The ESIA report comprises three main parts: (i) Part A: an
                          Environmental and Social Assessment; (ii) Part B: an Environmental Management Framework;
                          and, (iii) Part C: an Institutional Strengthening Program to support environmental and social
                          management demands coming from the project.

                           Given the participatory approach of the Project, the key social-related risk refers to the low
                           organizational level of producers associations (particularly those representative of the most
                           vulnerable social groups), which may not be enticed to answer the calls for projects and/or face
                           great challenges on managing and accounting for the funds they receive. This risk will be
                           mitigated by activities of technical assistance and institutional strengthening, the definition of a
                           special strategy to mobilize and open opportunities for the participation of more vulnerable groups
                           and the mainstreaming of gender issues in project design and implementation. Gender
                           mainstreaming is reflected on the project s emphases on the roles that women play on achieving
                           food security and protecting environmental biodiversity in rural communities, health policies that
                           address reproductive health and the prioritization of women as the main target group of literacy
                           class for adults, as well as on the establishment of a monitoring system based on gender sensitive
Public Disclosure Copy




                           indicators.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            Not applicable as no significant adverse impacts are foreseen for the project as designed.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            Not applicable as no significant adverse impacts are foreseen for the project as designed.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            The Borrower’s institutional capacity for safeguard issues management is considered adequate.
                           The Bank team assessed the capacity of the State, including the implementing agency and
                           partners. Rio Grande do Norte has benefited from continued Bank support in the environmental
                           area since the 1993. Although the Project executing agencies have experience with World Bank
                           safeguards policies and instruments from previous Bank financed operation, many of these did not
                           require any land acquisition, nor did they operate in indigenous areas. For these reasons, the
                           Project has sought to strengthen measures and systems already in place, such as: Environmental
                           and Social Screening requirements, independent environmental and social supervision contracts,
                           public consultation and participatory decision-making processes, and gender disaggregated social


                                                                     Page 17 of 21
                           impact assessments, among others. Capacity building for safeguards management has also been an
                           instrumental part of project preparation, for example workshops were conducted on environmental
                           assessment issues during preparation missions in January and April 2012.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The PIU will be responsible for ensuring that all Bank safeguards triggered by the Project are
                           complied with and that all works under implementation apply the ESMF, RPF and IPPF. The PIU
                           will also provide support to the beneficiary agencies on the preparation of specific social
                           assessments, public consultations and preparation of resettlement / indigenous peoples plans,
                           whenever they may be required. To do this, the PIU has hired qualified social and environmental
                           specialists to support project implementation. The Bank team will also continue to work closely
                           with State counterparts to ensure adequate adherence to all Brazilian and Bank social and
                           environmental standards.

                           The approach for identifying and managing environmental and social impacts and risks under the
                           Project is considered adequate. The Environmental Assessment safeguard is mandatory to all sub-
                           projects that may potentially have an environmental and social impact. Most of the other
                           safeguards policies have been triggered on a precautionary basis. The Borrower has addressed
                           safeguard policy issues by preparing a satisfactory Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
                           (ESIA) and an Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) in accordance with the
                           set of guidelines, procedures and criteria for screening activities and to ensure that the Project will
                           not cause any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible negative environmental and
                           social impacts.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Key stakeholders include small family farmers, community and rural producer associations, users
                           of public health and education services. Women headed households, youth groups, Indigenous
                           Peoples, and quilombola communities are among the most vulnerable social groups that will
                           benefit from project activities. Representative entities and leaderships of these different social
Public Disclosure Copy




                           groups have been consulted during the process of preparation of the Environmental and Social
                           Management Framework and the Indigenous Peoples Policy Framework.

                           Description of public consultation process, participation and outcomes are described in the
                           Environmental and Social Evaluation Report.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                  04-Feb-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                               19-Feb-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Brazil                                                       15-Feb-2013
                           Comments: www.seplan.rn.gov.br/paginas/noticias/detalhe_noticias.aspx?coNoticia=433
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                  04-Feb-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                               19-Feb-2013


                                                                      Page 18 of 21
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Brazil                                                           15-Feb-2013
                           Comments: www.seplan.rn.gov.br/paginas/noticias/detalhe_noticias.aspx?coNoticia=433
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      04-Feb-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   19-Feb-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Brazil                                                           15-Feb-2013
                           Comments: www.seplan.rn.gov.br/paginas/noticias/detalhe_noticias.aspx?coNoticia=433
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      04-Feb-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   19-Feb-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Brazil                                                           15-Feb-2013
                           Comments: www.seplan.rn.gov.br/paginas/noticias/detalhe_noticias.aspx?coNoticia=433
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]




                                                                   Page 19 of 21
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
Public Disclosure Copy




                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                          Bank?
                          Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?




                                                                    Page 20 of 21
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Maria de Fatima de Sousa
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                          Date: 09-May-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Laurent Msellati (SM)                          Date: 11-May-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 21 of 21
