                                                                  INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                           CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                         Report No.: ISDSC155
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Aug-2011

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                      Brazil                                 Project ID:                      P120830
                              Project Name:                 Rio Grande do Sul SWAp (P120830)
                              Task Team Leader:             Thomas Kenyon
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 12-Dec-2011                                Estimated Board Date:            22-Mar-2012
                              Managing Unit:                LCSPF                                  Lending Instrument:              Adaptable Program Loan
                              Sector:                       General industry and trade sector (30%), Sub-national government administration (20%), Public administration-
                                                            Financial Sector (20%) , Primary education (15%), Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (15%)
                              Theme:                        Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (30%), Public expenditure, financial management and procurement
                                                            (20%), Tax policy and adm inistration (20%), Education for all (15%), Rural services and infrastructure (15%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                  Financing Source                                                                                                     Amount
                                  Borrower                                                                                                                 0.00
                                  International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                                  479.90
                                  Total                                                                                                                  479.90
                              Environmental Category:       B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              B. Project Objectives

                              The project development objective is to improve the impact of public investment on economic growth, in part through the strengthening of public-
                              private consultative mechanisms and public sector capacity for monitoring, evaluation and taking corrective action.

                              C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                              The project will span four sectors - private sector development, education, transport, environmental and disaster risk management - financing
                              eligible expenditure programs under a SWAp approach and supported by technical assistance where appropriate. It will also contain a transverse
                              component of technical assistance focused on improving public sector management, in particular capacity for investment planning, monitoring and
                              evaluation and public-private consultation.

                              D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                              Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil


                              E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

                              The State of Rio Grande do Sul has strong environmental legislation which complements that at the federal level and is compatible with World
                              Bank Safeguards policies. However, the agencies implementing the SWAp have only a weak knowledge of Bank policies and will require
                              instruction during project preparation.

                              F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

                              Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo (LCSHS)
                              Gunars H. Platais (LCSEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

                              Safeguard Policies Triggered                     Yes        No       TBD                                 Explanation
                              Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01               ✖                          This policy is triggered given that there are civil works and planning
                                                                                                           activities under several sub-components that will have potential
                                                                                                           environmental and social impacts. All infrastructure works identified
                                                                                                           during preparation will require environmental and social
                                                                                                           assessments. Related management plans will be prepared,
                                                                                                           consulted on and disclosed prior to appraisal.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                         ✖                                   This policy is triggered given the transport component potential
                                                                                                                                    impact on natural habitats and the importance of the environmental
                                                                                                                                    management subcomponent for land use planning. The sub-
                                                                                                                                    component is expected to have a positive impact on the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                    environment by strengthening capacity to monitor private
                                                                                                                                    landholdings compliance with environmental and forest legislation.
                                                                                                                                    The ESMF will include screening criteria to ensure that any potential
                                                                                                                                    habitat impacts are identified and mitigated during the EA process.
                                                                                                                                    The EIA carried out prior to appraisal will take into account its
                                                                                                                                    potential impacts on natural habitats.
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                               ✖                      This policy is not triggered. The project does not intend to invest in
                                                                                                                                    the forest sector and will not support plantations or any forest related
                                                                                                                                    activities.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09                                                                        ✖        This policy should be considered TBD for the time being. The project
                                                                                                                                    does not intend to finance pesticides or other agricultural chemicals
                                                                                                                                    nor is it likely to lead to the increased use of pesticides. However,
                                                                                                                                    the team still needs to confirm whether the project counterparts will
                                                                                                                                    use herbicides or other chemical treatment as part of the RoW
                                                                                                                                    management.
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                              ✖                                   This policy is triggered as the project involves civil works that could
                                                                                                                                    potentially require significant excavations, potentially impacting
                                                                                                                                    physical cultural resources. The ESMF will include screening criteria
                                                                                                                                    and EIAs should ensure that adequate measures are in place to
                                                                                                                                    identify physical cultural resources and take appropriate action to
                                                                                                                                    minimize, avoid or mitigate potential adverse impacts. In addition
                                                                                                                                    civil works contracts should include appropriate clauses defining
                                                                                                                                    steps to be taken in the event of chance-finds during excavation or
                                                                                                                                    earthworks.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                       ✖                                   This policy is triggered given the presence of indigenous peoples
                                                                                                                                    with collective attachment in the state and the potential impact on
                                                                                                                                    them from the education and transport sector investments. The
                                                                                                                                    social assessment will consider potential effects on indigenous
                                                                                                                                    peoples and ensure that loan preparation includes culturally
                                                                                                                                    appropriate consultations. The social assessment and consultations
                                                                                                                                    should result in IPPs for investments identified during preparation
                                                                                                                                    and an IPPF to guide the development of IPPs for investments to be
                                                                                                                                    identified during implementation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                                 ✖                                   This Policy is triggered and an RPF for the entire project will be
                                                                                                                                    prepared given the range of activities supported under the project
                                                                                                                                    that could potentially result in involuntary resettlement impacts
                                                                                                                                    (public asset management, expansion of petroleum sector supply
                                                                                                                                    chains, extension of techno-parks, highway widening, road
                                                                                                                                    maintenance, paving of access roads, upgrading of school facilities,
                                                                                                                                    and development of a new disaster risk management policy).
                                                                                                                                    Specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) will be prepared and
                                                                                                                                    disclosed prior to appraisal for all works identified during
                                                                                                                                    preparation. The project should ensure that adequate support is
                                                                                                                                    provided to develop a resettlement process framework if the social
                                                                                                                                    assessment determines that the environmental subcomponent might
                                                                                                                                    result in people losing access to protected areas.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                                        ✖
                            Projects on International Waters OP/BP 7.50                                                    ✖        This policy should be classified as TBD given the location of Rio
                                                                                                                                    Grande do Sul as a border state and the potential implications of
                                                                                                                                    investments under the private sector development sector component
                                                                                                                                    for international waterways. Its applicability will be assessed during
                                                                                                                                    preparation
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                                            ✖

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                           A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Nov-2011
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
                              should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                The State of Rio Grande do Sul has already initiated the environmental assessments for some of the highway duplication and these should be
                                ready in a few months. Where possible the team will begin work on the other required studies prior to or during the planned preparation
                                mission in mid-September 2011. (Table summarizing the safeguards preparation plan agreed with LCSOS attached to the ISDS).



                            1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                             form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                            Signed and submitted by:
                            Task Team Leader:                  Name: Thomas Kenyon           Date: 24-Aug-2011
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)   Date: 19-Sep-2011
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Comments:
                            Sector Manager:                    Name: Lily L. Chu (SM)        Date: 07-Nov-2011
                            Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy
