                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC2751

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-May-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Jun-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Iraq                           Project ID:      P131550
                            Project Name:      Transport Corridors Project (P131550)
                            Task Team          Ibrahim Khalil Dajani
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          16-Sep-2013                    Estimated        19-Dec-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     MNSTR                          Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                              Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (70%), Public administration-
                                               Transportation (30%)
                            Theme(s):          Injuries and non-communicable diseases (40%), Other public sector governance
                                               (30%), Rural services and infrastructure (20%), Trade f acilitation and market
                                               access (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:    300.00                    Total Bank Financing:       300.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                               Financing Gap:                0.00
                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                     0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                      300.00
                              Total                                                                      300.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           22. The proposed Project Development Objective is to reduce the transport cost, travel time and
                           traffic fatalities between Baghdad west and Rutba along Expressway 1 and between Girsheen and
                           Derabun along Ibrahim El Khalil to Duhok road.
                           C. Project Description
                         Component A: Institutional Strengthening, Capacity Building and Enhancing Governance in the
                         Road Sector. This component would lay the ground for improved institutional capacity and much
                         stronger governance in the sector through supporting key investment activities including:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •       MOCH/SCRB organizational and capacity improvement. This subcomponent would support
                         the improvement of SCRB to become a more efficient and effective agency with high governance
                         standard. The support would include, (i) developing an effective organizational structure with clear
                         mandates and responsibilities; (ii) improving capacity to maintain road and bridge assets including
                         axle load controls; (iii) on-the-job training to strengthen SCRB’s capacity in strategic planning,
                         monitoring, and supervision capacity, including procurement guidelines and contract management,
                         World Bank environmental and social safeguards policies, financial management, road safety and
                         reporting; (iv) developing a bitumen enhancement study towards an improved quality asphalt mix,
                         and v) improving institutional financial management procedures.

                         •        MOCH/SCRB state-owned construction companies organizational improvement. Through
                         the Private Sector Development Trust Fund, the Bank continues to support the Government’s efforts
                         to restructure the State Owned Enterprise (SOE) sector and create a level playing field for private
                         sector investment in productive activities. This includes support in identifying SOEs that are ready
                         for reform, working to reform 180 SOEs, and strengthening the capacity of Ministries to lead reform
                         efforts. This subcomponent would focus on reforming the state-owned construction companies to
                         enable them to compete with the private sector for road and bridge construction, rehabilitation and
                         maintenance contracts whether financed by the government or by international financing agencies.
                         The support would include assessing the institutional structures of the companies and proposing
                         options for revising the regulatory framework for their establishment.

                         •       Enhancement of the Road Sector Governance. This subcomponent will support (i) greater
                         transparency and accountability in the sector through public disclosure of annual sector expenditures
                         and contract awards and agreements via an upgraded SCRB website and media; and, (ii) introduction
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of a new Citizens’ Roadway Reporting System, based on mobile phone and GPS technologies, which
                         road users and adjacent communities can use to report concerns, travel times, etc. for the project
                         roadways. This system will facilitate rapid identification and remediation of road issues through
                         active cooperation of road users, adjacent community members, and road authorities.

                         •       KRG-MOCH/GDRB organizational and capacity improvement. This subcomponent would
                         support the improvement of GDRB to become a more efficient and effective agency with high
                         governance standard. The support would include, (i) developing an effective organizational structure
                         with clear mandates and responsibilities; (ii) improving capacity to maintain road and bridge assets
                         including axle load controls; (iii) through structured and on-the-job training, strengthening GDRB’s
                         capacity in strategic planning, monitoring, and supervision capacity, including procurement
                         guidelines and contract management, environmental and social World Bank safeguards policies, road
                         safety and reporting; and (iv) training.

                         •       Training of local contractors and consultants: This would consist of (i) an assessment of the
                         quality of submitted bids and proposals to identify key weaknesses and develop a structured training
                         program; and (ii) carry out training to improve the understanding of World Bank procurement
                         guidelines and Safeguards Policies as well as overall project management.

                         •       Regulation of the trucking industry. This would consist of (i) introducing standards for
                         service providers, and establishing training and testing systems to ensure that prov iders meet these
                         standards, and (ii) developing truck standards, particularly axle load and gross vehicle weight limits.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component B: Transport and Trade Corridors Improvement. This component would lay the ground
                         for improving transport and trade through supporting key investments in infrastructure improvement
                         including:

                         •        Rehabilitation of Expressway No. 1 Corridor. The total length of the existing corridor is 965
                         km, the proposed project would finance the rehabilitation of approximately 175 km for critical need
                         of safety improvement under IBRD financing . The rehabilitation of other sections of Expressway 1
                         would be financed in parallel by the Government of Iraq and the Islamic Development Bank (IsDB).
                         The World Bank procurement guidelines and safeguard policies will be adopted and applied to the
                         rehabilitation of all sections regardless of the funding source. The three parties (GoI, WB and IsDB)
                         will agree during project preparation on the location of each respective section(s).

                         •      Upgrading the existing road between Ibrahim El Khalil and Duhok via Girsheen. This
                         subcomponent would finance the upgrading of the 25 km section from Girsheen to Derabun. The
                         Kurdish Regional Government (KRG) is financing the upgrading of other sections along this road.


                         Component C: Project Implementation and Monitoring. This component would finance the
                         operational costs of the two Project Management Teams (one in Baghdad and one in Erbil) to
                         coordinate, implement, supervise and monitor the Project implementation.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project would finance:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (i)      the rehabilitation of several sections of Expressway No. 1along the Western Stretch. From a
                         social safeguards perspective, these improvements will involve only rehabilitation of the existing
                         roadway and provision of road furniture; no expansion of the roadway thus no additional land will be
                         required. One of the segments planned for rehabilitated begins just west of Baghdad and it is likely
                         there are moderately sized population settlements in this area and, given this, encroachments on the
                         Right of Way (ROW) are likely and will need to be addressed. The other two segments where
                         rehabilitation is planned appear to be relatively sparsely settled, although some limited encroachment
                         on the ROW is possible by small businesses and vendors. Additionally, the installation of road
                         furniture might possibly hinder road crossings by farmers, herders etc. Identification of these issues
                         will be given careful attention during preparation of the ESMPs and RAPs (or ARAPs).

                         (ii)     the expansion of the roadway connecting Girsheen to Derabun in the KRG region. From a
                         social safeguards perspective, the expansion of the roadway will mean the ROW will be significantly
                         increased, which may directly affect households, businesses and agricultural concerns. A review of
                         Google Earth maps, however, shows that the area is sparsely settled, although adjacent land is used
                         fairly intensively for agriculture. The preparation of the ESIA and follow-on preparation of a RAP
                         (or ARAP) will determine the extent to which households and individuals will be affected by the
                         roadwork and work to identify appropriate mitigation for adversely affected PAPs.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Safeguards continue to be one of the weak areas among SCRB’s staff. Considering the limited
                           previous exposure to World Bank and other international concerns related to environmental and
                           social aspect, the understanding of how these aspects are to be addressed continue to be of concern.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Moreover, the limited interest from the international consulting community to travel to Iraq and
                           conduct these highly specialized reviews and assessments also causes delays in the learning curve for
                           not only to SCRB staff but also the local Iraqi specialists in these fields. Therefore, the project
                           intends to focus on building the capacity of SCRB staff and interested local consultants and
                           contractors to the Bank Safeguards Policies through intensive training program and on the job
                           mentoring. This should be accompanied by a more rigorous effort carried out at the national level
                           which could be included in the curricula of the higher education program.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Carolyn Winter (MNSUS)
                           Dariusz Kobus (MNSTI)
                           Africa Eshogba Olojoba (MNSEE)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             The project is classified as Category A, and this
                           BP 4.01                                             policy is triggered because of potential
                                                                               environmental and social impacts associated
                                                                               with the following civil works:: repairs of
                                                                               damage bridges and other structures,
                                                                               rehabilitation and resurfacing of damaged road
                                                                               sections, installation of guardrails and chain link
                                                                               fences, repairs of drainage system. To mitigate
                                                                               potential adverse environmental and social
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               impacts An ESIA (with a detailed ESMP) will
                                                                               be prepared for the Girsheen to Derabun road
                                                                               corridor improvement in the KRG region.
                                                                               Further, detailed ESMPs for each road segments
                                                                               of Expressway No. 1 will prepared. These
                                                                               instruments will be disclosed in-country and at
                                                                               the Bank’s Infoshop prior to appraisal
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No              It is unlikely that this OP will be triggered as the
                                                                               roads do not cross protected areas or other
                                                                               critical natural habitats.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No              This project does not pass through any forested
                                                                               areas or involves forest management
                           Pest Management OP 4.09             No              Use of pesticides is not envisaged in this project

                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No              Physical cultural resources will not be affected
                           BP 4.11                                             due to the scope of works – rehabilitation and
                                                                               repairs of existing expressway and road.
                                                                               However, mitigation measures will be identified
                                                                               as part of the ESMP in case of chance find.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            There are no indigenous people in the project
                                                                                                                                 areas
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           Road rehabilitation of the Expressway 1 will not
                                 4.12                                                                                            involve expansion of the road, so nearby
                                                                                                                                 settlements and structures are unlikely to be
                                                                                                                                 adversely affected. However, the installation of
                                                                                                                                 roadway barriers and fencing may have the
                                                                                                                                 effect of reducing utilization of small businesses
                                                                                                                                 and vending located on the roadside.
                                                                                                                                 Additionally, it is known that some businesses
                                                                                                                                 and vendors have encroached on the ROW and
                                                                                                                                 these will need to be re-situated and appropriate
                                                                                                                                 mitigation provided.On these sections on
                                                                                                                                 Expressway 1. Resettlement Action Plans
                                                                                                                                 (RAPs) or Abbreviated Resettlement Action
                                                                                                                                 Plans (ARAPs) might need to be prepared as
                                                                                                                                 and when necessary.

                                                                                                                                 The expansion of the Girsheen to Derabun
                                                                                                                                 roadway in KRG will result in ROW being
                                                                                                                                 extended. Although the area is relatively
                                                                                                                                 sparsely settled, it is expected that some
                                                                                                                                 households, small businesses and vendors, and
                                                                                                                                 agricultural areas will be impacted. Installation
                                                                                                                                 of road furniture might also limit human and
                                                                                                                                 animal crossing of the roadway and impact
                                                                                                                                 livelihoods. To this end, a Social Assessment
                                                                                                                                 and Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 need to be prepared, reviewed, approved and
                                                                                                                                 disclosed in-county and at the Bank’s Infoshop
                                                                                                                                 prior appraisal.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            This policy is not triggered as the issue of new
                                                                                                                                 or existing dams does not arise.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             Projects areas are not close to or near
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            international waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             This policy is not triggered as there no known
                                 7.60                                                                                            disputes over the project areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Oct-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             For Expressway 1 sections :
                             -        ESIA (including an ESMP) for the sections of Expressway 1 to be rehabilitated is being
                             initiated. These documents were received in draft form on May 16, 2013 and will be finalized by
Public Disclosure Copy




                             June 15, 2013.
                             -        RAPs (or ARAPs if appropriate) will be prepared for each of the sections of Expressway 1
                             to be rehabilitated. These documents were received in draft form in October 2012 and will be
                             finalized by June 15, 2013.


                             For Ibrahim Khalil - Duhok road (Grsheen to Derabun section) :
                             -       A draft ESIA will be prepared by August 15, 2013, and a final ESIA completed by
                             September 1, 2013.
                             -       A draft Social Assessment will be prepared by August 1, 2013, and a final draft delivered
                             by August 10, 2013.
                             -       A draft RAP will be produced by August 15, 2013 and a final RAP by September 1, 2013.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:      Name: Ibrahim Khalil Dajani

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name:                                                  Date:
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Patricia Veevers-Carter (SM)                     Date: 18-Jun-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
