                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSC777

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Oct-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Indonesia                        Project ID:      P129406
                            Project Name:       Metropolitan and Urban Development Project (P129406)
                            Task Team           Taimur Samad
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           23-Jul-2013                      Estimated        30-Sep-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      EASIS                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector:             Sub-national government administration (40%), Urban Transport (30%),
                                                General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (30%)
                            Theme:              Municipal governance and institution building (30%), City-wide Infrastructure
                                                and Service Delivery (30%), Other urban development (2 0%), Pollution
                                                management and environmental health (10%), Water resource management
                                                (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                       80.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                         400.00
                              Total                                                                         480.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The objective of the project is to improve planning and investment in participating cities in projects
                           that will be economically and ecologically sustainable. This will be done by applying the Eco2
                           Cities principles in participating cities and focusing on two components, namely:
                           i)       Catalyst investments that promote both economic development and ecological sustainability.
                           ii)      Analytical Support and Institutional Strengthening (TA) to support capacity building for
                           each participating city to develop their Eco2 Cities framework, improve planning, budgeting, and
                           design of investment priorities, as well as carry out analytical studies on urban expansion,
                         metropolitan management, and land use planning.
                         C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         As a baseline of this proposed project, the Urban and Local Government team has done analytical
                         work to support the Bappenas (Planning Ministry) on analyzing urbanization and agglomeration
                         issues, which include case studies in the four largest metropolitan areas. The result of the reports
                         indicates that Indonesia needs to leverage urbanization for socio-economic development to a much
                         greater extent. Indonesia’s large metropolitan areas—those with population over 5 million are not
                         leveraging their populations as expected to produce rapid increases in economic productivity.
                         Although Jakarta and Surabaya have relatively high levels of productivity, their rate of growth in
                         productivity is relatively low, averaging less than 1.5 percent (in real terms) between 1993 and 2007.
                         Metropolitan areas in the 5-10 million ranges have actually experienced a decline in real
                         productivity. Such sluggishness appears to be at least partly due to transportation and land use
                         challenges. These metropolitan regions are highly congested, do not have adequate systems of transit
                         to facilitate commuting, have inefficient spatial and land use patterns, and they have problems with
                         goods movement. These cities therefore urgently need investments in infrastructure, together with
                         improved land use planning, including transit and traffic management, as well as urban design
                         solutions to reduce congestion. This proposed project will address challenges faced by cities on
                         integrated urban development by supporting their proposed investments, which promotes both
                         economic and ecological sustainability.

                         The project will be designed as a Specific Investment Loan (SIL), with a proposed amount of IBRD
                         financing of US$ 400 million, to be implemented in a period of five years. The project will use an
                         on-lending mechanism to each city supported by capacity building and technical assistance activities
                         to strengthen the planned investments. The project is intended to be the first in a program that will
                         engage a series of cities over time.

                         The initial set of participating cities will be Surabaya, Makassar, and Balikpapan. These cities were
                         selected by the GOI based on their demand and commitment from each mayor to improve investment
Public Disclosure Copy




                         priorities, which promote Eco2 Cities principles.

                         Component 1: Investment in Catalyst Projects

                         Based on each local government’s Medium-Term Development Plan (RPJM-D), each city has
                         identified a set of initial investment priorities, which have been presented and discussed at both East
                         Asia and Pacific region-wide and national workshops. These investment priorities are described
                         below:

                         City: Surabaya
                         (Population 2,765,908)
                         Priorities: Urban mass transport and waterfront development are two main priorities in the city’s
                         long-term spatial plan for 2005- 2025. The city government is planning an integrated urban
                         transportation system and transformative riverfront redevelopment.
                         Catalyst Projects:
                         •        North-South tramway corridor
                         •        East-West monorail corridor
                         •        Non-motorized transport facilities
                         •        Kalimas riverfront redevelopment
                         Estimated Cost USD350 million
                         City: Makassar
                         (Population 1,272,349)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Priorities: As the largest metropolitan area in Eastern Indonesia, Makassar has some environmental
                         issues in its coastal area such as sedimentation, abrasion, water pollution, and sea level rise.
                         Catalyst Projects:
                         •        Proposed infrastructure to support Balang Tonjong Conservation Lake’s function as natural
                         reservoir, public green open space, water sports facilities, fishery, water treatment plant, and location
                         of informal sector activity
                         •        Proposed slum upgrading project by building low-income flats to be financed by the project,
                         in coordination with State Ministry of
                         People’s Housing that will build supporting infrastructure and facilities
                         Estimated Cost USD35 million

                         City: Balikpapan
                         (Population 609,552)
                         Priorities: Balikpapan’s development plan of 2011-2016 prioritizes maintaining 52 percent of the c
                         ity’s area as green area. The proposed projects will focus on eco-tourism development.
                         Catalyst Projects:
                         •        Investment in Balikpapan Botanical Garden: Proposed main infrastructure and facilities and
                         capacity building to be financed by the project; synergy with central and local budget.
                         •        Mangrove center development: Proposed infrastructure, facilities and capacity building for
                         the development of mangrove center to be financed by the project
                         Estimated Cost USD15 million.

                         Total Estimated Cost USD400 million

                         Component 2: Analytical Support and Institutional Strengthening
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The technical assistance component for this project will support the preparation of feasibility studies
                         and detailed designs specific to the investments planned by the cities. However, the investments will
                         also be supported by broader analytic work, which will ensure that the task team and government
                         counterparts have an adequate understanding of the spatial, institutional, and infrastructural contexts
                         in which these investments are being planned, in order to ensure successful outcomes. The analytical
                         work will have five components:

                         i)       The broad spatial dimensions of metropolitan growth will be analyzed using data obtained
                         from satellite imagery. This analysis will help understand the role that infrastructure has played in
                         shaping patterns of urban settlement, and how the proposed infrastructure can meet the demand for
                         urbanization made evident through the spatial data.
                         ii)      Detailed ground-level analysis of land use, urban form and the modalities of urbanization
                         will be carried out, using indicators relating to demography, housing typologies, land use regulations,
                         and transportation infrastructure. This detailed understanding of how the cities function will serve as
                         an input into decisions made regarding the location, characteristics and dimensions of infrastructure
                         investments.
                         iii)     Land and housing market segmentation studies will be conducted, which will form a baseline
                         against which the transformative economic impact of the projects can be measured. These studies
                         will help local governments understand the impacts of the infrastructure investments on land and
                         housing prices, particularly the impact on the accessibility of land and housing to the urban poor. The
                         cities will be encouraged to institutionalize such studies as regular practice.
                         iv) A local government urban planning capacity diagnostic will be conducted, in which the team will
                         work with local planning agencies (Bappeda) to determine the strengths and areas for improvement
Public Disclosure Copy




                         with regard to organizational structure, relationships with other institutions, technical skills, staff
                         recruitment and training, data systems, and use of data analysis in decision-making.
                         v) A study will be carried out focusing on the governance and management of metropolitan regions
                         requiring multi-jurisdictional cooperation. As the proposed infrastructure is likely to have impacts on
                         entire metropolitan regions, which in many cases extend beyond the cities with which the team will
                         directly engage, it is crucial to understand the means by which cities in metropolitan region
                         communicate and cooperate, and whether successful outcomes can be better ensured by facilitating
                         dialogue between the cities in a metropolitan region and between cities and provinces.

                         This component will also focus on institutional strengthening, to enhance the ability of cities to
                         develop urban systems that promote sustainable
                         and equitable growth. Developing urban systems that integrate land use regulations, transportation
                         networks, housing and services requires strong urban planning capacity at the local government
                         level. Helping local governments develop the required capacity will be a key element in ensuring that
                         there is an institutional environment that can support the infrastructure being built. Based on the
                         results of the local government urban
                         planning capacity diagnostic exercise described above, the team will work with the Bappeda to build
                         their capacity to integrate the planning of proposed investments with a broader planning system that
                         is able to respond to the cities’ needs.

                         Capacity building will also be supported by South-South collaboration to facilitate knowledge
                         exchange from cities in other developing countries which have found innovative ways to strengthen
                         local planning capacity, e.g. Brazil and Mexico. There will also be a knowledge exchange between
                         Bappeda within Indonesia. The exchanges will help cities learn from successes achieved and
                         challenges faced elsewhere, relating to integrated infrastructure and service provision, land
                         management for urban expansion, municipal fiscal strategies, and structuring planning institutions.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         At the request of the GOI through the President’s Office, the World Bank will expand this
                         institutional strengthening and knowledge exchange to Eastern Indonesia, e.g. Manado, Kupang,
                         Ambon, Ternate, and Jayapura.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the             safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project (phase 1) will be implemented in larger-sized cities in Indonesia that are also regional
                         centers of development, namely Surabaya, Makassar, and Balikpapan. Except for Balikpapan, all
                         these cities involve densely populated urban areas with low-income citizens and have sprawled to
                         neighborhood districts. Balikpapan is the largest city in Kalimantan and an important regional
                         development center. Balikpapan has pledged to maintain 52 percent of the city’s area as green area
                         and plans to focus on eco-tourism development and city sanitation, and will therefore provide an
                         important demonstration of balancing economic development with ecological sustainability. As
                         highlighted in section C above, investment priorities in Balikpapan include, among others, main
                         infrastructure and facilities in the Botanical Garden and capacity building to be as well as
                         infrastructure, facilities and capacity building for the development of a mangrove center. The
                         Botanical Garden was few years ago in a secondary and unproductive forest, the land for which
                         belongs to the local government. Infrastructure such as access road, inner roads, information and
                         office center, water reservoir has been constructed gradually. The project is expected to expedite the
                           development of Botanical Garden including inner roads, exhibition building, etc. so that its Master
                           plan can be implemented as planned.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Surabaya is proposing infrastructure and cars for tramlines connecting the north-south of the city
                           along the existing main road and monorails connecting the west and east part of the city along the
                           existing main road. Preliminary site visits suggested that some of the shelters or stop stations would
                           be located in densely populated areas, and in some sections of the alignments there would be a need
                           to cut trees and need to acquire land. The potential environmental impacts and potential need to
                           acquire land and resettle the affected population both for the tramlines and monorails will have to be
                           identified during the FS and EIA Study.

                           Makasar is proposing infrastructure to support the Balang Tonjong Conservation Lake’s function,
                           public green open space, water sports facilities, fishery, water treatment plant and location for
                           informal sector activity. It also proposed slum upgrading by building low-income flats. These
                           infrastructures would have potential environmental impacts and need land acquisition, however, as
                           there has been no detail plans for both activities, the intensity and the exact sites of the potential
                           environmental impacts and need for land acquisition cannot be identified at this stage.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Executing Agency of the proposed project, i.e. the Directorate General of Human Settlements of
                           Ministry of Public Works, has a long-standing experience in the implementation of Bank-financed
                           infrastructure projects involving safeguards management. The Ministry has sufficient capacity and
                           knowledge on managing safeguards based on the Indonesian regulations and Bank safeguards
                           policies.

                           The environmental and social impact management capacities of Surabaya and Balikpapan are
                           expected to be adequate as these cities have previous experience working with the Bank on similar
                           operations such as Surabaya Urban Development Project (SUDP) and Kalimantan Urban
                           Development Project (KUDP), respectively, but still have room for improvement. While the capacity
Public Disclosure Copy




                           of Makassar City is expected to be weak and will need to be strengthened so that each city will be
                           able to prepare the necessary safeguards instruments and carry out subsequent implementation. A
                           project implementation unit (PIU) will be established in each city and will have either qualified staff
                           or consultants to handle safeguards to prepare, implement and monitor Environmental Impact
                           Assessments, Environmental Management Plans, and Resettlement Action Plans during preparation
                           and implementation. Issues related to the capacity of local officials will be addressed through TA.
                           The project will include a needs assessment unique for each municipality. The outcome of this
                           assessment – which will include a discussion of safeguard capacity - will assist in the formulation of
                           a technical assistance package tailored to each city.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Knut Opsal (EASER)
                           Thomas E. Walton (AFTG1)
                           Indira Dharmapatni (EASIS)
                           Andrew Daniel Sembel (EASIS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes   The project will involve large scale
                         BP 4.01                              infrastructure investments, including urban mass
                                                              transport, neighborhood upgrading, sanitation,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              as well as investments in conservation areas and
                                                              the improvements of river banks that can have
                                                              significant impacts both positive and negative to
                                                              human and the environment. In general terms,
                                                              the proposed investments are expected to have
                                                              positive environmental impacts in the long run,
                                                              such as through better integrated urban
                                                              transportation, addressing environmental issues
                                                              of coastal cities related to sedimentation and
                                                              water pollution, improved city sanitation, and
                                                              resilient to disaster risks.

                                                              The general extent of environmental and social
                                                              impacts will be determined by the respective
                                                              feasibility studies, and based on these
                                                              preliminary findings, the Borrower will examine
                                                              the Project’s potential negative and positive
                                                              environmental impacts, compares them with
                                                              those of feasible alternatives (including the
                                                              "without project" situation), and recommend
                                                              any measures needed to prevent, minimize,
                                                              mitigate, or compensate for adverse impacts and
                                                              improve environmental performance.

                                                              Full EIAs will be required for most new
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              investments, and EMPs will be required for
                                                              other investments.

                                                              The borrower will also prepare an EA Executive
                                                              Summary and submit it to the Board prior to
                                                              appraisal. The TT will share the ToR of the EIA
                                                              with RSS for review and comments.

                                                              The scope of the EIA including EMP to be
                                                              prepared prior to appraisal for all physical
                                                              investments is to include the following:

                                                              1. All physical interventions proposed by the
                                                              project, including their ancillary aspects. In
                                                              addition to evaluating compliance with relevant
                                                              Bank policies and Indonesian laws and
                                                              regulations, the EA will take into account the
                                                              WBG EHS Guidelines for traffic safety,
                                                              construction, water and sanitation, and assess
                                                              their applicability to the project.
                                                              2. Disposal sites for the construction waste
                                                              generated by all construction activities
                                                              (especially tramway and monorail construction).
                                                              3. Socio-economic impacts that are not covered
                                                              by OP 4.12 (e.g., traffic management during
                                                              construction, access restriction to business,
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes   A number of proposed investments will be
                                                                 located in areas where natural habitats exist in
                                                                 rivers and lakes. The Project will assess
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 borrower capacity to implement the appropriate
                                                                 conservation and mitigation measures because
                                                                 of potential adverse impacts on natural habitat
                                                                 (e.g. in the case the subproject involving river).
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    The projects may have no impacts on the health
                                                                 and quality of forests and does not support or
                                                                 influence forest management. Creating a
                                                                 botanical garden in degraded forest does not
                                                                 directly affect forest management, nor would it
                                                                 be considered a plantation of the sort that OP
                                                                 4.36 would be concerned with.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The project will not involve procurement of any
                                                                 pesticides or herbicides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   Whether PCR is affected directly or indirectly
                         BP 4.11                                 will be determined when specific locations of
                                                                 investments are known.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No    Initial screening of the potential sites of the
                                                                 proposed subprojects in Balikpapan, Surabaya
                                                                 and Makasar in reference to the EgiMap (2010)
                                                                 prepared by the Bank suggested that no IPs
                                                                 communities are presence or will be impacted.
                                                                 This Policy is not triggered.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   Land acquisition and/or physical resettlement
                         4.12                                    will be necessary for some investments. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 general extent of resettlement will be
                                                                 determined by the FS, and based on these
                                                                 preliminary findings, subsequent RAPs will
                                                                 document potential resettlement- and
                                                                 livelihood-related impacts in detail and specify
                                                                 appropriate mitigation measures. Information
                                                                 from the EIA Study and the FS will be used as a
                                                                 basis for defining the intensity and area of the
                                                                 required land acquisition. A social assessment
                                                                 will be carried out in each project are and
                                                                 Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) will be
                                                                 prepared accordingly. Other large cities may
                                                                 join the project at a later stage and, if such an
                                                                 event is anticipated, the TT will evaluate the
                                                                 needs for a Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                                 (RPF). Finally, for any potential access
                                                                 restriction to natural resources the project will
                                                                 prepare a Process Framework. All the above
                                                                 instruments must be prepared prior to appraisal.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project will not finance dams.

                                 Projects on International                                         No                            None of the potential participating cities are
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            located in the watershed of any international
                                                                                                                                 waterway.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             None of the potential participating cities is
                                 7.60                                                                                            located in a disputed area.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 28-Oct-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      As a programmatic project as described above, each Local government will prepare EIAs and
                                      EMPs for each sub-projects once the sites of subprojects are more clearly defined based on the FS.
                                      Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be prepared by each local government for each subproject
                                      along with the preparation of the DED of a particular subproject. Draft RAP for each subproject
                                      involving involuntary resettlement will be submitted by the Executing Agency for Bank’s review
                                      and approval prior to appraisal. World Bank safeguards documents work will be coordinated so
                                      that a single report, either ANDAL or UKL/UPL, will meet the requirements of both. Existing
                                      AMDAL or UKL/UPLs for a number of investments will be reviewed and updated to fulfill the
                                      GoI and Bank safeguard requirements.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Taimur Samad

                                 Approved By:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan (RSA) Date: 15-Oct-2012
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Franz R. Drees-Gross (SM)             Date: 02-Jun-2012




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
