                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC609

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Oct-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Nigeria                         Project ID:      P126964
                            Project Name:      Nigeria Youth Employment & Social Support Operation (P126964)
                            Task Team          Foluso Okunmadewa
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          03-Dec-2012                     Estimated        26-Mar-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTSW                           Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector:            Other social services (50%), Health (20%), Primary education (20%),
                                               Vocational training (10%)
                            Theme:             Social safety nets (60%), Other social protection and risk management (20%),
                                               Other human development (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                         100.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              International Development Association (IDA)                                300.00
                              Financing Gap                                                                0.00
                              Total                                                                      400.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project will ultimately contribute to improving human capital development among the poor and
                           reducing intergenerational poverty, by ensuring the effectiveness of the mechanism to deliver
                           immediate employment to youths, empower them for future jobs and provide demand side support to
                           the core poor in accessing and utilizing human development services so as to increase their
                           employability and income earning potential. In essence, the project will contribute significantly
                           towards reducing youth unemployment and improving both health and education levels of the core
                           poor families and vulnerable groups in the Country. Therefore the proposed project development
                           objective (PDO) is “to strengthen the institutions and their functionality for youth employment and
                         social service for the poor in Nigeria? The project will support existing, and new Federal and State
                         Governments systems and arrangements to (i) provide temporary employment opportunities to
                         unskilled and semi skilled youths by supporting labour intensive public works schemes and (ii)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         provide skills (trainings, internship and apprenticeship) assistance to youth for employability and (iii)
                         provide conditional cash transfer to core poor and vulnerable groups for education and health
                         services utilization.
                         C. Project Description
                         The project will support existing, and new Federal and State Governments systems and arrangements
                         to (i) provide temporary employment opportunities to unskilled and semi skilled youths by
                         supporting labor intensive public works schemes and (ii) provide skills (trainings, internship and
                         apprenticeship) assistance to youth for employability and (iii) provide conditional cash transfer to
                         core poor and vulnerable groups for education and health services utilization. So the project will
                         have the following components:
                          a.      Public workfare component ($180m).
                          b.      Youth Empowerment Scheme (Skills for Job) ($30m).
                          c.      Cash Transfer Component. ($60m) and
                          d.      Coordination, Institutional, and Partnership Support Component. ($30m).

                         The last component which is the main system component will also support the setting-up of basic
                         program architecture for comprehensive social safety net at Federal level for partnership with State
                         and LGA levels and cover key and central aspects of social safety net program implementation.

                         The target groups for the public workfare and youth employment, and CCT interventions will include
                         extremely poor families with children in the age bracket of 0 # 18 years, pregnant women, street
                         children, the physically challenged, semi skilled and unskilled unemployed youth aged 18 # 35, and
                         unemployed youth in the same age bracket. The target group for each participating State will,
                         however, vary, depending on the main focus within the overall objective of the operation. It is
                         envisaged that close to 10 percent of the poor families, and youths in these categories in each State
Public Disclosure Copy




                         would be covered by the project in its first phase. Possible activities for the public works scheme
                         include "street cleaning, waste collection and removal, traffic control, education and health
                         infrastructure rehabilitation, feeder roads maintenance, flood and erosion control works management,
                         and tree planting to combat desertification. Some states may pilot the inclusion of some social
                         services such as elderly and child care".
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the              safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented throughout Nigeria in some of the 36 States and the Federal Capital
                         Territory (FCT), Abuja
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         Nigeria has demonstrated its commitment to mitigating adverse social and environmental impacts in
                         the implementation of a range of World Bank projects including category A projects. There are
                         adequate legal and institutional frameworks in the country to ensure compliance with World Bank
                         safeguards policies triggered by the project. The Project will be implemented by all State
                         Governments, and coordinated by the Federal Government. At the Federal level, the Federal PMU in
                         the Ministry of Youth Development (yet to be finalised) will be responsible for coordinating the
                         Program. It will screen States, provide technical backstopping during preparation and
                         implementation, and consolidate project monitoring reports to submit to the Bank. The Federal PMU
                           will also be responsible for providing targeted technical assistance to the states. The Federal
                           Government of Nigeria is familiar with Banks safeguard requirements and it should play a key role in
                           providing oversight and coordinating support to state governments. The State PMUs will implement
Public Disclosure Copy




                           their respective components. They will be responsible for the procurement and management of all
                           contracts assigned to them, including all civil works components and consultancy services. The
                           Federal PMU that would domicile at the Ministry of Finance, and State PMUs will be new to Bank
                           safeguard policies. As such, there will be a need to properly assess their staffing and ensure they
                           have the required capacity before the starting of the proposed civil works. In addition, the project
                           management unit at federal and state levels will recruit safeguard specialists to be responsible and
                           accountable for all safeguards issues. These officers will be supported by consultants to be engaged
                           on needs basis. The safeguards specialists in the World Bank team will provide additional guidance
                           as required.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Caroline Mary Sage (AFTCS)
                           Amos Abu (AFTN1)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes              Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) is
                           BP 4.01                                             triggered by the project. Although the objective
                                                                               of component 1 is to reduce youth
                                                                               unemployment in Nigeria, it supports small
                                                                               public civil works thereby triggering OP/BP 4.
                                                                               01. Consequently, a few minor, site specific
                                                                               typical adverse category B impacts are also
                                                                               envisaged. As targeted sites or areas are not yet
                                                                               defined, an environmental and social
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               management framework (ESMF) will be
                                                                               prepared as part of the due diligence. This
                                                                               ESMF will be disclosed in country and in the
                                                                               InfoShop prior to appraisal. For those works
                                                                               that will be known before appraisal, a specific
                                                                               Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
                                                                               (ESIA) and/or Environmental and Social
                                                                               Management Plan will be prepared and
                                                                               disclosed prior to appraisal.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        TBD              The project is not expected to impact any
                                                                               known Ramsar site. However, it is not
                                                                               inconceivable for some of the civil works to
                                                                               affect natural habitats. If so, the ESMF will
                                                                               provide guidance on mitigation measures.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                 TBD              Some of the civil works may involve
                                                                               reforestation/afforestation activities. If so, the
                                                                               ESMF will provide guidance on mitigation,
                                                                               measures, including a forest management plan.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           TBD   Some of the project activities may require pest
                                                                 management. If so, a Pest Management Plan
                                                                 will be prepared prior to appraisal.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   Nigeria has rich cultural heritage resources and
                         BP 4.11                                 some civil works related activities of the project
                                                                 may be located in the area of influence of some
                                                                 sites. To mitigate this risk, specific procedures
                                                                 (such as chance find procedures) will be
                                                                 included in the ESMF.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No    There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
                                                                 area.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   The Banks Involuntary Resettlement Policy
                         4.12                                    (OP/BP 4.01) is triggered by Youth
                                                                 Employment and Social Support Operation.
                                                                 While the project is not expected to lead to any
                                                                 large scale acquisition of land or denial of
                                                                 access to usual means of livelihood, activities in
                                                                 component 1 may lead to small scale land
                                                                 acquisition, temporary re- location, and/or
                                                                 restriction of access to sources of livelihoods;
                                                                 thus OP/BP 4.12 is triggered. Since the exact
                                                                 locations and the number of people to be
                                                                 impacted are not known at this time, the
                                                                 borrower will prepare and disclose a
                                                                 Resettlement The Bank’s Involuntary
                                                                 Resettlement Policy (OP/BP 4.01) is triggered
                                                                 by the project. While the project is not expected
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 to lead to any large scale acquisition of land or
                                                                 denial of access to usual means of livelihood,
                                                                 activities in component 1 may lead to small
                                                                 scale land acquisition, temporary re- location,
                                                                 and/or restriction of access to sources of
                                                                 livelihoods; thus OP/BP 4.12 is triggered. Since
                                                                 the exact locations and the number of people to
                                                                 be impacted for such action are not known at
                                                                 this time, the borrower will prepare and disclose
                                                                 a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) prior
                                                                 to appraisal. The RPF will outline measures to
                                                                 avoid and minimize resettlement as well as
                                                                 assist project affected people in their effort to
                                                                 improve or at least restore their standards of
                                                                 living. The RPF will be disclosed in country and
                                                                 in the InfoShop prior to appraisal. For those
                                                                 works that will be known before appraisal, a
                                                                 specific Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) – or
                                                                 Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (ARAP),
                                                                                                                                 as applicable, will be prepared and disclosed
                                                                                                                                 prior to appraisal.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            N/A
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects on International        No                                                             N/A
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             N/A
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 29-Oct-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      D. For those civil works that will not be known at the time of appraisal but will instead be
                                      prioritized during implementation, an Environmental and Social Development Framework
                                      (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared. Environmental and Social
                                      Impact Assessment (ESIA) studies # including an Environmental Management Plan (EMP), as
                                      well as, whenever needed, Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) will be prepared prior to appraisal for
                                      all the civil works that will be identified during project preparation. All the safeguards instrument
                                      will be disclosed in-country and in the InfoShop prior to appraisal. The ESMF and RPF will be
                                      prepared and disclosed by the client in Nigeria and World Bank InfoShop by end October, 2012
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Foluso Okunmadewa

                                 Approved By:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                                          Date: 25-Oct-2012
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Stefano Paternostro (SM)                                                                                             Date: 15-Oct-2012




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
