                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC2603

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 20-Mar-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-Apr-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Ukraine                          Project ID:      P132741
                            Project Name:      District Heating Energy Efficiency (P132741)
                            Task Team          Yadviga Viktorivna Semiko
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          03-Sep-2013                      Estimated        20-Dec-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSEG                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Energy efficiency in Heat and Power (100%)
                            Theme(s):         City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (80%), Climate change (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       350.00                Total Bank Financing:       250.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                              Financing Gap:                 0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      50.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        250.00
                              Clean Technology Fund                                                         50.00
                              Total                                                                        350.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           15.      The project development objective is to improve the energy efficiency and quality of service
                           of selected Ukrainian district heating utilities and decrease their CO2 emissions.
                           C. Project Description
                           1.     The proposed project would be implemented over six years, through a Specific Investment
                           Loan (SIL) from IBRD directly to DH utilities, guaranteed by the Government of Ukraine, in the
                         total amount of US$250 million, blended with Clean Technology Fund (CTF) loan in the amount of
                         US$50 million; the utilities are expected to contribute funds of approximately US$50 million.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2.       The CTF funds would allow increasing the scale of the proposed investments in building-
                         level heat substations (ITPs) that have surprisingly low market penetration in Ukraine. Most of the
                         countries in Western and Eastern Europe have switched to supplying heat through ITPs due to their
                         economic and efficiency gains. However, in Ukraine this switch has not happened, partly because of
                         historical reasons (group substations were invented in Ukraine) and partly because of prevalence of
                         the old Soviet mentality among Ukrainian DH professionals who still believe in superiority of
                         supply-driven DH systems. Using CTF funds would buy down the investment costs of the
                         participating utilities, allowing them to install more ITPs, thus speeding up the process of
                         introduction of a more efficiency technology to the market, increasing its demonstration effect and
                         reaching the tipping point when other DH companies start investing in ITP installation. Using CTF
                         funds would also lead to lower CO2 emissions that could not be achieved otherwise.

                         3.       The proposed project aims to engage with utilities of different sizes (small, medium and
                         large) to enhance its demonstration and transformation effects. The participating utilities were
                         selected though a screening process managed by the Ministry of Regional Development, Building
                         and Communal Services of Ukraine (Minregion). Minregion developed an application form for the
                         district heating utilities, based on the criteria, suggested in the World Bank “Ukraine:
                         Creditworthiness of District Heating Companies? report. Minregion, the executor of the CTF Project
                         Preparation Grant received by Ukraine as a part of the CTF investment plan, decided to use the
                         project preparation grant to prepare feasibility studies for 6 of the selected utilities.

                         4.      Applications, received from over 60 Ukrainian utilities, were independently evaluated. Based
                         on the recommendations of the independent report, the Government recommended the following 6
                         DH utilities for participation in the proposed project and preparation of the feasibility studies:
                         •       Miskteplovodenerhiya (Kamyanets-Podilskyi),
                         •       Ivano-Frankivskteplokomunenerho (Ivano-Frankivsk);
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •       Kharkivski teplovi merezhi (Kharkiv);
                         •       Vinnytsiamiskteploenerho (Vinnytsia);
                         •       Mykolaivoblteploenerho (Mykolaiv); and
                         •       Khersonteploenerho (Kherson).

                         5.    The two other companies were suggested as potential candidates for the project if financing
                         becomes available for additional feasibility studies:
                         •     Donetskmiskteplomerezha (Donetsk) and
                         •     Southwest teplovi merezhi (Khmelnytsky).

                         6.      The proposed project would consist of two components: (i) investment component; and (ii)
                         technical assistance and capacity building component.

                         7.      The investment component (US$294 million) would improve companies’ efficiency, reduce
                         costs and improve their quality of supply. This component is expected to finance:
                         •       installation of ITPs in resi dential buildings and possibly municipal buildings (schools,
                         hospitals, etc) serviced by participating utilities; and
                         •       replacement of networks with pre-insulated pipes.

                         8.      The scope of the investment component will be determined by feasibility studies conducted
                         for each participating utility. Feasibility studies financed by the CTF Project Preparation Grant are
                         expected to be launched in April 2013. The draft feasibility studies are expected to be completed in
                         July 2013. The feasibility study for Donetskmiskteplomerezha (Donetsk) is being prepared by
Public Disclosure Copy




                         EBRD.

                         9.       Each feasibility study financed by the CTF Grant will develop a strategic investment plan
                         and priority investment program for each participating utility. For each of the developed investment
                         programs, an affordability analysis and environmental and social impact assessment, consistent with
                         the Bank’s safeguards policies will be carried out. Since the participating DH utilities are similar, it
                         was suggested that a programmatic-level Environmental and Social Assessment will be prepared,
                         covering the whole program of improving energy efficiency of DH companies and, based on this,
                         Environmental Management Plans for each of the proposed DH companies' investment programs will
                         be finalized. LEGLE would follow-up with LEGEN to obtain their opinion on whether this is feasible

                         10.      OP 4.12 will not be triggered since no land acquisition is expected. All sites will be located
                         on municipal land which is not used in any way. There are no illegal occupiers or squatters on
                         expected project sites. The proposed project would use existing district heating pipeline routes that
                         are owned by municipalities. OP 4.11 will not be triggered since no old or historic buildings/facilities
                         will be included in the proposed project. No gender-specific impacts are expected. If potential gender
                         effects are identified during subprojects’ preparation, a separate analysis will be done.

                         11.     The technical assistance and capacity building component (US$6 million) would finance
                         operational strengthening of participating utilities. It would include:
                         •       software and necessary training support to implement 100% consumption-based billing;
                         •       regular service quality surveys;
                         •       capacity building of participating utilities to install and maintain ITPs; and
                         •       project implementation support.

                         12.     The preparation of the proposed project would be combined with policy dialogue on tariff
Public Disclosure Copy




                         reforms with the main objective of improving the regulatory practices focused on achieving financial
                         sustainability. The preparation of the proposed project would also be supported by a public
                         awareness campaign, financed by the CTF Project Preparation Grant.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         13. The project will be located in Ivano-Frankivsk, Kamyanets-Podilskyi, Kharkiv, Kherson,
                         Mykolaiv, Vinnytsia and possibly Donetsk and Khmelnitskyi. The specific project sites are going to
                         be selected after feasibility studies are completed based on the proposed priority investment
                         programs; they are expected to include basements of buildings (residential and possibly municipal),
                         spaces below staircases in buildings and pipeline routes.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         14.      The project is going to be implemented by participating utilities and the Ministry of Regional
                         Development, Construction and Communal Services (Minregion). Each utility will have a separate
                         Project Implementation Unit (PIU). It is planned that a PIU established in each of these utilities
                         would include a safeguards specialist, who would be the existing staff of each utility responsible for
                         Environment, Health and Safety. Utility-level PIUs will be supervised by central PIU in Minregion.
                         Minregion is familiar with World Bank safeguard rules, as they have been implementing the World
                         Bank-financed Urban Infrastructure Project since 2004. To confirm that the participating utilities
                               have necessary safeguards capacity, and meet the Banks requirements, safeguards assessment would
                               need to be carried out in each of the participating utilities. Capacity building activities may need to
                               be planned as determined necessary by the safeguards assessment, including training of the staff, etc.
Public Disclosure Copy




                               F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                               Dmytro Glazkov (ECSEG)
                               Klavdiya Maksymenko (ECSSO)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                                 Safeguard Policies                                                Triggered?                    Explanation (Optional)
                                 Environmental Assessment OP/                                      Yes                           The operation is designated as Category B as it
                                 BP 4.01                                                                                         will support investments which are expected to
                                                                                                                                 be Category B. Since it is expected that the
                                                                                                                                 selected utilities’ proposed priority investment
                                                                                                                                 programs, identified in the feasibility studies,
                                                                                                                                 would be similar, it was suggested that
                                                                                                                                 Minregion will prepare a program-level
                                                                                                                                 Environmental and Social Assessment, covering
                                                                                                                                 the whole program of improving energy
                                                                                                                                 efficiency of participating DH companies.
                                                                                                                                 Based on this, participating utilities will develop
                                                                                                                                 Environmental Management Plans for each of
                                                                                                                                 the proposed investment programs.
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No                            No old or historic buildings/facilities will be
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         included in the project
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            No temporary or permanent displacement will
                                 4.12                                                                                            be required for the proposed investments; the
                                                                                                                                 subprojects will be implemented on municipal
                                                                                                                                 land that is not used in any way. There are no
                                                                                                                                 illegal occupiers or squatters on expected
                                                                                                                                 project sites.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 17-Jul-2013



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                             March-June, 2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:     Name: Yadviga Viktorivna Semiko

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name:                                              Date:
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Ranjit J. Lamech (SM)                        Date: 16-Apr-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
