                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC4148

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Jun-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Jul-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Russian Federation             Project ID:      P143159
                            Project Name:      Integrated Environmental Monitoring Project (P143159)
                            Task Team          Adriana Jordanova Damiano
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          04-Dec-2013                    Estimated        27-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSEN                          Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                              Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Public administration- Information and communications (40%), Solid waste
                                               management (40%), General water, sanitation and flood prote ction sector (20%)
                            Theme(s):          Environmental policies and institutions (30%), Pollution management and
                                               environmental health (30%), Climate change (20%), Other envi ronment and
                                               natural resources management (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:    153.00                    Total Bank Financing:        50.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                               Financing Gap:                0.00
                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                   103.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                       50.00
                              Total                                                                      153.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           16.    The Project Development Objective is to improve the national capacity to produce
                           environmental monitoring data and provide accessible, quality and regular environmental monitoring
                           information to various users from the public and private sectors.
                         17.      Specifically, the project will support methodological and technological enhancement of the
                         environmental monitoring network. This will include GIS based and (remote sensing) services;
                         enhancing data system of nationwide environmental information which is used for monitoring,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         control, planning and assessment of the environment, and research; establishment of compliance
                         monitoring data system which contains data on pollution loading; national GIS -based portal and
                         modern equipment, that will allow expanding decision making capacity of various users and thus
                         strengthen the fundamentals of environmental management. The project will also support targeted
                         regional programs for environmental monitoring in selected pilot regions, with significant
                         environmental problems, including support to monitoring infrastructure and capacity of regional
                         authorities for region-sector specific environmental monitoring.

                         Key Development Indicators include:

                         a) Accessible federal data acquisition platform providing comprehensive datasets of quality
                         monitoring information to users from the public and private sectors established and operational at the
                         SFD SEM;

                         b) Improving on-line access of end-users to environmental information <=5 minutes (to date, the
                         information on individual components of the environment is available upon request <= 15 days);

                         c) Spatial inventory of emissions of large point sources with geo-reference in line with EMEP*
                         reporting requirements established in two regions.

                         *European Monitoring and Evaluation Program for emission reporting under the LRTAP
                         Convention.
                         C. Project Description
                         The Project will take the form of an investment loan. The project will finance technical assistance (e.
                         g., studies, knowledge exchange, and training), investments in ICT (system design, software and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         hardware), monitoring equipment, laboratory equipment etc. and will have four components: (1)
                         Support to institutional, regulatory-and methodological framework for environmental monitoring; (2)
                         Information technologies and systems of ecological monitoring; (3) Public access to environmental
                         information; and (4) Project management.
                         Component 1: Support to institutional, regulatory and methodological framework for environmental
                         monitoring (estimated cost US$15.0 million). This Component will address functional gaps in the
                         current environmental monitoring system. The activities will specifically include:(i) improvement of
                         regulatory tools for comprehensive ecological monitoring based on good international practice; (ii)
                         development of comprehensive environmental quality monitoring system and requirements for
                         homogeneity and representativeness of information in line with recommendations of international
                         organizations (e.g., WHO, WMO, OECD, UNECE) and good international practice (EU, USA,
                         Canada etc.); (iii) development of guidelines for the anthropogenic load impact assessment and
                         analysis of limiting and critical ecological factors; (iv) analysis of operational costs of regional
                         segments of existing and perspective USSEM subsystems in pilot regions, using management
                         accounting model for calculating the cost of environmental information products and economic
                         valuation of environmental performance; (v) development of methodology for collection and
                         processing of observation data, quality controls, formats and protocols for representativeness and
                         accuracy of data, as well as the creation and testing an interactive information model for specific
                         users and areas of application; (vi) staff training on new methodologies and use of new equipment
                         for:
                         •       MENR, agencies headquarters, regional offices and branches of the sub-systems of
                         ecological monitoring;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •       Research and information centers (e.g., Main Geophysical Observatory Voejkov, Scientific-
                         Research Institute of Atmospheric Air, (SRI," NPO “Typhoon?, Fedorov Institute of Applied
                         Geophysics, Federal Center for Geographic Information Systems, and the Russian Academy of
                         Science;
                         •       Territorial environmental and geo-information centers responsible for collection and
                         processing of environmental data.
                         During project preparation, an analysis will be carried out of existing departmental facilities for
                         processing and storage of environmental data, observation and data collection points, in order to
                         substantiate the subsequent system optimization and modernization, including observation
                         equipment, ICT and laboratory infrastructure requirements. The methodological framework for
                         operationalizing the monitoring system will be developed under Component 1 early on during project
                         implementation. This includes the methodological guidelines for dataset formats, archiving, spatial
                         visualization (harmonized with the principles of the European Monitoring and Evaluation Program
                         (EMEP).

                         Component 2: Information technology and environmental monitoring systems (estimated cost US
                         $125.0 million). This component will support two levels of monitoring infrastructure improvements:
                         (i) at regional level, through elimination of major technology gaps and moderniza tion of existing
                         observation system in the pilot regions. Candidate regions include the Arkhangelsk, Murmansk,
                         Kaluga, Chelyabinsk and Sverdlovsk oblasts and Krasnoyarski Krai (industrial areas), and Kostroma,
                         Voronezh, Smolensk oblasts (agricultural areas), all of which with high concentration of pollution in
                         densely populated areas, and (ii) at national level, through supporting integration and optimization of
                         the existing system for collection, processing and storage of environmental observation data; and
                         establishment of a single information space which allows for real time data processing, transmission,
                         integration and visualization, access and data sharing by a diverse group of users.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         In selected pilot regions the project will support modernization of analytical laboratories directly
                         related to air, water and soil quality monitoring and a demonstration model for accounting of
                         anthropogenic impact and reporting, using spatial datasets for sector groups applicable to specific
                         users. During preparation the feasibility of including project support to wildlife monitoring sub-
                         systems in the pilot regions by equipping regional authorities with automated infrastructure for
                         monitoring and control will be determined.

                         In addition, this component will include the services of a System Integrator. His services will be key
                         to resolve a number of system integration tasks as follows:

                         •        Conducting a pre-project survey at the federal level and in the pilot regions, including the
                         analysis of information and telecommunication resources created and used by the federal and
                         regional authorities for assessment of negative environmental impacts and ecological monitoring, as
                         well as the analysis of human resource potential;
                         •        Carrying out the engineering design of the FIS of SFD, including federal and territorial
                         segments;
                         •        Providing technical support to the leading implementing agency and Project Implementation
                         Unit (PIU) in implementation of project activities - from formulation of technical requirements up to
                         performing the designer supervision over the execution of contracts for creation of system
                         components;
                         •       Ensuring system integration (format/logical, hardware and software compatibility of
                         individual complexes, subsystems and components of FIS of SFD.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 3: Public access to environmental information (estimated cost US$8.0 million). In Russia
                         the general public had limited capacity to participate in formulation of environmental policies.
                         Current GORF policies call for a shift towards broader involvement of public and a stronger role in
                         local environmental matters through:

                         (i)      Enhanced public access to environmental information. Specifically, the project will target
                         schools, community organizations to increase the demand for information and public understanding
                         of the factors affecting the environmental quality (e.g. surface and ground waters; air quality) and
                         health related impacts. Support will be provided to target groups in building awareness on
                         environment related human health risks.
                         (ii)     A website (in each pilot region) with visual maps of the spatial distribution of emission
                         levels and pollutants in selected urban centers. This will demonstrate innovative methods for
                         providing near-time reporting of spatial and temporal distribution of air pollutants in heavily
                         industrialized urban communities atmospheric dispersion models (ADMs), and regional Geographic
                         Information Systems (GIS).

                         The project will also support a series of events (i.e. conferences, workshop, scientific exchanges,
                         knowledge sharing events) on environmental monitoring, policy development, international best
                         practice, in respect of environmental managemen t and conservation with representation from federal
                         and regional executive bodies, academia and non-governmental organizations.

                         Component 4: Project management (estimated cost US$5.0 million). This component will finance
                         project management cost in relation to PIU management and staff, and operational cost to meet the
                         requirements of the Bank fiduciary policies on procurement, financial management, contract
                         management, reporting and safeguards.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2.       Implementation

                         The project activities are designed to facilitate the implementation of the environmental policy of the
                         Russian Federation. While successful implementation of the policies and regulations to a large extent
                         depends on timely and accurate information on environmental conditions, increasing the
                         transparency and access to information will have positive impact and will gradually change public
                         behavior and expand the demand for and possibility of public involvement in local environmental
                         matters. The project will be implemented over a five years period. The leading Implementing Agency
                         will be the Ministry of Natural Resources and Ecology of Russia (MNRE). Project implementation
                         will be carried out according to the principles of Resolution No. 43 of January 28, 2005, which
                         requires the selection of Project Implementation Unit (PIU) prior to project appraisal. For effective
                         implementation of administrative and technical functions, the PIU will be selected based on agreed
                         Terms of Reference to perform the following functions: (i) organization of competitive selection of
                         consultants and contractors in accordance with the rules of the World Bank; (ii) ensuring a target use
                         of the loan and co-financing funds; (iii) delivery of project and financial reporting under the project;
                         (iv) coordination of all project activities.

                         Financial provision for counterpart funds for preparation and project implementation are already
                         secured within the budget allocations of the Russian Federation and are linked to the lending pipeline
                         in the CPS. A principle approval of the project concept has been granted by Ministry of Finance and
                               Ministry of Economic Development to the effect that the project financing is provided in the federal
                               budget for planning period of 2014 - 2015, and also included in the external borrowing program of
                               the Russian Federation for 2013 and the planning period of 2014 - 2015.
Public Disclosure Copy




                               D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                               analysis (if known)
                               The project will be implemented at national level, plus in two pilot regions. Selection of the regions
                               will be carried out during pre-appraisal.
                               E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                               The Borrower's capacity will be assessed during project preparation.

                               F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                               Alexei Slenzak (ECSEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                                 Safeguard Policies                                                Triggered?                    Explanation (Optional)
                                 Environmental Assessment OP/                                      No
                                 BP 4.01
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No
                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Nov-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      No negative impacts are expected to occur as result of the project investments at national and
                                      regional levels. There is no need to develop environmental impacts or social assessment studies
                                      for the project.
                         IV. APPROVALS




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Task Team Leader:   Name: Adriana Jordanova Damiano

                         Approved By:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Regional Safeguards Name:                             Date:
                         Coordinator:
                         Sector Manager:     Name: Kulsum Ahmed (SM)           Date: 12-Jul-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
