                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                   Report No.: ISDSA867
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Sep-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            South Asia                          Project ID:   P128275
                            Project Name:       Third Phase of the APL on Strengthening Regional Cooperation for Wildlife
                                                Protection in Asia (P128275)
                            Task Team           Sumith Pilapitiya
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       26-Jun-2012                             Estimated   11-Dec-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                         Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: SASDI                                    Lending     Adaptable Program Loan
                                                                                    Instrument:
                            Sector:             General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (70%), General public
                                                administration sector (30%)
                            Theme:              Biodiversity (80%), Environmental policies and institutions (10%), Other trade
                                                and integration (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                               Financing Source                                                                Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              International Development Association (IDA)                                      30.00
                              Total                                                                            30.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective (PDO) is to assist the participating governments of India and
                           others to build or enhance shared capacity, institutions, knowledge and incentives to collaborate in
                           tackling illegal wildlife trade and other selected regional conservation threats to habitats in border
                           areas.
                            3. Project Description
                           The third phase of the regional project focuses on two main areas: (i) strengthening the capacity of
                           institutions in India to allow the country to take the lead on wildlife conservation in South Asia; and
                           (ii) capacity building to address the illegal wildlife trade in cooperation with other countries in the


                                                                         Page 1 of 12
                         region participating in the APL. The project interventions would enhance the capacity of the
                         Wildlife Division (WD) of India’s Ministry of Environment and Forests (MOEF) to steer its
                         neighboring countries toward adopting wildlife conservation policies and strategic management
Public Disclosure Copy




                         initiatives, thereby improving trans-boundary conservation. Moreover, the project would strengthen
                         the Wildlife Crime Control Bureau (WCCB) to effectively address wildlife trafficking in the region.
                         India’s participation in the regional project and its leadership are critical for building and sustaining
                         cross-border cooperation in wildlife conservation and crime control because the other countries
                         participating in the project have common borders with India.

                         The National Wildlife Action Plan provides the strategy and the program for conservation of wildlife
                         in India. The first National Wildlife Action Plan (NWAP) of 1983 has been revised and a new
                         National Wildlife Action Plan (2002-2016) has been adopted. A high-level political commitment for
                         wildlife conservation exists in India, with the Prime Minister chairing the Indian Board of Wildlife
                         which is the apex body for overseeing and guiding wildlife conservation in the country. Major
                         challenges to wildlife conservation in India have been identified to include: (i) poaching of flagship
                         species like the tiger, rhino and elephant; (ii) fragmentation and degradation of wildlife habitats and
                         corridors; (iii) escalating human wildlife conflict; (iv) growing illegal wildlife trade; and (v) need for
                         creation of inviolate areas for flagship species. A review of the expenditure for wildlife conservation
                         during 2007 – 2011 as well as the resource needs and spending capacity of the relevant institutions
                         points to a funding shortfall of about 50%. Since the third phase of the project will address some of
                         the key challenges in the wildlife sector, it is intended to contribute towards bridging the financing
                         gap.

                         The landscape approach to management of cross-border ecosystems among the countries
                         participating in this regional project is essential to the long-term conservation of charismatic and
                         flagship species, like the Royal Bengal Tiger, Asiatic Lion, Indian Elephant, One Horned Rhino,
                         Asiatic Black Bear and Red Panda (to name a few) because these wildlife require vast roaming
                         spaces. Compatible management policies and introduction of cross-border corridors would ensure
                         landscape level connectivity that is essential to the survival of flagship species. It is critical that
Public Disclosure Copy




                         these species are managed effectively not only in the designated PAs within India but also along the
                         corridors that link ecosystems across India’s boundaries. The conservation of flagship species would
                         lead to improved natural habitats for all species and, ultimately, healthy ecosystems for Asia.

                         India’s participation represents the third phase of the regional project with Bangladesh and Nepal
                         participating in the first phase and Bhutan joining in the second phase. At the November 2010
                         meeting of conservation officials from Bangladesh, Bhutan, India and Nepal, the participants
                         discussed the project’s regional issues and agreed to adopt specific mechanisms for collaboration in
                         addressing the threats to wildlife and habitats. At that meeting, the officials conveyed their
                         commitment to join the Regional Policy Steering Committee (a regional governance structure under
                         the project) for ensuring regional coordination as soon as the Committee is established and work
                         towards institutionalizing regional cooperation in wildlife conservation in South Asia.

                         Component 1: Capacity building for wildlife conservation and cooperation for addressing the illegal
                         trans-boundary wildlife trade (US$20.52 million)

                         A capacity needs assessment of the implementing agencies will be undertaken during project
                         implementation using the Capacity Development Results Framework (CDRF) developed by the
                         World Bank Institute (WBI) which promotes a common and systematic approach to identification,
                         design and monitoring and evaluation. In addition to planning the capacity needs of the respective

                                                                       Page 2 of 12
                         implementing agencies, the CDRF will be used for evaluation of the capacity building program
                         supported under the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1 aims to bring about regional harmonization and collaboration in cross-border wildlife
                         conservation and management, combating wildlife crime through strengthened legislative and
                         regulatory frameworks, well-equipped specialized agencies and systems, as well as relevant training
                         and awareness programs for staff across the range of agencies that contribute to the enforcement of
                         wildlife laws and regulations. This component will support strengthening the capacity of: (i) WD/
                         MOEF – the unit under MOEF responsible for wildlife protection, conservation and management of
                         protected areas in collaboration with the state governments -- for undertaking policy development
                         and analysis; and (ii) WCCB.

                         Additionally, the project will strengthen WD/MOEF’s leadership role and strategic approach to
                         regional coordination in wildlife conservation. This role will be supported by implementing agencies
                         under MOEF’s jurisdiction, such as WCCB. Targeted interventions are envisaged under the project
                         for WCCB which has the national mandate for the control of illegal wildlife crime and trade. The
                         interventions under this component are aimed at bolstering WCCB’s role as South Asia’s leader in
                         wildlife crime and trade control.

                         Two broad areas are identified for support: (i) technical assistance in monitoring and evaluation
                         (M&E), policy analysis and development to build WD/MOEF’s leadership in regional wildlife
                         conservation and management; and (ii) assistance to WCCB to carry out the effective control of
                         illegal wildlife crime and trade in cooperation with the other countries. Under these two broad areas,
                         specific activities that would enhance India’s role in regional capacity building, cooperation and
                         coordination will be carried out.

                         Sub-component 1.1: Technical assistance to WD/MOEF on policy analysis and research and M&E
                         (US$8.65 million).
                         The activities under this sub-component would enhance the capacity of WD/MOEF to discharge its
Public Disclosure Copy




                         mandate on policy development, regulation and M&E as well as to take the lead in regional efforts
                         on wildlife conservation and ecosystem management. These activities would strengthen WD/
                         MOEF’s ability to provide policy leadership, scientific management and training for personnel
                         involved in wildlife protection, conservation and management at the central and state level. This will
                         be achieved through: (i) technical assistance for carrying out policy studies, strengthening regulation
                         and developing M&E systems; (ii) support for modern field, research and IT equipment; (iii) staff
                         training and capacity building, including study tours and exchange programs with regional and
                         international conservation agencies; and (iv) support for institutionalizing regional coordination of
                         wildlife protection and conservation.

                         Sub-component 1.2: Capacity building and training for WCCB (US$11.88 million).
                         GOI established WCCB – through the 2007 amendment to the Wildlife (Protection) Act – in
                         response to the increasing incidence of wildlife crime that led to the local extinction of tigers in two
                         tiger reserves. Its mandate includes intelligence development on organized wildlife crime, scientific
                         and professional investigation into wildlife crimes, facilitating coordinated universal action against
                         wildlife crime and ensuring India’s compliance with relevant international treaty obligations. India is
                         well placed to play a prominent role in the South Asia region in this regard. India proposes to assist
                         other countries in South Asia in curbing wildlife crime through improved information,
                         communications and coordination, better legal frameworks, judicial awareness and reforms.



                                                                      Page 3 of 12
                         WCCB has a unique advantage since no other neighboring country has an institution dedicated to
                         wildlife crime control. Yet, at present, WCCB remains a fledgling institution. While WCCB has
                         five regional offices, three sub-regional offices and five border units – in addition to its headquarters
Public Disclosure Copy




                         in Delhi – the lack of trained staff continue to hinder its effectiveness. To strengthen WCCB, GOI’s
                         Planning Commission approved an increase of over 250 new staff for WCCB, including research
                         scientists to run the forensics laboratories. This sub-component will strengthen WCCB in fulfilling
                         its mandate through institutional development and comprehensive capacity building programs.
                         Equally important, WCCB will support capacity building of wildlife crime control units in
                         neighboring countries as part of those programs under this sub-component.

                         Component 2: Promoting wildlife conservation in Asia (US$2.95 million)
                         The objective of this component is to generate and share knowledge as well as technical expertise by
                         promoting research and innovative approaches on emerging challenges in wildlife conservation.

                         Sub-component 2.1: Virtual Regional Center of Excellence (VRCE) for wildlife conservation (US
                         $0.48 million).
                         GOI’s formal request to participate in the APL specified India’s intent to develop and exchange
                         knowledge on conservation and crime control with the other participating countries. To that end, the
                         VRCE would fill crucial knowledge and information gaps in addressing regional threats to
                         conservation. This sub-component entails the creation of VRCE that would include a network of
                         scientists and practitioners whose mission would be to expand the scope and quality of research in
                         wildlife conservation needed to develop a common response against illegal wildlife trade in and
                         outside the region and to address other regional conservation and landscape level issues to be agreed
                         by the participating countries. For all participating countries to benefit from knowledge sharing
                         efforts, VRCE could sponsor the creation of a local networking forum in each participating country
                         to facilitate the exchange of research information, collaboration and coordination of country level
                         institutions involved in wildlife conservation research. Coordination of the forum in India would be
                         facilitated by WD/MOEF through the Wildlife Institute of India (WII).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         VRCE would provide the first (and only) coordinated, institutional response for research and
                         knowledge dissemination on wildlife conservation in South Asia with possible links to analogous
                         efforts in East Asia. The exclusive focus will be on either promoting a conservation-related regional
                         public good or addressing a regional public bad. Given the existence of national institutions with
                         expertise in this area already, it is critical for VRCE to bring value-added and not duplicate existing
                         efforts. By playing the role of coordinator and facilitator of knowledge and expertise, VRCE could
                         become a vehicle for promoting dialogue and good practices as well as disseminating knowledge.
                         Because VRCE will be virtual and will have no central physical facility, it will rely heavily on state-
                         of-the-art information and telecommunication technology (ICT) to conduct its business and to attain
                         its objectives. A Regional Operational Steering Committee (ROSC) – described in Section IV –
                         would assist in the development of VRCE’s overall program and objectives.

                         VRCE would build on existing regional and global environmental initiatives and benefit from
                         established experience, mechanisms and operating procedures. It would draw on strategic
                         partnerships with renowned wildlife conservation institutions in the region and elsewhere.

                         Sub-component 2.2: Innovative research and pilot projects with a regional dimension (US$2.47
                         million).
                         To sharpen incentives, promote demand-driven interventions and encourage attention to regional
                         wildlife protection and conservation, this sub-component would support innovative research and pilot

                                                                       Page 4 of 12
                         projects that would contribute towards more effective wildlife protection and conservation at the
                         national and regional levels. A competitive, demand-driven approach to reward innovation and
                         efficiency of the staff of WD/MOEF, WCCB and other agencies under MOEF’s jurisdiction, would
Public Disclosure Copy




                         be applied in selecting the activities that would receive support under this sub-component.

                         A transparent review and approval process for proposals submitted for funding will be developed and
                         implemented. The eligibility criteria (including a negative list of activities) will be specified in the
                         Operational Manual (OM) to be finalized prior to disbursement. In line with the request of GOI, no
                         field based activities within PAs will be supported under this sub-component. Since the precise
                         activities to be supported under Sub-component 2.2 would be identified only during the preparation
                         of the funding proposals, a typical list of potential activities can be assumed at this time. WD/MOEF
                         has prepared an environmental and social management framework which will be used to ensure that
                         the activities to be funded will have no adverse environmental and/or social impacts.

                         Component 3: Project coordination and communication (US$5.04 million)

                         Sub-component 3.1: Project management and monitoring (US$0.76 million).
                         This sub-component would focus on project management and monitoring. MOEF will be
                         responsible for overall project implementation although specific components/activities wil l be
                         implemented by WD/MOEF and WCCB. MOEF will create a National Project Steering Committee
                         (NPSC) responsible for overall project oversight at the country level. Day-to-day project
                         management will be undertaken by a project management unit (PMU) within WD/MOEF. The PMU
                         will be responsible for implementation of WD/MOEF activities as well as the coordination and
                         monitoring of WCCB-implemented activities. In turn, a Project Implementation Cell (PIC) will be
                         established within WCCB for day-to-day implementation of its activities.

                         Sub-component 3.2: Project communications (US$4.28 million).
                         The project will adopt a multi-pronged approach to communications in order to meet regional and
                         local challenges. In addition to relying on the regular communication mechanisms of WD/MOEF
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and WCCB, the project would support a public awareness campaign targeted at illegal wildlife crime
                         and wildlife conservation. Additionally, awide range of consultations with various stakeholder
                         groups will be conducted at the national and local levels. It is expected that rolling consultations will
                         continue throughout the project cycle. The communications sub-component will be developed and
                         implemented in collaboration with IDA specialists in external relations. Implementation will be
                         coordinated, as needed, with GTI in view of the latter’s broader geographic mandate to engage in
                         demand side management and its partnership with ICCWC.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is being coordinated at the national level and specific project areas within the country
                         will be determined only during implementation. Most of the project activities are in the form of TA
                         and are applicable for most of the country. However, some of the pilot activities under Sub-
                         component 2.2 will focus on the protected and forest areas contiguous with Bangladesh, Nepal and
                         Bhutan.

                         India’s North East Region, constituting 5.2 per cent of the total geographical area, represents the
                         transition zone between the Indian, Indo-Malayan and Indo-Chinese bio-geographical regions as well
                         as being a meeting point of the Himalayan mountains and peninsular India. The North East is thus
                         the biogeographical 'gateway' for much of India's fauna and flora and also a biodiversity hotspot. A


                                                                       Page 5 of 12
                         diverse set of habitats coupled with long-term geological stability has allowed the development of
                         significant levels of endemism in all animal and plant groups. The Eastern Himalaya comprise Nepal,
                         Bhutan, states of East and North-East India, and a contiguous sector of Yunnan province in South-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Western China.

                         Geographically, apart from the Brahmaputra, Barak and Imphal valleys and some flat land between
                         the hills of Meghalaya and Tripura, the remaining two-thirds of the area is hilly terrain interspersed
                         with valleys and plains. The altitude varies from almost sea-level to over 7000 metres above mean
                         sea level (MSL). The region's high rainfall averaging around 10000 millimetres and above creates
                         problems of eco system, high seismic activity and floods. The states of Arunachal Pradesh and
                         Sikkim have cold, snowy winters and mild summers.

                         The 39 million people of Northeast India constitute only about 3.8 per cent of the total population of
                         the country (2001 census). Over 68 per cent of this population (26.64 million) lives in the state of
                         Assam alone. Mizoram has the lowest population of less than a million, i.e. only 0.891 million. The
                         population density varies from 13 per sq. kilometre in Arunachal Pradesh to 340 per sq. kilometre in
                         Assam. The predominantly hilly terrain in all the states except Assam is host to a large proportion of
                         tribal population ranging from 19.3 per cent in Assam to 94.5 per cent in Mizoram. The region has
                         over 160 Scheduled Tribes and over 400 other sub-tribal communities and groups. It is
                         predominantly rural with over 84 per cent of the population living in the countryside. According to
                         2001 census, the total literacy rate of the population in the region at 68.5 per cent, with female
                         literacy rate at 61.5 per cent, is higher than the country's average of 64.8 per cent and 53.7 per cent
                         respectively. Of course, there are significant variations in the literacy rates among different states
                         with Assam, Arunachal Pradesh and Meghalaya below the national average. The economy in the
                         entire Northeast India is agrarian in nature, although little land is available for settled agriculture.
                         The inaccessible terrain has made rapid industrialization difficult in the region. Along with settled
                         agriculture, jhum (shifting cultivation) is still practiced by a few indigenous groups of people.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sangeeta Kumari (SASDS)
                         Darshani De Silva (SASDI)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes               Although project activities are expected to be
                         BP 4.01                                               environmentally beneficial in the long-term,
                                                                               implementation of certain activities will have the
                                                                               potential to trigger environmental impacts which
                                                                               are not irreversible and are likely to be localized
                                                                               and can be easily mitigated. Since the project will
                                                                               operate in areas of high ecological sensitivity and
                                                                               vulnerability, great care will be taken to address
                                                                               environmental issues at the earliest stage possible
                                                                               in order to minimize their potential impacts.
                                                                               However, significant adverse social and
                                                                               environmental impacts are not expected as
                                                                               physical interventions are to be focused on
                                                                               conservation and safety of people. The ESMF
                                                                               that will be prepared will ensure the framework is


                                                                       Page 6 of 12
                                                                         in place in managing environmental and social
                                                                         safeguards including any potential impacts to
                                                                         natural habitats and forests.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes             The proposed project’s objective reflects that of
                                                                         OP 4.04 where the project will not entail any
                                                                         conversion or degradation of natural habitats. It
                                                                         is highly unlikely that the policy will be triggered
                                                                         in its full force as the project will not directly
                                                                         affect natural areas in an adverse way. Aside from
                                                                         EA documentation that may be required for pilot
                                                                         projects under Sub-component 2.2, there is no
                                                                         free-standing document that is automatically
                                                                         required by triggering OP 4.04 as it applies to the
                                                                         project.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes             Some impacts are possible due to pilot projects
                                                                         under Sub-component 2.2, although the pilots
                                                                         will be conducted outside protected areas.
                                                                         Compliance of OP 4.01 will ensure possible
                                                                         impacts to forests are managed within an
                                                                         acceptable level to the GOI and the World Bank.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No              NA

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No              NA
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes             North eastern states of India are generally
                                                                         inhabited by scheduled Tribes. However, the sites
                                                                         of pilot projects under Sub-component 2.2 are
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         unknown, the presence or absence of Indigenous
                                                                         People (IPs) and impacts on them are unknown at
                                                                         this stage of the project. However, OP 4.10 will
                                                                         be triggered to ensure a culturally appropriate
                                                                         Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) will be prepared
                                                                         following meaningful consultation with the
                                                                         affected IPs.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes             The proposed project will not permit any
                         4.12                                            involuntary resettlement and involuntary land
                                                                         acquisition. However, Sub-component 2.2 pilot
                                                                         projects are likely to affect land use patterns of
                                                                         the communities and access to natural resources.
                                                                         This will likely have an impact on their
                                                                         livelihoods. Hence, OP 4.12 has been triggered,
                                                                         and a Resettlement Policy Framework (as part of
                                                                         ESMF) establishes the process by which
                                                                         members of potentially affected communities will
                                                                         be consulted and they will participate in the




                                                                 Page 7 of 12
                                                                                  design of the sub-projects and mitigatory/
                                                                                  compensation measures.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No                NA
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International        No                     NA
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                     NA
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential l arge scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The environmental and social impacts of the proposed project are expected to be positive since
                              the project focuses on tackling illegal wildlife trade and other select regional conservation threats
                              to critical wildlife habitats in cross border areas. Therefore, it is not envisaged that there will be
                              any significant or irreversible environmental or social impacts under the project.

                              The project has triggered OP 4.01 to ensure all physical activities that may be supported by the
                              project are carried out within the required level of safeguards. Since there is a possibility that some
                              of the project interventions will be undertaken in the vicinity of natural habitats and forests, OP
                              4.04 and OP 4.36 are triggered to overcome any negative effects to natural ecosystems. No
                              involuntary resettlement and land acquisition will take place under the proposed project. Although
                              no involuntary resettlement or land acquisition would take place due to project activities, there
                              could be impacts on community livelihoods as a result of piloting effective conservation measures
                              that could affect land use patterns. Thus, OP 4.12 is triggered. In order to safeguard lifestyles and
                              livelihoods of Indigenous Peoples living around PAs and to ensure that the project does not have
Public Disclosure Copy




                              any adverse impacts on indigenous communities OP 4.10 is also triggered.

                              Of the three components of the project, subcomponents 1.2 and subcomponent 2.2 have potential
                              environmental and social impacts. Component 1 of the project will support institutional capacity
                              building and cooperation for addressing the trans-boundary illegal wildlife trade in India, hence no
                              adverse environmental or social impacts are envisaged, except short-term impacts due to the
                              construction or renovation of a few buildings such as the establishment of a service laboratory for
                              wildlife forensic testing for India and countries in South Asia under the subcomponent 1.2. This
                              facility will not be located within PAs, and therefore, it is unlikely that such construction will have
                              irreversible impacts.

                              Under the component 2.1, support will be provided to establish a Virtual Regional Center of
                              Excellence (VRCE). VRCE as the name implies would provide a platform for wildlife
                              conservation scientists and practitioners to respond to illegal wildlife trade through expanded
                              scope and quality of research in wildlife conservation and therefore, will not have any negative
                              environmental or social impacts, but will enhance positive impacts over the long-term. The
                              activities proposed under Component 2.2 will eventually have significant conservation benefits.
                              Due to the demand-driven nature of this component where proposals will be submitted pilot and
                              research on crucial aspects of the conservation activities with regional benefits, it is not possible to
                              pre-identify specific activities that will be included in the proposals until the proposals are

                                                                          Page 8 of 12
                           submitted. Proposals are expected on research on endangered species conservation, preparation of
                           endangered species recovery plans and pilot programs in human-wildlife conflict management
                           models. No adverse environmental issues are expected under this component, while it will bring
Public Disclosure Copy




                           forward positive environmental and social benefits on the long-term. Community participation in
                           implementing the pilot projects on human-wildlife conflict management is critical for long-term
                           success.

                           The project will ensure once the locations of interventions are identified, site specific
                           environmental and social impacts assessments including status and possible impacts of IPs if
                           present are carried out prior to finalization of site-specific activities.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             Improved conservation of wildlife will open the path for increased ecotourism activities. If
                           unplanned tourism development takes place in the peripheries of protected areas could result in the
                           loss of conservation value in the landscapes that contain the PA network. Therefore, proper
                           planning and regulation of development of areas peripheral to PAs are crucial in order to ensure
                           that these areas are managed within their carrying capacities and stress to wildlife is minimal. The
                           perceived economic liability of wildlife conservation to the national economies will be reduced
                           through development of responsible ecotourism, thus providing an incentive to the leadership of
                           the countries to ensure that the PA networks are conserved in the long term.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             In the past, countries have sought to tackle the illegal wildlife trade unilaterally, with
                           uncoordinated investments in enforcement, while the problem is regional in nature. Generally,
                           valued wild resources are poached in one country, stored in another and transported through
                           another to the final destinations. The trade is practiced by moving to the most porous locations
                           with the lowest level of enforcement. Coordination and unification of enforcement efforts is thus
                           essential to increase the costs to poachers and reduce the volume of trade. The regional approach
Public Disclosure Copy




                           proposed in this program therefore seems crucial to effectively address the controlling illegal
                           wildlife trade. Drawing upon the example of the ASEAN-WEN, this project will seek to promote
                           synergies and harmonize enforcement efforts. However, there are very few best practices and
                           lessons that are available so far in this context. Recognizing the complexities involved, an
                           important aspect of this project is to create the synergies and structures that are needed to promote
                           learning, and adaptive management approaches that permit improvements to be incorporated.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) in lieu of project specific
                           Environmental Assessments (EA) and Social Assessments have been prepared as details of
                           specific project locations, sub-project activities and interventions are available until project
                           implementation. The ESMF primarily includes description of the environmental and social
                           policies and legislation that will govern the project interventions, an assessment of generic issues
                           typically associated with anticipated interventions under the project, measures for environmental
                           and social risk mitigation and institutional arrangements for conducting environmental and social
                           assessments, implementation and
                           monitoring, actions to be taken if IPs are present.

                           The World Bank safeguard policies triggered under this project are: Environmental Assessment


                                                                     Page 9 of 12
                          (OP/BP 4.01); Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Forests (OP/BP 4.36), Involuntary Resettlement
                          (OP/BP 4.12 and Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10). Therefore, the ESMF was prepared taking the
                          policies that have been triggered into account and will serve as a guide to the level of
Public Disclosure Copy




                          environmental and social analysis and mitigation required for all interventions supported by the
                          project which will have the potential for adverse environmental and social impacts and thereby
                          ensure compliance with the World Bank environmental and social safeguard policies and the
                          relevant national regulations during implementation.

                          The type of environmental assessment and planning required will be based on the findings of the
                          environmental checklist to be completed for each physical intervention. As a category B project
                          with no significant adverse environmental impacts, all physical activities financed under the
                          project in general, including Components 1 and 2, will be required to prepare Environmental
                          Management Plans (EMP) for each site or activity. No sub-projects will be approved from under
                          the subcomponent 2.2 without a satisfactory EMP/SMP being submitted with the detailed proposal
                          which will be reviewed and cleared by the Bank prior to fund disbursements.

                          The social checklist that will also need to be completed for each site identified will also provide an
                          indication on the need to conduct detailed socio-economic and IP assessments. All activities that
                          may have the potential for social impacts are required to be developed after consultations with the
                          affected community. Consultations are pre-requisite for designing any activity that impacts
                          communities supported under subcomponent 2.2. In order to ensure social safeguard requirements
                          are adequately assessed, the ESMF includes an assessment of generic issues that are expected in
                          view of anticipated interventions under the project, including a Resettlement Policy Process
                          Framework in case land use restrictions and livelihood impacts occur and guidelines for the
                          development of an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) to be used in the event that project activities
                          may take place in areas where indigenous people are located, measures for social risk mitigation
                          and institutional arrangements for conducting social impact assessments (SIAs), implementation
                          and monitoring. The project will not fund any activity if a prior social impact assessment has not
                          been completed if found necessary under the social checklist.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           India’s environmental clearance processes are fully operational and experience and knowledge on
                           Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) has been built in the institutions that are involved in the
                           project. The existing knowledge within the implementing agencies to conduct, review and monitor
                           EMPs under the project is deemed adequate. The primary responsibility of coordinating work
                           related to social safeguards will rest on the Project Management Unit (PMU) under the WD and
                           Project Implementation Cell (PIC) under the WCCB. Based on the findings of the environmental
                           and social checklists for physical interventions, either PMU or PIC will prepare the EAs/SIAs
                           internally or using a consultant satisfactory to the Bank as need may be and make sure that suitable
                           mechanisms are mobilized to ensure their implementation.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Project preparation is done in mainly in consultation with custodians of wildlife conservation.
                           Consultations were held with the conservation community in India on May 4, 2012 with the
                           participation of number of key conservation NGOs and relevant departments including Customs.
                           Since the specific locations of the field interventions are still unknown, more focused group
                           discussions with communities likely to be affected by have not been held in order not to raise
                           expectations in advance of concrete plans for intervention. Such consultations in the absence of
                           knowledge where the site specific activities will take place, as well as not having specific


                                                                    Page 10 of 12
                           knowledge of proposed activities could result in raising expectations of communities that project
                           benefits may accrue and be counterproductive in the longer term. Therefore, site specific
                           community consultations will take place when the sub-project proposals are being prepared.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           However, the project has made provision for site-level consultations with stakeholders prior to
                           finalization of proposals for funding through the subcomponent 2.2. The final proposal design and
                           details in the intervention will be made public at the specific sites prior to approval by the Proposal
                           Review Committee.

                           The ESMF was disclosed to the public in India on June 19, 2012. The draft ESMF was submitted
                           to IDA for clearance on June 12, 2012. It has been made available at the Infoshop as of September
                           12, 2012.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      12-Jun-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  19-Jun-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   12-Sep-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      12-Jun-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  19-Jun-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   12-Sep-2012
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      12-Jun-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  19-Jun-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   12-Sep-2012
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:

                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
                         ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [        ]   No [    ]   NA [     ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats




                                                                      Page 11 of 12
                             If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
Public Disclosure Copy




                             project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Sumith Pilapitiya
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Sanjay Srivastava (RSA)                           Date: 13-Sep-2012
                            Coordinator:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Herbert Acquay (SM)                               Date: 14-Sep-2012




                                                                       Page 12 of 12
