                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                    Report No.: ISDSC638

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Aug-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            India                             Project ID:       P127974
                            Project Name:       North Eastern Region Power System Improvement Project (P127974)
                            Task Team           Rohit Mittal
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           03-Jul-2013                       Estimated         04-Nov-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      SASDE                             Lending           Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector:             Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (100%)
                            Theme:              Infrastructure services for private sector development (50%), Corporate
                                                governance (33%), Other public sector governance (17%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                                Amount
                              Borrower                                                                         105.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                            425.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Total                                                                            530.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed project development objectives would be:
                           To improve the availability and reliability of electricity supply through expansion and reinforcement
                           of power systems in the participating states in the North Eastern Region.
                           C. Project Description
                           The project is part of an overall scheme formulated by GoI for: (i) strengthening/ augmenting inter-
                           state and intra-state transmission and distribution network in the eight states of the North Eastern
                           Region (NER) to facilitate increased access and availability of power; and (ii) development of
                           institutional capacities for the efficient and sustainable operation of the sector. GoI’s request to the
                           World Bank is for IBRD funding support for a part of the comprehensive scheme, covering the
                           strengthening of the intra-state transmission and distribution network and building institutional
                         capacity of six states in the region (Assam, Manipur, Mizoram, Meghalaya, Tripura and Nagaland).
                         The project, as described below, is going to address priority needs and set the platform for the reform
                         process, using the institutional as well as regulatory frameworks outlined by the Electricity Act 2003.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         There is a possibility of future operations depending on the performance of this project. It is
                         understood that the intra-state investments and capacity building initiatives for the other two states in
                         the region will be funded directly by GoI, thus ensuring equity between the eight states. Recognizing
                         the limited institutional capacity of the participating states to undertake efficient implementation of
                         the proposed project, the GoI has engaged POWERGRID as a “design and project management
                         consultant? to the states.

                         As per the present DPR for the overall program, the intra-state investments across the proposed six
                         states include Transmission lines (132 kV, 220 kV and 400 kV); Distribution lines (33 kV); Sub
                         stations (220/132, 132/66, 132/33, 132/11, 66/33, 33/11 kV). These investments could be broken
                         down into three categories:
                         -        Critical and urgent investments (transmission lines as well as substations) to increase the
                         transfer capability of the transmission network.
                         -        Critical and urgent investments (distribution segments as well as substations) to improve the
                         electricity supply and services to the consumers.
                         -        Investments at both the transmission and distribution levels to expand the electricity service.

                         The critical and urgent investments could be viewed as “Priority? investments that need to be carried
                         out to enable the states to draw their share of power from the grid and deliver it to major load centres.
                         Given the fragile state of transmission and distribution infrastructure in the region, it is proposed that
                         the Bank finances the critical infrastructure needs in the first operation/phase (of a series of loans) to
                         enable the target states to draw their allocated share of power from the national grid, to strengthen
                         the state grid to ensure adequate power reaches the major load centers in a reliable manner, and to
                         improve the performance of the distribution segment in providing quality services to the consumers.

                         While ensuring a minimum level of service, the institutional capacity of the various utilities and other
Public Disclosure Copy




                         players, notably the electricity regulatory commissions, will be strengthened through Technical
                         Assistance to help them better prepare and implement the investments under the project. Within the
                         project, a component to fund higher level of investments in states demonstrating progress against
                         certain performance indicators is also being proposed. The project will particularly build on the
                         lessons learned from the Bank’s engagement with POWERGRID, Haryana, West Bengal and
                         Maharashtra, to incorporate to the maximum extent possible the good practices across the different
                         dimensions during project planning and implementation as well as essential functions in utility
                         operations and management.

                         In line with the above approach, the proposed project, with expected Bank support of around US$
                         425 million, will fund the following three components/ activities:

                         (a) Component A: Priority Investment Component for Strengthening of intra-state transmission, sub-
                         transmission and di stribution systems (indicative size of US$ 350 million of IBRD funding)

                         This component will include priority investments in 400 kV, 220 kV, 132 kV, 66 kV, 33 kV 11kV
                         lines and associated sub-stations, as described above. These priority investments will increase the
                         power transfer capability of the transmission network, and improve the electricity supply to the
                         consumers. It is expected that these investments will reduce the overall system technical losses and
                         thus help improve power availability, reliability, and quality.
                         (b) Component B: Performance-based Investment Component (indicative size of US$ 60 million of
                         IBRD funding)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component will also fund investments in strengthening intra-state transmission, sub-
                         transmission and distribution systems as described above. However, the funds under this component
                         will be available to the States only after they demonstrate satisfactory performance against laid down
                         key performance indicators to be finalized during project preparation. As of now, the proposed
                         indicators are proposed to focus on two aspects: (i) implementation performance of investments
                         under component A; and (ii) one or two additional parameters like improvement in Metering/ Billing/
                         Collection; improvement in customer service, Third party energy audits, adoption of Fuel Surcharge
                         Adjustment formulas etc.

                         POWERGRID (as the design and project management consultant for the project), CEA and the
                         States are working together to finalize the priority investments and update their implementation time
                         lines for inclusion in the proposed project. The volume of investment requirement for the respective
                         States as well as the allocation of funds between the two components will be decided once the details
                         of priority investments have been finalized.

                         (c) Component C: Technical Assistance for Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building of
                         utilities/departments (indicative size of US$15 million of IBRD funding)

                         The GoI and the NER states have expressed their support for the institutional strengthening of the
                         various utilities and key stakeholders in the sector, and have agreed to focus on capacity building of
                         the utilities across the six States through this Technical Assistance component. Taken collectively the
                         power sectors in the NER states are below the national averages in terms of size and performance.
                         However, between themselves, the states are at various levels. Some have done relatively better in
                         specific areas. e.g. development of regulatory institutions, use of IT systems etc. In that context the
                         capacity building program under the proposed project will strive to bring all the NER states to the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         same institutional level and thus become a homogeneous group. The main focus of the capacity
                         building program will be to strengthen the core skills of the utility in the areas critical for the
                         preparation and implementation of the proposed investments as well as in the core functions of utility
                         operations and management, so that the desired outcomes of efficiency and service improvement are
                         achieved. The Planning Process, Procurement and Project Management, Financial Management
                         Systems, Metering, Billing and Collection Systems, accountability structures are perceived to be the
                         immediate capacity challenges that need to be addressed. Diagnostic studies are proposed to be
                         undertaken during the project preparation phase in each of the six states for a gap analysis in the
                         power sector for identification of priority areas for institutional capac ity building. The capacity
                         building program shall be specifically customized to each State’s needs while drawing on the
                         possible synergies between them.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the              safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The North East Region (NER) stretches across the eastern foothills of the Himalayan mountain
                         range. Geographically the region is connected to the other parts of the country through a small
                         “chicken neck? corridor in the state of West Bengal. With a total population of 45.6 million (2011
                         census), the sparsely populated region of the North East accounts for about 3.7 percent of India’s
                         total population and covers 7.9 percent of India’s total geographical area. The vast majority of the
                         region’s population lives in rural areas, accounting for 82 percent of the total population as against
                           the national average of 69 percent (2011). The project is proposed to be located across six states
                           (Assam, Manipur, Mizoram, Meghalaya, Tripura and Nagaland) of the North East region of India.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           A large part of the region is hilly and, recognized as one of the globe’s biodiversity hotspots. Forests
                           cover about 56% of the total land area and some are among the most dense in the region. The region
                           has many havens for a variety of flora and fauna, some of which are endemic and others recognized
                           to be threatened at various levels. Of particular attention are numerous corridors/areas of migration
                           of elephants and birds, 46 already recognized national parks and sanctuaries, and other important
                           conservation areas, which transmission lines may need to traverse.

                           The North-East Region is known for its rich cultural heritage and ethnic diversity where over 160
                           scheduled tribes reside, representing about 12 percent of the total tribal population of India. Close to
                           442 languages and dialects are spoken in the region, and almost every community has its own
                           distinct culture and historical context (unique language, customs, traditional and religious beliefs,
                           arts and crafts, etc.).

                           Agriculture remains the backbone of the region’s economy, contributing close to 26 percent of the
                           regional GDP (2008) and provides employment to over 75 percent of the population, with a
                           predominance of agricultural workers being women. The region’s literacy rates of 81 percent for
                           males is slightly lower than the national average of 82 per cent, while the female literacy rate of 75
                           percent is substantially above the national average of 65 percent (2011 Census).

                           The legal and policy framework governing land ownership and settlement pattern varies across the
                           proposed project region in the six states. It recognizes both community and private ownership that is
                           determined by the traditional practices of the tribal groups in the region.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The electricity departments/ power utilities of the states in the North East region have no prior
                           experience of using World Bank Safeguards Policies. In order to help with the project preparation,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           GoI has designated POWERGRID (which has a long engagement with the World Bank) as the
                           "design and project management consultant" to assist the states in project preparation and
                           implementation on technical as well as safeguard aspects. The scope of work of POWERGRID
                           includes developing the capacity of the states’ power sector agencies in managing safeguards by
                           working very closely with each state during the project preparation and implementation phase.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Mridula Singh (SASDS)
                           Gaurav D. Joshi (SASDI)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The project activities are likely to have impacts
                           BP 4.01                                               on the natural environment in a number of
                                                                                 states. Hence, this policy is triggered. As part of
                                                                                 the environmental assessment, biodiversity
                                                                                 impact assessment, based on available
                                                                                 secondary data will also be undertaken.
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       Yes                           Some of the project activities have the potential
                                                                                                                                 to affect Natural Habitats as some components
                                                                                                                                 of the project may pass through relatively
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 pristine area. Hence, this policy has been
                                                                                                                                 triggered to ensure that appropriate instruments
                                                                                                                                 are developed in advance for handling any such
                                                                                                                                 situations.
                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                Yes                           Some project activities will be carried out in
                                                                                                                                 Forest areas and could affect them. Hence, this
                                                                                                                                 policy has been triggered. Mitigation aspects
                                                                                                                                 will be however covered in the overall
                                                                                                                                 assessment and form part of the Environment
                                                                                                                                 and Social Policy and Procedures (ESPP) and
                                                                                                                                 no separate documentation is currently
                                                                                                                                 envisaged for this.
                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           TBD                           Since it is not clear whether there will be any
                                                                                                                                 specific pest management activities, final
                                                                                                                                 decision on this will be taken at the time of
                                                                                                                                 appraisal.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   Yes                           The project will involve some civil works and
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         chance finds cannot be ruled out. Hence, this
                                                                                                                                 policy has been triggered. However, as with
                                                                                                                                 other policies, measures to address its
                                                                                                                                 requirements are expected to be within the
                                                                                                                                 ESPP documentation.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     Yes                           The states have over 12% of the total tribal
                                                                                                                                 population of India, representing more than 160
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 tribes. A Resettlement Action Plan cum Tribal
                                                                                                                                 Development Plan is proposed to be prepared
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           The civil works will require assets that are
                                 4.12                                                                                            traditionally owned/managed by individuals/
                                                                                                                                 collectively/ local institutions. Measures to
                                                                                                                                 mitigate any adverse impacts will be developed.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 05-Apr-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             Each state is expected to develop its own set of Policies and Procedures adapting the
                             Environmental and Social Policies of POWERGRID for transmission and distribution schemes.
                             The scope of work of POWERGRID includes helping develop the capacity of the states’ power
Public Disclosure Copy




                             sector agencies in managing these aspects by working very closely with each state during the
                             project preparation and implementation phase. An overall environmental assessment is proposed
                             to be undertaken for each state. Given the high representation of tribal groups in the region's
                             population, a Resettlement Action Plan cum Tribal Development Plan is proposed to be prepared.
                             The tentative timeline for completing the safeguard related studies is April 2013.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:      Name: Rohit Mittal

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name:                                                 Date:
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name:                                                 Date:
Public Disclosure Copy
