                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA673
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Sep-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Lebanon                            Project ID:   P127306
                            Project Name:     LB Supporting Innovation in SMEs Project (P127306)
                            Task Team         Randa Akeel
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         08-Aug-2012                        Estimated   30-Oct-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    MNSF1                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector:           SME Finance (50%), General industry and trade sector (50%)
                            Theme:            Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (40%), Other Private Sector
                                              Development (30%), Trade facilitation and market access (20%) , Infrastructure
                                              services for private sector development (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                               Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        30.00
                              Total                                                                        30.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           The project’s main development objective is to encourage the equity investment market to increase
                           the supply of early stage investment finance for financially viable, new, and existing innovative
                           firms.
                            3. Project Description
                           The government of Lebanon under this Project will establish and finance a funding program called
                           Innovation in SMEs (iSMEs) to stimulate innovation by entrepreneurs and increase the availability of
                           equity investments for young, growing firms. This type of public involvement in equity funds and
                           grants for businesses is a tested model used by many governments as a means of supporting a
                           funding gap in the market (examples are included in Annex 7).


                                                                       Page 1 of 5
                         The program will not focus on any specific industry or sector. However, based on the Lebanese
                         market which is composed primarily of small enterprises in the services sector, it is expected that the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         iSME funding program will invest primarily in enterprises that are developing innovative products
                         and processes in, ICT, mobile applications and e-applications for education, health, media, and
                         design. Enterprises with proposals for lowering cost, improving productivity, and/or expanding
                         global market outreach through innovative mechanisms and processes for agribusiness and other
                         industries are, also expected to apply. The program will not invest in activities that involve pure real
                         estate deals and construction. A complete list of ineligible sub-activities that cannot be, funded by the
                         iSME funding program is included in Annex 3 and will be included in the Project Operations Manual
                         (POM).

                         Project Components

                         The project will finance two components:
                          i) The iSME funding program which, will have two project sub-components providing two types of
                         financing to enterprises: a) concept development grants (CDGs) to stimulate ideas generation and
                         concept development and; b) equity investment to support the early stage growth of a firm.

                         ii) The second component will be project management and implementation, including marketing and
                         promotion of iSME, outreach for mentorship support from the business ecosystem, training activities,
                         and the establishment of a Project Management Unit (PMU). Each component can be described as
                         follows:

                         Component I:    Innovation in Small and Medium Enterprises (iSME) Funding Program (US$27.5
                         million)

                         (a)      Concept Development Grants (CDGs) up to the amount of US$15,000 (total US$2.5
                         million):
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component will fund the provision of Concept Development Grants to eligible recipients to
                         support the preparation and development of innovative business concepts, strategies, studies and
                         plans. Under this component, potential entrepreneurs with a new business idea can apply for a small
                         grant to help them develop their innovative concept. The grant can be used by innovative
                         entrepreneurs to collect the information and proof of concept needed to attract external investment in
                         their business by addressing key areas of risks. Those can include a business plan, marketing/sales
                         strategy, sector or market assessment, other supportive tools, documents and presentations. The
                         intended outcome of the grant will be improvement in the ability of the potential entrepreneur to
                         demonstrate the value of their proposed business, and make the business idea ready for investment
                         and attract investors.

                         (b)      Equity Investment up to - US$2 million (total US$25 million): This component will finance
                         eligible investments in eligible enterprises. It will provide equity investment in an enterprise
                         alongside another institutional investor . It is envisaged that equity investments from iSME will take
                         the same risk as the investor (pari passu) and will be made at three different stages of risk finance
                         corresponding broadly to: Seed Capital (US$25,000 – US$200,000) Venture Capital (US$200,000 –
                         US$500,000); and Growth Capital (US$500,000 – US$2,000,000). In the current Lebanese market
                         all three of these categories are weakly represented and so justify the participation of this funding
                         program on gap filling grounds. A minority percentage of the iSME funds will be, invested in
                         Growth Capital of US$2 million as a means of providing viability and sustainability of iSME for the

                                                                       Page 2 of 5
                         longer term.

                         Component II: Project Management (US$2.425 million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component will support the establishment of the PMU, Project management and
                         implementation, and carrying out marketing and outreach activities. It will include provisions of
                         goods and consultants’ services, including audit, and financing of Incremental Operating Costs,
                         Training and Incremental Fees.

                         A monitoring and evaluation (M&E) framework is outlined in Annex 1A of the Project Appraisal
                         Document (PAD). The framework builds on the results outlined in the project development objective
                         (PDO) above and includes indicators to assess accomplishments against the PDO and project
                         components. Monitoring and evaluation of project components, sub-components, and activities will
                         be a streamlined, integrated aspect of project implementation and management. Primary
                         responsibility for results monitoring will fall on Kafalat. Kafalat will present an M&E report to the
                         MOF (and to the WB) on a semi Annual basis. Details on the arrangements made for M& E can be
                         found in Annex 1 of the PAD.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         N/A

                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Chaogang Wang (SDV)
                         Suiko Yoshijima (MNSEN)

                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       No
Public Disclosure Copy




                          BP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No

                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09            No

                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No
                          BP 4.11
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No

                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     No
                          4.12
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No

                          Projects on International          No
                          Waterways OP/BP 7.50




                                                                      Page 3 of 5
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential l arge scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                Social safeguards policies are not expected to be triggered. This project will fund small concept
                              grants and equity and does not fund any works. In addition, the project will not finance any
                              activities which would involve land acquisition or involuntary resettlement impacts. Therefore,
                              this project would not trigger the WB policy on Involuntary Resettlement OP 4.12. This project
                              will also not fund activities which can affect any indigenous peoples' communities or groups. This
                              project will not involve any physical interventions and none of the Bank’s environmental
                              safeguard policies will be triggered. It is expected to finance small enterprises in the services
                              sector like ICT, which is unlikely to cause any environmental impacts. The activities financed by
                              the project will be mainly process improvements through innovative mechanism, cost reduction,
                              and institutional development and will not involve physical interventions. The project’s activities
                              will not result in any environmental impacts and therefore, this project is designated Category C.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                                No indirect and cumulative impacts are expected.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                                N/A
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                The implementation agency is KAFALAT the Lebanese SME guarantee agency in Lebanon.
                              Kafalat will be in charge of conducting screening following the screening framework provided in
                              the project operations manual (POM). A complete list of ineligible sub-activities that cannot be
                              funded by the project is included in the POM and is set forth in Annex 3 of the project appraisal
                              document (PAD). Kafalat signed a collaboration agreement with the Multilateral Investment
                              Guarantee Agency (MIGA) in 2011. Through such collaboration, Kafalat is familiar with the
                              environmental and social risk management of the WB. Kafalat’s capacity to conduct the screening
                              necessary for safeguards was assessed and was found acceptable given the high technical skills of
                              its management and staff in assessing enterprises and business plans. Kafalat also has access to
                              consultants on safeguards in environment, chemical, energy, social development and others, which
                              it will use should it need additional clarifications Some basic training and guidance notes on
                              safeguards will be provided at the launch of the project to the newly hired PMU staff.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                                N/A
                           B. Disclosure Requirements Date
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the



                                                                        Page 4 of 5
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or  EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                            N/A
Public Disclosure Copy




                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
                           ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Randa Akeel
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Simon C. Bell (SM)                          Date: 28-Sep-2012




                                                                      Page 5 of 5
