                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC3427

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Jul-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Jul-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Lesotho                          Project ID:       P144933
                            Project Name:      Second Private Sector Competitiveness and Economic Diversification Prj
                                               (P144933)
                            Task Team          Smita Kuriakose
                            Leader:
                            Estimated                                           Estimated         31-Oct-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: AFTFE                                Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         General industry and trade sector (50%), Other industry (40%), SME Finance
                                               (10%)
                            Theme(s):          Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (50%), Export development and
                                               competitiveness (30%), Other Private Sector Development (20 %)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     15.00                      Total Bank Financing:         13.10
                            Total Cofinancing:                                 Financing Gap:                 0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                             1.90
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                   13.10
                              Total                                                                         15.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The development objective of the proposed project is to contribute to increased private sector
                           investments, firm growth and jobs created in non- traditional sectors. This will be achieved by (i)
                           improving business environment; (ii) increasing access to finance; (iii) supporting investment
                           promotion in new sectors with increased backward linkages to the local economy and (iv) targeted
                         support to new growth sectors such as horticulture and tourism all of which will benefit both micro
                         entrepreneurs and SMEs.
                         C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1.       The project will comprise two mutually- reinforcing components: (i) Improving the business
                         environment; and (ii) Increasing economic diversification through targeted support to new growth
                         sectors.

                         COMPONENT 1: Improving the Business Environment

                         Sub-component 1A: Business Registration, licensing and construction permit reform
                         2.      The objective of this component is to reduce the time and cost for registering a business and
                         obtaining construction permits. This component will support the drafting and implementation of the
                         Business Registration Bill which aims to cover all businesses, including sole proprietors and
                         partnerships. This will enable the benefits of the OBFC system to go beyond company registration
                         and register sole proprietors and partnerships, and also increase formalization of businesses.

                         3.      Inspired by the success of the company registration under the OBFC, the GoL has
                         undertaken steps to modernize its industrial licensing regime. The GoL recognizes that the current
                         licensing system of Lesotho is cumbersome, involving multiple agencies. In order to tackle these
                         shortcomings, GoL was supported by the PSCED Project to draft the 2013 Industrial Licensing Bill
                         which is to replace the outdated 1969 Industrial Licensing Act. The new project will support GoL to
                         implement this new Industrial Licensing Bill. In addition, the introduction of a streamlined risk-
                         based environmental and health inspection procedure during the business registration and licensing
                         procedures can further improve the process of business start-up and operation, and remove
                         unnecessary regulatory burden for the private sector, resulting in saving time, cost and increasing
                         numbers of compliant businesses.

                         4.       One of the worst performing DB indicators for Lesotho is the process of obtaining
Public Disclosure Copy




                         construction permits. Currently the country is ranked 145 out of 183 economies globally. While in
                         Lesotho, there are only 11 steps, which is below the average of 15 steps for Sub-Saharan Africa and
                         the 14 steps for OECD countries, it takes an average of 330 days to obtain a construction permit in
                         Lesotho. A major reason for that is the lack of coordination between the Maseru City Council (MCC)
                         and the different departments and agencies, taking an average of 106 days and 3 separate procedures
                         for an entrepreneur to obtain a building permit to use the building. The project will help streamline
                         the construction permit system within the MCC, by automating the document workflow, digitizing
                         the back-office functions of MCC and digitizing the archive wherever possible in order to create
                         automated, predictable and transparent systems, thus reducing time, cost and regulatory burden for
                         the private sector, and at the same time reducing the transaction costs for the MCC.

                         Sub-component 1B: Improving Access to Finance

                         5.       The objective of this component is to improve the access to finance in Lesotho, by providing
                         a stable and predictable loan market and credit worthiness system (credit bureau), providing a
                         diversified set of the financial services (financial leasing and movable collateral) and extend these
                         new services to the unbanked population. The establishment of a credit bureau will cover the entire
                         population and provide creditors with information for assessing credit worthiness of borrowers, thus
                         ensuring stability and predictability in the market. The introduction of a movable collateral registry
                         will allow borrowers to use movables to secure loans, thus removing the burden from banks to
                         require only immovable security, and include unbanked population. This registry will aim at
                         including information on financial leasing, thereby implementing the leasing regulations that were
                         finalized under the PSCED I project. These reforms together help modernize the financial services
Public Disclosure Copy




                         market, by allowing lenders and borrowers new forms of asset-financing.

                         6.       In addition, the availability and cost of credit are positively correlated with the strength of
                         creditor rights’ protection. The protection of creditor rights includes an effective debt enforcement
                         regime for individual creditors to recover their debt, and a robust and efficient insolvency regime,
                         which regulates collective creditor recovery. The project will provide technical assistance to help
                         modernize the Insolvency Proclamation and ensure coherency with the liquidation provisions.

                         COMPONENT 2: Supporting Economic Diversification

                         Sub-component 2A: Supporting investment promotion and increasing linkages to the local economy

                         7.       This component of the project will aim to provide the GoL with support towards achieving
                         sustainable diversification of the country’s export manufacturing program as well as provide support
                         to strengthen the local SME capacity. This diversification needs to be achieved such that there is
                         horizontal diversification – where non-textile industries need to be attracted, combined with
                         increased localization – where local participation in the manufacturing sector increases in terms of
                         providing technical and managerial skills and supplying export-oriented firms.

                         8.       The project will focus on delivering a mixture of strategic and operational outcomes in an
                         integrated, sequential way. There is evidence to show that the existing factory sites do not provide
                         the desirable infrastructure and services to foreign investors due primarily to the very low rents that
                         are paid for these sites. There are likely several options for the commercialization of factory sites,
                         including: i) fully private development, ownership and operation of the industrial estate as a going
                         concern; and, ii) private construction and leasing of individual factory shells on LNDC serviced
                         industrial land. The project would support the technical evaluation of options for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         commercialization of a site which can meet unmet demand for factory sites from new investors. The
                         TA provided will support designing a PPP deal that would attract private developers to construct and
                         manage the factory site on a commercial and sustainable basis.

                         9.     The project will also provide technical assistance on implementing targeted programs that
                         would facilitate linkages between these foreign investors and domestic SMEs. Support measures
                         would help facilitate improved information flows and targeted instruments to help increase business
                         opportunities between the two groups while simultaneously also improving capacity of the local
                         SMEs.

                         Sub-component 2B: Supporting the Tourism Sector

                         10.       Another vital source of growth for Lesotho could be the development of the tourism sector.
                         The Lesotho PSCED Project to date has supported activities targeted to address fundamental tourism
                         sector constraints. Increased competitiveness in the tourism sector mandates efforts that a) better
                         quantify and track sector performance, (b) improve standards, (c) strengthen the country’s unique
                         offerings, and (d) support an enabling institutional framework. This sub-component will support
                         tourism value chain development through targeted activities including development of tourism
                         statistics and continuing the implementation of the star grading system for accommodation.
                         11.      Further, support will also be provided to the handicrafts sector by increasing their capacity to
                         both produce domestically and export. In order to spur tourists and domestic demand and provide a
                         sustainable retail market outlet, the project will support the development of a privately managed
Public Disclosure Copy




                         centrally located handcraft marketplace in Maseru. The marketplace will be financially sustainable
                         and include a tourism information hub, attracting the tourist market. The tourism information hub
                         will offer market based services in order to meet the needs of tourists and generate income to cover
                         operational costs.

                         Sub-component 2C: Expanding Commercial Horticulture

                         12.     The pilot farms under the PSCED Project, were created to demonstrate the potential for
                         commercial fruit farming in Lesotho, test various varieties of fruit under Lesotho growing conditions
                         and work in conjunction with Government to ensure that policies and regulations are in place to
                         support sector development. The pilot farms have realized a number of successes, including
                         Lesotho’s first fruit exports and production of the first Grade 1 apples in the country. Also, lessons
                         learned from the horticultural pilot farm project are being applied to a national rollout of larger
                         commercial farms using block farming, starting with a village association in Mahobong (Village
                         Rollout) in March 2013.

                         13.      Applying lessons learnt from Phase 1 of the Horticulture Component, the primary
                         development objectives of Phase 2 are as follows:
                         i)       Transform strategic areas in Lesotho into major producers and exporters of early variety tree
                         crops by demonstrating that commercial deciduous fruit production is competitive and sustainable.
                         ii)      Improve livelihoods of rural farmers through the production, export and processing of high
                         value tree crops.
                         iii)     Facilitate shift from reliance on maize as the main source of income to a more diversified
                         cropping structure.
                         iv)      Develop a competitive value chain for tree crops including:
                         •        Sales of fresh produce in local and export markets;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •        Juicing, canning and drying facilities for products of Grade 3 and lower quality; and
                         •        Food processing industry based on derivatives from tree crops.

                         14.      The project will help support to expansion of upstream activities, including seedling nursery
                         development, expansion of commercial production of deciduous fruits (35 hectares), and strengthen
                         capacity of local on-farm technical support services; and downstream activities beginning in 2016
                         when the project anticipates increasing volume of marketable crop entering the market from existing
                         and new farms. Of the marketable products, Grade 1 products will be targeted for export markets,
                         Grade 2 products for domestic markets, and Grade 3 and lower for local value added processing. In
                         this regard, downstream activities will focus on the development of local supply and value chains for
                         deciduous fruit, farm certification (Global Gap) which will enable Basotho farmers the opportunity to
                         export Grade 1 products to any market in the world and expand marketing options for local products
                         both within and outside Lesotho.

                         Sub-component 2D:Lesotho Enterprise Assistance Program

                         15.      The LEAP matching grant scheme was designed to help strengthen business capacity of the
                         private firms, mostly Basotho-owned MSMEs, as well as their representative organizations through
                         provision of financial and technical assistance to buy business development services with the aim to
                         increase their competitiveness. The LEAP program will be managed under this component and will
                           be funded using government counterpart funding.

                           Component 3: Project Implementation
Public Disclosure Copy




                           16.      This component will support the costs of the Project Management Unit, which is intended to
                           be re-hired given the good performance and to ensure continuity and efficiency. The implementation
                           arrangements used under the PSCED Project will be used in the new proposed Second PSCED
                           Project.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Component 1 activities will be technical assistance provided to the GoL administration in Maseru,
                           while component 2 activities will be implemented in the regions once the sites are identified for the
                           horticulture sub component.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           At country level, environmental oversight capacity is adequate in Lesotho. All of the institutions that
                           will be involved in the implementation of the project have previously implemented Bank-funded
                           projects or are currently involved in the implementation of Bank-funded projects or programs. As
                           such, they are familiar with the Bank’s safeguards policies and have gained experience in the
                           implementation and oversight of Bank-funded projects.

                           The upstream work for the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be
                           completed with public consultation and disclosure for the horticulture component. The ESMF will
                           also have a sample ESMP which would be based on the insights gained during the PSCED Project
                           implementation of the 3 pilot sites and the village roll-out. For the tourism component, an ESMP for
                           the chosen site is under preparation and will publicly disclosed prior to project appraisal. The client
                           has hired a consultant who is a qualified and experienced social and environmental safeguards
                           specialist currently undertaking these assessments.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Paula F. Lytle (AFTCS)
                           Lungiswa Thandiwe Gxaba (AFTA2)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The policy is triggered due to anticipated
                           BP 4.01                                               moderate impacts from activities to be
                                                                                 undertaken under the horticulture subcomponent
                                                                                 and the proposed tourism handicraft center.
                                                                                 Activities may include excessive use of water,
                                                                                 tilling of land and minor to moderate use of
                                                                                 pesticides for the horticulture sub-component
                                                                                 and rehabilitation or construction of buildings
                                                                                 for the tourism handicraft center. The project
                                                                                 has been rated category B- partial Assessment
                                                                                 for Environmental Assessment (EA) and the
                                                                                 upstream work for an ESMF for the horticulture
                                                                                                                                 component will be completed with public
                                                                                                                                 consultation and disclosure in-country and at the
                                                                                                                                 Bank’s Infoshop prior to appraisal. Since the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 site for horticulture component will be selected
                                                                                                                                 during project implementation the ESMF will
                                                                                                                                 lay out the framework and incorporate the
                                                                                                                                 lessons learnt from the existing pilot sites and
                                                                                                                                 the village roll-out and ensure that there are no
                                                                                                                                 outstanding land issues. The site for the tourism
                                                                                                                                 handicrafts center has been identified and a draft
                                                                                                                                 ESMP has been prepared; it will be consulted
                                                                                                                                 upon and disclosed before appraisal.
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No                            The project does not affect natural habitats.

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                Yes                           The projects does not affect forests or forestry.

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           Yes                           While the total land under the project is not
                                                                                                                                 substantial (only 30-35 hectares) and the risk of
                                                                                                                                 pesticides is minor to moderate due to the small
                                                                                                                                 amounts of pesticides being used, the ESMF
                                                                                                                                 will incorporate an integrated pest management
                                                                                                                                 plan (IPMP).
                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   Yes                           The project will finance a tourism information
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         hub that will provide information on tourism
                                                                                                                                 sites, including physical cultural resources. The
                                                                                                                                 project will include guidance on good practice
                                                                                                                                 measures for cultural property management.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 area.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            The tourism information center will be built on
                                 4.12                                                                                            an identified site for which the land has already
                                                                                                                                 been acquired and does not have any
                                                                                                                                 encroachers or squatters. Other components of
                                                                                                                                 the project do not require land acquisition, and
                                                                                                                                 there are no squatters or encroachers.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project does not involve dams.

                                 Projects on International        No                                                             N/A
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             N/A
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 05-Aug-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             The ESMP for the tourism site and the ESMF for the horticulture component are both under
                             preparation and will be disclosed by Aug 5, 2013
                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Task Team Leader:     Name: Smita Kuriakose

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name:                                                Date:
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Irina Astrakhan (SM)                           Date: 19-Jul-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
