                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC3693

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-Aug-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 07-Aug-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                            Project ID:       P133069
                            Project Name:      Shaanxi Small Towns Infrastructure Project (P133069)
                            Task Team          Guangming Yan
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          14-Jan-2014                      Estimated         12-Aug-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASCS                            Lending           Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (40%), Rural and Inter-
                                               Urban Roads and Highways (60%)
                            Theme(s):          City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (60%), Water resource
                                               management (40%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    223.00                      Total Bank Financing:        150.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                                 Financing Gap:                 0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      73.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        150.00
                              Total                                                                        223.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective is to improve the infrastructure services in selected small and
                           medium towns in Shaanxi Province.
                           C. Project Description
                           The Shaanxi Province and Bank agreed that project formulation will be guided by the following
                         principles: (i) support Shaanxi’s efforts of promoting the urban development of county seats (third
                         tier cites defined in Guan-Tian Economic Zone Development Plan ) and selected key towns of
                         provincial level, which perform critical roles and have great potential for facilitating rural-to-urban
Public Disclosure Copy




                         migration from vast rural area in Shaanxi; (ii) address gaps of basic urban infrastructure services in
                         existing built-up area with high priority, supplemented by support to prioritized infrastructure
                         investments in town’ expansion area being developed; (iii) give high priority for urban
                         infrastructures shared by multiple towns to encourage integration of infrastructure, facilitate efficient
                         operations, and improve the financial and operational performance; and (iv) give higher priority for
                         construction of urban infrastructures that have added-value of facilitating job creation or industrial
                         development in project towns.

                         The following components (Indicative cost US$ 223 million) have been initially selected for
                         preparation, but are subject to refinement and amendment as project preparation proceeds:

                         (a) Component 1: Improvement of Basic Infrastructure Services (Indicative cost US$ 213 million):
                         including: (i) rehabilitation, upgrading and filling gaps in basic infrastructure services in existing
                         built up areas, including rehabilitation of neighborhood roads and lanes, and improved level of
                         service and coverage in water supply, drainage and wastewater, solid waste collection, river
                         rehabilitation, etc.; and (ii) construction of basic infrastructure in urban expansion areas.

                         (b) Component 2: Improvement of Town Management and Institutional Capacity Enhancement
                         (Indicative cost US$ 7 million): Introduction of systems and procedures for improvement of
                         management including: public infrastructure asset management; town planning and development
                         control regulations; and training, etc.

                         (c) Component 3: Project Implementation Support and M&E (Indicative cost US$ 3 million): Project
                         Management Consultant support for design review, bid document preparation, project management,
                         reporting , monitoring evaluation systems , etc.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         An inland province along the middle reaches of the Yellow River and a gateway to northwest China,
                         Shaanxi links the west with the east and connects the north with the south. It borders Ningxia, Inner
                         Mongolia, Shanxi, Henan, Hubei, Sichuan and Gansu provinces, covering an area of 205,600 sq km.
                         Total population is about 37 million.

                         The province has three distinctive landforms from north to south. The Loess Plateau in the north
                         (Shaanbei Region) has an elevation of 800-1,300 meters, and accounts for 45% of the total area of
                         the province. The Central Shaanxi Plain (Guanzhong Region) in the middle averages an elevation of
                         520 meters. The Qinling and Daba mountainous areas in the south (Shaannan Region) include the
                         Qinling Mountains, Daba Mountains, and Hanjiang River Valley, accounting for 36% of the total
                         area of the province. The Qinling Mountains and the Daba Mountains in the southernmost of the
                         province measure 1,000-3,000 meters and 1,500-2,000 meters in elevation, respectively.

                         The proposed components would serve 10 towns (average population about 35,000 and built-up area
                         around 3-5 km2) in nine counties/districts across seven municipalities: Xi’an, Xianyang, Baoji,
                         Tongchuan, Weinan, Hanzhong and Ankang. Geographically, eight towns (Wutun, Guanshan ,
                         Wugong, Zhitian, Run, Guo, Chenglu, Chengcheng) are within the Guanzhong-Tianshui Economic
                         Zone and two towns ( Pu Town, Hanying) locates in Shaannan Region (southern part of Snaanxi) .
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The proposed project will be managed by the existing Provincial Project Management Office
                           (PPMO) which is housed at the Shaanxi Provincial Development and Reform Commission (PDRC).
Public Disclosure Copy




                           It has experience in managing World Bank financed projects, and is currently implementing the
                           Western Rural Water Supply, Sanitation Project (P095315). The PPMO has good understandings on
                           Bank’s Safeguards Policies. During the project preparation, additional experienced environment and
                           social consultants will be engaged to help PPMO to prepare safeguards documents. However, county
                           level PIUs have no prior experience in implementing World Bank financed project, trainings on
                           Bank’s Safeguards policies will be conducted during project preparation.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Chongwu Sun (EASCS)
                           Jun Zeng (EASCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             Based on the project proposals and preliminary
                           BP 4.01                                            screening during project identification, this
                                                                              policy is triggered, mainly because of the
                                                                              activities under the component 1.
                                                                              The project will have significant benefits in
                                                                              terms of providing improved basic infrastructure
                                                                              and services at the township level. Investments
                                                                              under Component 1 include civil works for
                                                                              infrastructure such as roads, drainage, water
                                                                              supply, wastewater collection, solid waste
                                                                              collection facilities, etc.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              Potential negative environmental and social
                                                                              impacts mainly occurs in construction phase,
                                                                              including soil erosion, noise, dust, and shipping
                                                                              and disposal of construction waste, etc.
                                                                              A category B is assigned mainly because the
                                                                              impacts are site-specific and few is irreversible,
                                                                              at the same time the mitigation measures can be
                                                                              designed during project preparation and be
                                                                              readily for taken into implementation.
                                                                              Environmental safeguards instruments proposed
                                                                              include: An EIA and a standalone EMP will be
                                                                              prepared. The EIA will cover the entire project
                                                                              area of influence, including all project activities,
                                                                              linked activities and ancillary facilities. Where
                                                                              relevant, cumulative impacts at the subproject/
                                                                              town level will also be included in the EIA. The
                                                                              EIA will include the screening procedures and
                                                                              results for determining whether or not OP/BP
                                                                              4.04 and OP/BP 4.11 are triggered by the
                                                                 project. Further, the results of the Social
                                                                 Assessment (SA) will be integrated in the EIA.
                                                                 An EMF will be prepared for cases when the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 exact locations of individual activities might
                                                                 change during project implementation. The
                                                                 EMF will be included as an annex to the EMP..
                                                                 During the preparation of the proposed
                                                                 instruments, WBG’s Environmental, Health and
                                                                 Safety Guideline is considered as important
                                                                 reference. And due diligence review would be
                                                                 conducted if there are any existing facilities and
                                                                 projects related to the proposed project.
                                                                 Public consultation and information disclosure
                                                                 will be conducted following OP4.01
                                                                 requirements during EA preparation. At least
                                                                 two rounds of public consultation will be carried
                                                                 out with potentially affected persons and other
                                                                 relevant stakeholders through various methods,
                                                                 e.g., questionnaire surveys, interviews and
                                                                 public meetings as needed. The full draft EA
                                                                 will be disclosed locally.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       TBD   Based on the information provided, there is no
                                                                 significant natural habitats be found in the
                                                                 proposed project areas. However, since the
                                                                 project components are located in various places
                                                                 and detailed survey will be conducted in the EA
                                                                 process, the EA consultant is required to do a
                                                                 screening, under the guidance of Bank's task
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 team, in the EA preparation to determine the
                                                                 policy triggering.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    Based on current information available, the
                                                                 proposed project components are not located in
                                                                 forest areas. Therefore, this policy is not
                                                                 triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The proposed project will neither procure
                                                                 pesticides and nor will result in increased use of
                                                                 pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   Based on current information available, there
                         BP 4.11                                 are no any physical cultural relics found within
                                                                 the proposed project areas. In the EA process,
                                                                 EA consultants will check and confirm the
                                                                 presence/absence of the PCR with relevant
                                                                 authorities. This will be done under the
                                                                 guidance of Bank’s task team. Chance finds
                                                                 during construction may occur and relevant
                                                                                                                                 clauses would be included in all construction
                                                                                                                                 contracts.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            The TT visited all project towns during project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 identification and social screenings were
                                                                                                                                 conducted. It is concluded that the project areas
                                                                                                                                 are predominantly Han Chinese and there is no
                                                                                                                                 ethnic minority groups as defined by OP4.10
                                                                                                                                 such as Hui, Manchu and Mongolian
                                                                                                                                 communities present in, or have collective
                                                                                                                                 attachment to the project area.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           Involuntary resettlement is unavoidable. The
                                 4.12                                                                                            main impact will include urban/rural structure
                                                                                                                                 demolition, land acquisition and temporary land
                                                                                                                                 taking. A Resettlement Action Plan will be
                                                                                                                                 prepared by the client in both English and
                                                                                                                                 Chinese. In the project preparation phase,
                                                                                                                                 locations of some subcomponents might not be
                                                                                                                                 determined or might change during
                                                                                                                                 implementation; a Resettlement Policy
                                                                                                                                 Framework will also be prepared.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The proposed project will not directly finance
                                                                                                                                 construction and rehabilitation of any dams.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             Not applicable
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             Not applicable
                                 7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 23-Jan-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      In parallel with the project feasibility study, EA/EMP (including EMF as an annex to EMP) and
                                      RAP/RPF will be drafted and submitted to the Bank for review by December, 2013.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Guangming Yan

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name:                                                                                                                      Date:
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Mark R. Lundell (SM)                                                                                                 Date: 07-Aug-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
