                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC3422

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-May-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-Aug-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Lao People's Democratic                       P145544
                                                                           Project ID:
                                               Republic
                            Project Name:      Lao PRD Early Childhood Education Project (P145544)
                            Task Team       Omporn Regel
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       18-Nov-2013                         Estimated         27-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: EASHE                                Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Pre-primary education (90%), Primary education (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for all (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        28.00               Total Bank Financing:             28.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                             Financing Gap:                     0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                    28.00
                              Total                                                                        28.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The objective of this project is to increase coverage and improve the quality of pre-primary education
                           and early childhood care services for 3-5 year old children in disadvantaged districts.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed Grant seeks to improve school readiness in poor districts in order to improve learning
                           outcomes in pre-primary and primary education. It consists of four components.
                         Component 1: Improving Access to Early Childhood Development (ECD) in Targeted Districts (US
                         $8.0 million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This Component aims to increase access to early childhood education and care for 3-5 year old
                         children in target districts, with a particular focus on disadvantaged children and children with
                         disabilities by increasing the availability of ECD services (sub-component 1.1) and stimulating
                         demand for ECD services (sub-component 1.2).

                                  Sub-component 1.1 - Increase Supply of ECD Services. This sub-component seeks to
                         increase the supply of pre-primary school classrooms meeting accessible standards for children with
                         physical disabilities, ECD materials and the number of CBSRPs. Its main activities will include: (i)
                         the construction of formal pre-primary classrooms, involving the transfer of grants-in-aid for CBC to
                         communities in the target districts to construct pre-primary classrooms with age-appropriate
                         sanitation facilities and (ii) the establishment of CBSRPs within target districts .

                                  Sub-component 1.2 – Stimulating Demand for ECD Services. This sub-component will
                         include an intensive community awareness campaign, as well as the introduction of nutrition
                         counseling and parenting education services (i.e. enriched caregiving practices). The project will
                         finance a communications campaign aimed at increasing parents’ awareness about the benefits of
                         pre-primary education. This campaign may include training for the Village Education Development
                         Committee (VEDC) on the benefits of pre-primary school for children ages 3-5. The project will
                         work with community health centers to provide health information through training in areas such as
                         hygiene, nutrition counseling, sanitation, and parenting education to pregnant mothers and mothers
                         of children under two years old.

                         Component 2: Ensuring the quality of ECD Teachers (US$4.0 million)

                         This component will include: (i) pre-service teacher training for the formal pre-primary school
Public Disclosure Copy




                         program, (ii) identification and training of caregivers to support the expansion of the CBSRP
                         program for 3 -5 year old children and (iii) training for the early childhood education (ECE) officers
                         at the district and provincial levels to improve their capacity to monitor ECD programs. The project
                         will build on the EFA-FTI successes and experience with the continuation and expansion of the pre-
                         primary school scholarship program for females from ethnic groups and the CBSRP. The project
                         seeks to expand the CBSRP to cover 3-5 year old children in villages where the EFA-FTI pre-
                         primary school teachers will return upon completion of their two years of pre-service training in June
                         2013. It is expected that these teachers will provide needed mentoring and support to the caregivers
                         upon completion of the caregiver training.

                         Component 3: Supporting the Development of Early Learning and Development Standards(US$4.0
                         million)

                         This component will set the foundations for a quality assurance system for ECD services, by
                         focusing on strengthening the quality standards and ensuring that the results from early grade reading
                         assessments feed back into the early childhood and primary school curricula.

                         Sub-component 3.1 - Strengthen ECD standards: This sub-component will include strengthening of
                         existing standards for pre-primary education and CBSRP. The activities will include: (i) a review of
                         the existing standards; (ii) participation in regional and international conferences on ECD standards.
                         (iii) study visits to countries implementing effective ECD programs and strong literacy
                         preparedness components; and (iv) dissemination and training of facilitators and provincial officers
                         on the compliance and monitoring of such standards.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sub-component 3.2 – Pilot Intervention on Literacy Preparedness and Early Grade Reading. This
                         sub-component will build on the outputs of Sub-component 3.1 and data from the 2012-2013 Lao
                         Early Grade Reading Assessment (EGRA) to operationalize activities aimed at improving the school
                         readiness of children in five domains: PhysicalHealth, Well-Being, and Motor Development, Social
                         & Emotional Development, Approaches Toward Learning, Language, Literacy and Communication,
                         and Cognition and General Knowledge. In particular, the project will pilot align activities in two
                         domains (language, literacy & communication as well as cognition and general knowledge) to
                         measure literacy outcomes capturing literacy preparedness at school entry and after one year of
                         schooling in primary education levels.

                         Component 4: System Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (US$4.0 million)

                         This component will support project management and monitoring and evaluation of the early
                         childhood education sub-sector. The component’s main activities will include: (i) training to central,
                         provincial, and district education officials as well as VEDC members to develop and implement a
                         unified early childhood education monitoring system; (ii) providing technical assistance and support
                         to district education offices, particularly those in rural areas, to enable them to provide effective
                         academic support to schools and villages with CBSRP; (iii) conducting semester and annual sub-
                         sector reviews and planning; (iv) conducting a pre-primary school student tracking survey through
                         the existing EMIS data collection mechanism; (v) baseline and endline surveys of school readiness/
                         literacy preparedness and early grade reading to measure the impact of the intervention; (vi) capacity
                         building and support for financial management, procurement, and internal audit; and (vii) capacity
                         building and support for local institutions to undertake evidence-based research on the whole child
                         development. This component will support an impact evaluation to assess whether the project
                         interventions are making a genuine difference to learning outcomes as well as other studies related to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         ECD that might be appropriate for evaluating the impact of the project. This component will also
                         support the introduction of vision and hearing health/ disability screening (with service provisions
                         and referrals) as part of the ECD program.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will focus on educationally disadvantaged poor districts and will be selected based on
                         criteria that will be determined during preparation.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The proposed Grant is a follow-on operation of the Education Development Project II (EDP II) and
                         the EFA-FTI, in which the recipient demonstrated the capacity to comply with Bank safeguards
                         policies throughout project and program implementation. Local ethnic teachers have been trained to
                         teach the ethnic students, especially those in pre-school and Grades 1 and 2. The teachers are
                         allowed to explain lessons in ethnic dialects with drawings and available visual objects as needed.
                         These mitigative measures are in line with the Ethnic Group Development Plan (EGDP) applied by
                         the Program to help students overcome their language difficulty. Under the on-going project, the
                         District and Provincial Education officers are familiar with the environmental safeguards compliance
                         which includes: i) adherence to the safeguards procedures as described in the Operations Manual
                         which includes monitoring and reporting of the project’s performance, and ii) validation of the
                           results on the ground. MoES will be responsible for everyday implementation of the grant at the
                           operational level. MoES will appoint a Designated Technical Officer who will manage the proposed
                           civil works under their respective components. Separately a designated Safeguards Officer will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                           appointed by MoES who will be responsible for scrutinizing the environmental safeguards issues
                           involved in each civil works activity. The institutional capacity is deemed adequate for the project.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Satoshi Ishihara (EASTS)
                           Boun Oum Inthaxoum (EASHE)
                           Viengkeo Phetnavongxay (EASTS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The project will involve minor civil works,
                           BP 4.01                                              specifically the construction of pre-primary
                                                                                education facilities within targeted areas. There
                                                                                are likely to be some concerns relating to
                                                                                inconveniences or nuisances (e.g., dust, noise,
                                                                                construction waste) to surrounding areas during
                                                                                construction. However, these potential impacts
                                                                                on the environment are deemed to be minor,
                                                                                site-specific, and reversible in nature, and for
                                                                                which mitigation measures can be readily
                                                                                designed. Based on the past experience with the
                                                                                EDP II and EFA-FTI projects, and to ensure
                                                                                compliance with Bank Safeguards policies, an
                                                                                Environmental Codes of Practice (ECOP) will
                                                                                be developed as part of Operation Manual,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                which will be implemented by the project team.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No               The project will not cause any degradation of
                                                                                natural habitats as defined under the safeguard
                                                                                policy.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No               The project will not degrade critical forest areas
                                                                                as defined under the safeguard policy.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09             No               The project will not involve any procurement of
                                                                                pesticides nor cause any increased use of
                                                                                pesticides.
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No               The project will not adversely affect sites with
                           BP 4.11                                              archeological, paleontological, historical,
                                                                                religious, or unique natural values.
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       Yes              OP4.10 is triggered, because the educationally
                                                                                disadvantaged poor districts where the project
                                                                                components 1 and 2 would be implemented
                                                                                would likely include those districts resided by
                                                                                poor ethnic groups (as Indigenous Peoples are
                                                                                called in Lao). Moreover, the component to
                                                               support future pre-primary education teachers
                                                               and caregivers is specifically targeted at ethnic
                                                               groups. This component has been implemented
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                               under previous Bank projects in the sector.
                                                               Throughout its implementation, it has been
                                                               objectively guided by transparent selection,
                                                               clear implementation criteria and has benefited
                                                               from community-validated selection.

                                                               The client (MoES) will undertake a social
                                                               assessment, including in areas where ethnic
                                                               groups are present, in order to assess the
                                                               project’s potential positive and adverse affects
                                                               on ethnic groups, and examine project
                                                               alternatives where adverse effects may be
                                                               significant. In particular, a social assessment
                                                               will review existing barriers for ethnic children
                                                               to receive early childhood education, including
                                                               those related to language, traditions, customs,
                                                               values, etc,. This assessment will identify, in
                                                               participatory manner, measures to address these
                                                               barriers. Free, prior and informed consultation
                                                               will be conducted with a representative sample
                                                               of ethnic groups who are likely to participate in
                                                               and affected by the project. This process will
                                                               allow their perspectives to be collected and
                                                               reflected in the project design and that their
                                                               broad support to the project is ascertained. To
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                               carry out the social assessment, the client will
                                                               hire a social consultant whose qualification,
                                                               experience and TOR are acceptable to the Bank.

                                                               The existing Ethnic Group Development Plan
                                                               (EGDP) for the EDP II and the EFA-FTI will be
                                                               updated based on the social assessment and
                                                               consultations, and disclosed both through
                                                               Infoshop and in-country at convenient locations
                                                               prior to project appraisal.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   No   The project will construct new pre-primary
                         4.12                                  classrooms within existing primary school with
                                                               land boundaries which belong to the state. No
                                                               acquisition of private land, or loss of private
                                                               assets including trees and structures, is
                                                               anticipated. It is not anticipated that physical
                                                               relocation will be necessary.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No   The project does not involve any dams.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The project does not involve international
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            waterways.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project will not be located in any known
                                 7.60                                                                                            disputed areas as defined in the policy.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 02-Dec-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      A.    Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage
                                      ISDS would be prepared: November 15, 2013

                                      B.             The target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS: September 28, 2013

                                      C.      Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be
                                      needed.

                                      The existing Ethnic Group Development Plan (EGDP) for the EDP II and the EFA-FTI will be
                                      updated based on the social assessment and consultations, and disclosed both through Infoshop
                                      and in-country at convenient locations prior to project appraisal.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Omporn Regel

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name:                                                                                                                      Date:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Luis Benveniste (SM)                                                                                                 Date: 27-Aug-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
