                                              INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC5226

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Sep-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-Sep-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            China                            Project ID:      P144531
                            Project Name:       Climate Smart Staple Crop Production (P144531)
                            Task Team           Jiang Ru
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           10-Jan-2014                      Estimated        15-Sep-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      EASCS                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            GEF Focal Area:     Climate change

                            Sector(s):        Crops (80%), Agricultural extension and research (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Climate change (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        30.10                Total Bank Financing:              0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            25.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                              5.10
                              Total                                                                         30.10
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           8.       The proposed project’s Global Environmental Objective (GEO), i.e. its Project Development
                           Objective (PDO), is to promote climate smart and sustainable crop production through identification,
                           piloting, and promotion of low emission and soil carbon sequestration production techniques and
                           practices. The focus of the project will be on the production of three main staple crops of China’s and
                           two major crop production systems: the rice-wheat system in Anhui and the wheat-corn system in
                           Henan.
                         9.      This project will be an integral part of China’s efforts to address climate change issues in
                         agricultural sector. Successful implementation of this project will contribute to the country’s efforts
Public Disclosure Copy




                         to reduce China’s GHG emissions per unit of GDP by 40-45% by 2020 compared to its 2005 level.
                         C. Project Description
                         The proposed project will have four components: (a) Technology Pilots and Promotion; (b) Policy
                         Development; (c) Knowledge Management; and (d) Project Management.

                         Component 1: Technology Pilots and Promotion. This component will promote identification,
                         piloting, evaluation and promotion of low GHG emission production and soil carbon sequestration
                         technologies, techniques and practices for the production of rice, corn and wheat at the project sites.
                         This project will focus specifically on a systematic design, demonstration and evaluation of these
                         technologies and their joint impacts on emission reduction for a particular crop production system. In
                         general, the project will promote the adoption of climate smart and integrated soil crop management
                         practices under the precondition of maintaining and even improving current crop productivity.

                         It is expected that for wheat and corn, the project will support CSA practices including (a) selection
                         of improved varieties that are nutrient and water efficient; (b) integrated soil crop system
                         management, including the use of amendments such as biochar; (c) crop residue management and
                         cover crops; (d) change in tillage practices. CAS practices (a), (b) and (c) are also applicable for rice
                         production. In addition, the project will explore crop rotation and improved water management
                         practices for rice production. For all project sites, integrated pest management performed by
                         professional pest management services will be promoted at all project sites. It is expected that small-
                         scale construction and rehabilitation of on-farm agricultural infrastructures such as irrigation
                         channels and farm roads may be supported by counterpart funding to ensure successful
                         implementation of technology pilot activities at the project sites. Actual site investment activities will
                         be determined during project preparation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Results of technology pilots will be systematically monitored and evaluated based on internationally
                         reputable monitoring and evaluation (M&E) methodologies and/or principles. Based on these on-site
                         results and feedbacks of local farmers, this component will promote wide adoption of successfully
                         piloted technical combinations for the concerned crop systems in the four project provinces.

                         Component 2: Policy Development. This component will principally focus on developing and
                         promoting policies and strategies for low carbon crop production in China. It will support (a) review
                         and development of technical codes and standards related to applications of agricultural inputs (e.g.
                         fertilizers, pesticides and irrigation water) in wheat, rice and crop production; (b) review and
                         development of technical procedures/ guidelines of demonstrated soil carbon sequestration and
                         emission reduction technologies; and (c) policy studies on incentive mechanisms (including the role
                         of subsidies, institutional factors, and cost effective approaches and alternatives to subsidies such as
                         payment for ecosystem services) to encourage local farmers to apply CSA production technologies.
                         The project will also support MOA to adopt selected policy instruments based on concrete pilot
                         results and findings of these studies.

                         Component 3: Knowledge Management. This component will support activities to analyze and
                         summarize experiences and lessons learnt from the pilots of climate smart crop production
                         technologies at the project sites. It will create a knowledge base on the elements of CSA technologies
                         and practices for key staple crop production. It will work with agricultural extension services at the
                           project sites to develop an information dissemination platform using cost-effective technologies such
                           as ICT tools. It will also develop a strategy for scaling up the adoption of demonstrated low-emission
                           technologies in production areasbeyond the pilots. Such activities will enable China to properly
Public Disclosure Copy




                           manage and disseminate relevant knowledge and information on low emission technologies.

                           Component 4: Project Management. This component will support the operating costs associated with
                           project management activities.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The proposed project sites are in the rural areas of Huiyuan County of Bengbu Municipality of Anhui
                           Province and Yexian County of Pingdingshan Municipality of Henan Province. The project locations
                           will be confirmed during project preparation.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           MOA is working with the Bank on the Eco-farming Project (P096556) and has obtained operational
                           experience with Bank policies and procedures. The MOA department in charge of project preparation
                           and implementation is working with UN agencies in implementing a GEF operation and an operation
                           under the Montreal Protocol on Ozone Depleting Substances. However, the department has no prior
                           experience with Bank operation. Training on Bank project management, including safeguards, will
                           be provided to the department and its project management office during project preparation to
                           improve its capacity to properly implement this proposed project.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Songling Yao (EASCS)
                           Yiren Feng (EASCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The proposed project's impacts on the
                           BP 4.01                                              environment are expected to be positive as the
                                                                                project by design is to promote climate smart
                                                                                and sustainable crop production techniques and
                                                                                practices that will (a) reduce emission of
                                                                                greenhouse gases; (b) reduce the use of
                                                                                agricultural inputs and thus reduce the releases
                                                                                of excessive such inputs into the environment;
                                                                                and (c) improve soil organic matters.

                                                                                The GEF grant financed activities will focus on
                                                                                improvement in crop production techniques and
                                                                                thus will not include any civil work and
                                                                                physical construction activities. However, the
                                                                                counterpart fund may be used to construct or
                                                                                rehabilitate small size on-farm agricultural
                                                                                infrastructures such as irrigation canals and
                                                                                farm roads. Such construction activities may
                                                                                potentially lead to small-scale adverse
                                                                 environmental impacts. These potential impacts
                                                                 will be temporary, limited and site specific in
                                                                 nature, and can be readily managed with
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 available mitigations measures. Environmental
                                                                 Code of Practice (ECOP) will be prepared to
                                                                 address the impacts from the construction and
                                                                 rehabilitation of the different typologies of rural
                                                                 infrastructure that will be supported under the
                                                                 project.

                                                                 Based on the above and the fact that the project
                                                                 will promote integrated pest management (IPM)
                                                                 practices at the project sites, the Task Team
                                                                 (TT) proposes Category B for this project.

                                                                 Social impact assessment will be performed as
                                                                 part of the project's feasibility study to identify
                                                                 and address potential social issues. Proper
                                                                 measures will be incorporated into the project
                                                                 design.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No    The project will be implemented in rural areas
                                                                 with intensive crop production activities. No
                                                                 natural habitats are in or near the project areas.
                                                                 The project will not affect any protected areas,
                                                                 known natural habitats, or established or
                                                                 proposed critical natural habitats. In addition,
                                                                 the project will not result to expansion of
                                                                 agricultural production that could affect natural
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 habitats. Therefore, this policy is not triggered.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    The project will not finance any activities
                                                                 related to forests. In addition, the project will
                                                                 not result to expansion of agricultural
                                                                 production that could affect natural habitats. As
                                                                 such, this policy is not triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes   This policy is triggered as the project will
                                                                 promote IPM practices at the project site and
                                                                 will support the review and development of
                                                                 technical codes and standards related to
                                                                 applications of agricultural inputs (including
                                                                 pesticides. A Pest Management Plan (PMP) will
                                                                 be prepared for the rice, wheat and corn in the
                                                                 project sites.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    The project is located in rural areas with
                         BP 4.11                                 intensive agricultural activities. According to
                                                                 the preliminary screening, the proposed sites are
                                                                 not in or close to any physical cultural heritage.
                                                                                                                                 This policy is not triggered. However, chance
                                                                                                                                 finds during minor on-farm construction
                                                                                                                                 activities may occur and relevant clauses will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 included in all bidding documents and
                                                                                                                                 construction contracts.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     TBD                           The project sites are in two core crop production
                                                                                                                                 areas of China where limited indigenous people
                                                                                                                                 (IP) communities exist. IP issues will be closely
                                                                                                                                 examined after the final project sites are
                                                                                                                                 confirmed in the two counties. An IPPF, if OP
                                                                                                                                 4.10 is found triggered, will be prepared.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           As the project's counterpart funding may
                                 4.12                                                                                            finance on-farm and small scale physical
                                                                                                                                 construction activities, there may be small size
                                                                                                                                 land use issues. As such, the OP 4.12 is
                                                                                                                                 triggered. A RFP will be prepared to handle any
                                                                                                                                 possible land issues, guiding RP preparation as
                                                                                                                                 needed during project implementation.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         TBD                           The project will not finance construction or
                                                                                                                                 rehabilitation of any dams as defined under this
                                                                                                                                 policy. As the final project locations are yet to
                                                                                                                                 be decided, it is unclear at this stage whether
                                                                                                                                 project related irrigation activities will rely on
                                                                                                                                 upstream dams or a dam under construction. As
                                                                                                                                 such, whether this policy is triggered will be
                                                                                                                                 determined during project preparation. If the
                                                                                                                                 policy is triggered, dam safety evaluation will
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 be conducted by an independent dam safety
                                                                                                                                 expert.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The policy is not triggered as the project does
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            not involve trans-boundary water bodies.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The policy is not triggered as the project does
                                 7.60                                                                                            not involve any disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Aug-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      No specific safeguard related studies are expected.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Jiang Ru

                                 Approved By:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Regional Safeguards Name:                        Date:
                         Coordinator:
                         Sector Manager:     Name: Mark R. Lundell (SM)   Date: 10-Sep-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy
