                                                                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                            CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC125
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Nov-2011

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                       Tunisia                                  Project ID:                      P120561
                              Project Name:                  Tunisia: Ecotourism and Conservation of Desert Biodiversity (P120561)
                              Task Team Leader:              William R. Sutton
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 01-May-2012                                   Estimated Board Date:            04-Sep-2012
                              Managing Unit:                 MNSSD                                    Lending Instrument:              Specific Investment Loan
                              Focal Area:                    Biodiversity
                              Sector:                        Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (50%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%)
                              Theme:                         Biodiversity (40%), Environmental policies and institutions (30%), Land administration and management (30%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                       Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                         2.00
                                   Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                                                          4.27
                                   FRANCE French Agency for Development                                                                                       2.00
                                   International Finance Corporation (IFC)                                                                                    0.45
                                   Total                                                                                                                      8.72
                              Environmental Category:        B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              B. Global Environmental Objective(s)

                              The Proposed Development Objective is to contribute to the conservation of desert biodiversity and the sustainability of desert lands by piloting an
Public Disclosure Copy




                              improved approach to protected areas management that integrates ecotourism development and community engagement.

                              C. Project Description

                              The project will pilot a first sustainable approach to ecotourism as a means to promote environmental, financial and social opportunities in Tunisia
                              with view to upscale this model at a later time. It aims to reduce and reverse the degradation of Tunisia's natural capital by integrating conservation
                              of desert biodiversity and desert lands at all levels of ecotourism development, to initiate the generation of local employment and revenue streams
                              that would serve as an incentive for community and private sector engagement, and to improve the management of desert protected areas.

                              Component 1: Strengthen public capacity and services. (total estimated cost $4.97m; GEF $ 2.37m; IFC $0.25m; Government $0.75 M; AfD
                              $1.6M). This component will contribute to professionalizing the management of PAs, and investment opportunities for ecotourism circuits while
                              supporting IFC activities in mapping and strengthening the institutional and regulatory framework necessary to support ecotourism development. It
                              will support an improved management of targeted protected areas and their immediate environment, taking into account their specific
                              characteristics as arid ecosystems. The main activities in this component would include: (i) the updating/development and implementation of
                              participatory PA management plans, in consultation with MAE and MOT technicians, local authorities, tourism operators and local communities for
                              approximately 2-3 PAs chosen during a site selection process based on the short list; (ii) physical investments within targeted PAs focused on
                              ecotourism development, as for example the construction and equipping of eco-museums and visitor centers, ecotourism circuits (including signs,
                              tracks, vista points, etc.), water and sanitation facilities, and necessary access infrastructure around the parks, as identified in the PA management
                              plans; (iii) training for ministerial and parks staff to increase their understanding of ecotourism, community engagement, and the contribution they
                              can make to sustainable PA management; and (iii) strengthening sustainable natural resource management practices and techniques (including
                              soil and water conservation measures) within and around the PAs.

                              IFC activities under this component will consist of two main parts. Part I: Diagnostics and Assessments will include (a) mapping/assessing the
                              current legal/regulatory framework in place, (b) reviewing/assessing institutional roles and responsibilities and identifying gaps/overlaps, (c)
                              confirming and validating the assessment with the private and the public sector through workshops, (d) producing recommendations that would
                              inform the design of a framework for attracting sustainable private investment, including improved regulations, incentives, and transparent
                              processes for securing investments. Part II: Design and Implementation of Reforms will include (a) drafting legal/policy/regulatory documents
                              affecting ecotourism and amendments to laws to implement reforms; (b) drafting inter-institutional MOUs, and decrees if required to resolve, clarify
                              and integrate the different regulatory responsibilities, mandates and jurisdictions of the relevant institutions, and (c) capacity building workshops/
                              training on the new regulations/standards as required.

                              In line with the improved sustainable financing for Tunisia's protected areas through ecotourism development, this component could help to define
                              other sustainable future finance options for protected areas (e.g. REDD+, biodiversity foundation for protected areas) and mechanisms for
                           protected area and ecotourism management (e.g. private sector arm of conservation institution), in addition to the national budget.

                           Component 2: Mobilizing community and private sector partnerships. (total estimated cost $2.95m; GEF $1.6m; IFC $0.2m; Government $0.75m;
                           AfD $0.4m). This component will initiate an understanding of ecotourism among local communities and the private sector and support their set-up
                           of ecotourism businesses with specific products for the national and international tourism market. It will support the creation of ecotourism
                           development opportunities for local communities and the private sector while at the same time ensuring compliance with PA management plans
                           and biodiversity and soil conservation objectives. Activities under this component would include: (i) the creation of employment and revenue
Public Disclosure Copy




                           opportunities for the local population linked to ecotourism, including (a) posts within the protected areas (eco-guards, workforce, etc.), and (b)
                           revenue generating activities linked to ecotourism (accommodation, handicrafts, local products and services, local associations promoting
                           traditional practices and products, agrotourism, etc.); (ii) capacity building for local communities and the private sector in ecotourism development
                           linked to PA management, including training in the areas of ecotourism and natural resource management, training of eco-guides within the local
                           population and PA managers, environmental sensitization for local communities, and study tours and exchange visits aimed at assimilating best
                           practices; (iii) a tailor-made promotion and communication strategy for this project including transparent communications for the choice of the
                           selected ecotourism sites, dissemination activities concerning the vision of ecotourism as well as project goals, and an information campaign for
                           international tour operators operating in ecotourism; and (iv) supporting public-private-partnership (PPP) initiatives through the introduction of
                           incentive frameworks, financial mechanisms and ecotourism concessions for the private sector with a view to encouraging investment in
                           ecotourism development, namely the creation and promotion of ecolodges, circuits, etc.

                           IFC work in terms of investment generation activities under this component will consist of two main parts. Part I: Assessments of Pilot Anchor
                           Projects will include (a) mapping, assessing and selecting greenfield sites that have been short-listed for investment generation (conduct site
                           assessment visits), and (b) conducting an investor survey to confirm investor interest and provide market intelligenc e. Part II: Investment
                           Facilitation will include (a) producing brief pre-feasibility studies for select projects, (b) assisting the client to promote the identified opportunities to
                           potential investors, (c) assisting in the development of the necessary information and materials and the presentation of the opportunities to
                           potential investors at an investor conference or through a road show, and (d) should sufficient investor interest be generated, assisting in the
                           tendering out of a test project, using the regulatory framework already developed.

                           Component 3: Project Management and M&E. (total estimated cost US$0.8m; GEF US$0.3m; Government $0.5m). This component would support
                           the establishment and operationalization of the Project Management Unit, through the provision of goods, works, equipment, consultant services
                           (training, study tours), and incremental operating costs, associated with the management, implementation, M&E and audits for the proposed
                           project.

                           It should be noted that the proposed activities within each of the components will be further refined following the completion of the project
                           preparation study for which procurement processes are currently underway. It should also be noted that a participatory approach will be sought in
                           the preparation and implementation of the protected areas management plans, the implementation of project investments, as well as in project
                           M&E.

                            D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                           Serving as a model, the project implementation will be centered on protected areas and their immediate environment (including typical agricultural
                           and pastoral systems) located in the desert regions of the country, and will be selected among the Governorates of Gabes, Tataouine, and
                           Medenine (South-East region) and Tozeur, Gafsa and Kebili (South-West region). The choice of the protected areas will be based on a short-list
                           using specific eligibility criteria defined by the steering committee (e.g. the existence of significant biodiversity after IUCN classification, the location
Public Disclosure Copy




                           within existing tourist circuits, the ecotourism potential, appropriateness for replication, etc). Not more than three protected areas will be chosen out
                           of this short-list and further analyzed for project use. Candidate protected areas for the short-list process include: Dghoumes National Park, Jbil
                           National Park, Sidi Toui National Park, Bou Hedma National Park (Gafsa Governorate), and Chaambi National Park (Kasserine Governorate -
                           supported by AfD), among others. Project target groups will mainly consist of adjacent communities, park staff, and private sector tourism
                           entrepreneurs operating in these areas.

                            E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

                           The Ministry of Agriculture and Environment is a strong partner in the implementation of Bank and especially GEF-funded projects, particularly the
                           General Directorate for Environment and Quality of Life (direct counterpart). The existing Project Management Unit (PMU) will draw on the existing
                           capacity within the DGEQV.

                            F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

                           Sherif Kamel F. Arif (GEF)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

                            Safeguard Policies Triggered                        Yes         No        TBD                                    Explanation
                            Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                   ✖                            The project will finance small scale physical investments within
                                                                                                               targeted protected areas, including the construction and equipping
                                                                                                               of eco-museums and visitor centers, ecotourism circuits (including
                                                                                                               signs, tracks, vista points, etc.), and access infrastructure (including
                                                                                                               roads and fences). An Environment and Social Management
                                                                                                               Framework (ESMF) will be prepared, submitted for consultation and
                                                                                                               disclosed prior to appraisal.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                                 ✖      The project preparation study as well as field visits by the project
                                                                                                               team will determine if biodiversity is currently under threat from
                                                                                                               habitat encroachment, overexploitation of natural resources, as well
                                                                                                               as poaching and illegal collection, within the project protected
                                                                                                               areas. In case the study will determine that OP 4.04 is triggered,
                                                                                                               specific mitigating measures will be included into the ESMF .
                            Safeguard Policies Triggered                                      Yes           No           TBD                                             Explanation
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                               ✖
                            Pest Management OP 4.09                                                          ✖
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                                                         ✖        The project preparation study results and field visits will determine
                                                                                                                                    whether the OP is triggered.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                                    ✖
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                                                            ✖        The project preparation study and preparation mission will
                                                                                                                                    determine: (a) if related infrastructure such as roads leading to
                                                                                                                                    these protected areas are on private property; (b) if as a result of the
                                                                                                                                    management of these protected areas, there will be loss of revenues
                                                                                                                                    or lack of access to the protected areas. In case of OP 4.12 is
                                                                                                                                    triggered, a Resettlement Policy Framework will be prepared,
                                                                                                                                    submitted for consultation and disclosed prior to appraisal.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                                        ✖
                            Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                                        ✖
                            7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                                            ✖

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                           A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Apr-2012
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
                              should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                January-April 2012

                         IV. APPROVALS
                            Signed and submitted by:
                            Task Team Leader:                                Name: Viviane Wei Chen Clement                                                                        Date: 05-Dec-2011
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                 Name: Hocine Chalal (RSA)                                                                             Date: 15-Dec-2011
                            Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Sector Manager:                                  Name: Hoonae Kim (SM)                                                                                 Date: 06-Dec-2011
                            Comments:




                            1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                             form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
