                                                                     INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                              APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSA550
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Mar-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                         Pakistan                               Project ID:                      P125958
                              Project Name:                    Pakistan: Second Punjab Education Sector Project (P125958)
                              Task Team Leader:                Dhushyanth Raju
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 23-Jan-2012                                   Estimated Board Date:            26-Apr-2012
                              Managing Unit:                   SASED                                  Lending Instrument:              Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                          Primary education (100%)
                              Theme:                           Education for all (80%), Other public sector governance (20%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                    Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                   3837.70
                                   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                           350.00
                                   CANADA Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA)                                                                19.30
                                   UK British Department for International Development (DFID)                                                            200.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                4407.00
                              Environmental Category:          B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              The Project Development Objective (PDO) of PESP II is to support the education sector reform program of the Government of Punjab to increase
                              child school participation (at multiple levels) and student achievement.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Success of the project in meeting its objectives will be measured by the following outcome indicators:

                              1.           Primary school participation: Net Enrollment Rate (NER), primary level (6-10 age group)
                              2.           Middle school participation: Net Enrollment Rate, middle level (11-13 age group)
                              3.           High school participation: Net Enrollment Rate, matriculate level (14-15 age group)
                              4.           Student achievement: Mean test score

                              3. Project Description

                              Background: The provincial government has been implementing a multifaceted sectoral reform program which has mainly supported public
                              education at the primary and secondary levels since 2003 called the Punjab Education Sector Reform Program (PESRP). This reform program has
                              received financial and technical support from the Bank through four development policy credits (2004–2007) and an ongoing results-based specific
                              investment credit (2009–). The reform program is also currently supported by the United Kingdom’s Department for International Development
                              (DfID) and the Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA). Under PESRP, the government has focused on developing administrative
                              systems (e.g., regular measurement of student achievement via universal testing), improving the provision and quality of inputs (e.g., textbook
                              delivery, school infrastructure development, teachers via merit-based recruitment, school funds via school councils; training school councils), and
                              the development of interventions that strengthen incentives and accountability for service delivery performance (e.g., teacher performance pay,
                              achievement- and enrollment-tied subsidy payments to low-cost private schools). The provincial government also recently introduced an Education
                              Sector Reform Roadmap which focuses the provincial leadership’s attention on improving education outcomes through holding delivery agents
                              accountable for performance.

                              PESRP comes to an end in June 2012. The provincial government has designed its next medium-term sectoral reform program for primary and
                              secondary education, the Second Punjab Education Sector Reform Program (PESRP II), which aims to better orient and ratchet up efforts to
                              address the remaining deficiencies in participation and achievement outcomes.

                              Project Description (PESP II): The proposed project is a US$350 million Specific Investment Credit which will support the design and
                              implementation of PESRP II, over the period FY2012/13–FY2014/15. The project comprises of two components: (1) a results-based component—
                              Component 1—which would finance PESRP II, amounting to US$340 million (97% of the total Credit) and (2) a Technical Assistance (TA)
                              component—Component 2—which would support essential technical, advisory support and capacity-building initiatives related to PESRP II,
                              amounting to US$10 million (3% of the total Credit).

                              Under PESRP II, the government plans to take the next evolutionary step and zero in on improving service delivery performance at the school level

                                                                                                                                                                     Page 1 of 4
                         in order to realize both meaningful and continuing gains in outcomes of interest. This objective necessarily implies focusing on improving teacher
                         quality and performance given that, in this context in particular, these factors are virtually synonymous with school quality and performance.

                         Thus, under PESRP II, teacher quality and performance are expected to be promoted directly and indirectly through a coherent mix of initiatives
                         related to (1) institutional arrangements and functions, (2) resources and support, and (3) monitoring and accountability. The initiatives include:

                         (a)       formulating and fixing salary (teaching posts) and non-salary budgets at the school level, in line with formula that relate the school
Public Disclosure Copy




                         budget to student enrollment, basic school operational and classroom needs, and appropriate teaching staff levels and types;

                         (b)      decentralizing administrative and financial management powers to schools (or school clusters) for managing school-specific budgets and
                         resources;

                         (c)       introducing test based teacher recruitment;

                         (d)     starting with teachers in achievement-poor schools and districts, tying teacher compensation more closely to school performance as
                         measured in terms of improvements in student achievement;

                         (e)      strengthening the system of field-based advisory support to teachers at the school and targeting the support at achievement-poor
                         schools;

                         (f)   strengthening school councils, specifically their authority, autonomy and capacity to support school performance; and

                         (g)       ensuring the regular collection of credible information on school, teacher, and student performance (e.g., teacher absence, teacher on-
                         task, student achievement) and feeding this information back into the system, to schools, and to a broad range of stakeholders to effect
                         improvements.

                         The above initiatives are designed to directly promote greater school quality, and, through these improvements, promote the retention of students
                         in schools and school participation of new children. To more directly promote gains in participation, the initiatives also include:

                         (a)      strengthening the design of an existing program that offers tuition-replacement vouchers to children from disadvantaged households in
                         poor urban areas to promote access to and participation in low-cost private schools subject to a rigorous quality assurance system and

                         (b)        offering attendance-tied supplemental cash transfers to promote secondary schooling among rural girls in participation-poor districts (as
                         well as strengthening delivery performance by phasing in branchless banking).

                         Taken as a whole, the initiatives are formulated to yield returns in the short term in terms of participation and achievement gains, but also promote
                         well-performing, robust, sustainable institutions and administrative systems that would generate returns over the medium to long term.

                         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         The proposed project will be implemented across the entire province of Punjab, which has several types of geophysical characteristics.
                         Geographically, the province can be divided into five zones: (i) Northern Hilly Region including Murree hills and adjoining areas; (ii) Potohar
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Plateau including Rawalpindi, Chakwal and Jhelum districts; (iii) Central Plains which mostly consist of river interfluves and includes the districts of
                         Lahore, Gujranwala, Faisalabad, Sheikhupura, Sahiwal and others; (iv) desert like plains in South Punjab, including Multan, Rahimyar Khan and
                         Bahawalpur districts; and (v) Cholistan and Thal Deserts. The Northern Hilly region is prone to earthquakes, whereas the river interfluves
                         experience occasional flooding during the monsoon periods. Water availability is a problem in the Thal and Cholistan deserts, while water quality –
                         both surface and ground water – is a serious issue in and around most of the urban centers of the province. Groundwater is generally available,
                         though at varying depths, in the Potohar Plateau, Central Plain and Desert Like Plains. The quality of groundwater is generally poor in the southern
                         parts of the province.

                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                         Chaohua Zhang (SASDS)
                         Javaid Afzal (SASDI)

                          6. Safeguard Policies                           Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01             Yes
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                     No
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                              No
                          Pest Management OP 4.09                         No
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11          No
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                   No
                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12             No
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                       No
                          Projects on International Waterways OP/BP       No
                          7.50
                          Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60           No




                                                                                                                                                                     Page 2 of 4
                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                   Most of the PESRP II activities to be financed by the Bank are environmental benign. Under PESRP II, the government has indicated that it
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 will shift its focus from infrastructure development to improving teacher quality and performance. There may however be some small-scale civil
                                 works in the sector at large during the program implementation period to provide missing facilities to schools or to rehabilitate/improve existing
                                 school buildings. None of these construction activities will be supported under PESRP II. Similarly, there will be no land acquisition or
                                 involuntary resettlement for new school infrastructure under PESRP II. Depending on their nature and extent, the activities in the sector at large
                                 may yield low-to-medium negative environmental impacts, most of which are likely to be reversible and temporary in nature. Hence, PESP II
                                 has been classified as Category B, in accordance with World Bank OP 4.01.

                                 For PESP, which supported PESRP, an Environmental Assessment (EA) was carried out based on which an Environmental and Social
                                 Management Framework (ESMF) was developed by the government. The assessment findings of the EA carried out for PESP remain relevant
                                 for PESP II. Therefore, the existing ESMF, with revisions, will continue to apply to PESRP II. The ESMF includes mitigation measures to
                                 address safeguard issues, implementation and institutional arrangements and plans, monitoring requirements, and supervision roles and
                                 responsibilities. The ESMF has been disclosed prior to PESP-II appraisal.

                                 PESP II is will promote and support activities through softer interventions built into the project’s TA that can help address concerns with the
                                 state of the existing school-system infrastructure. There are significant shares of schools that lack access to safe drinking water and sanitation
                                 facilities, and have poor natural lighting and ventilation. Existing school building designs and construction quality do not result in structures that
                                 are sufficiently resistant against natural disasters such as earthquakes and floods. Maintenance and repair of buildings and facilities can also
                                 be poor. The proposed actions under PESRP II to provide adequate non-salary budgets to schools and empowering schools to use them as
                                 well as strengthening and empowering school councils to use their grants will likely aid in addressing the extent and severity of poor repair and
                                 maintenance. In addition, through the TA component of the project, the government plans to continue to avail of analytical and advisory
                                 services for (1) the reinforcement of buildings in high-risk areas; (2) provision of low-cost water treatment facilities/technologies; (3) natural
                                 disaster preparedness and hygiene training for teachers and students; and (4) preparation of guidelines for school building design/construction,
                                 addressing aspects such as natural lighting and ventilation, aesthetics, protection against natural disasters, water supply, sanitation, use of
                                 local construction materials, and consideration of local climatic conditions.

                                 Social: Child school participation and student achievement shortfalls vary systematically across selected population subgroups. The
                                 socioeconomic dimensions examined comprise of gender, poverty, rural/urban, and district. PESRP II aims to improve school participation,
                                 student attainment, and student achievement in general and in population subgroups where the shortfalls are largest in particular. This targeting
                                 to participation-poor or achievement-poor subgroups is reflected in the Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs). Relevant education indicators for
                                 the subgroups of interest will be monitored during project implementation as well.

                                 As with PESRP, indigenous groups have not been identified in the areas expected to be covered by PESRP II, thus OP 4.10 is not triggered. If
                                 any such group is identified during the course of program implementation, an Indigenous Peoples Development Plan will be prepared and
                                 necessary measures incorporated into PESRP II to mitigate any potential adverse impacts and facilitate access to (improved) schooling.
                               2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                   Given the nature of activities under PESRP II (see above), supported by PESP II, the program is unlikely to cause any indirect and/ or long-
                                 term negative impacts.
                               3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                                  Not relevant.
                               4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                                  and implement the measures described.
                                   The ESMF prepared for PESRP, with revisions, will continue to be used for PESRP II.. The revised ESMF includes appropriate mitigation
                                 measures to address any potential negative environmental and social impacts associated with program activities. The ESMF also includes
                                 institutional arrangements, monitoring requirements, capacity-building needs, and documentation protocol for any needed environmental
                                 management of program activities.

                                 PESRP II does not require the acquisition of land for public purposes but communities may voluntarily donate land for setting up government
                                 schools in the sector at large. In order to ensure transparency and genuine voluntariness, the ESMF requires evidentiary documentation (1) on
                                 the ownership of the land and the voluntary nature of the donation, (2) on the appropriateness of the donation for the intended purpose, (3) on
                                 the economic status of the donor (i.e., non poor status and that remaining holdings are economically viable), (4) that there are no
                                 encumbrances on the land, (5) that there are no negative livelihood impacts on vulnerable groups, (6) that no compensation is paid, and (7) that
                                 the owner relinquishes claims on the land and the title is transferred to the recipient through the notary public, registered deed, or any other
                                 procedure prescribed by the law of the state. In the past, donated land has had undesirable characteristics, such as being far from the
                                 community, having soil of poor resistance, difficult topography, or being located in flood-prone areas. In the unlikely case that new schools are
                                 built, the ESMF will be used to ensure that they meet the structural and architectural requirements that reduce vulnerability to risks and
                                 increase children safety.

                                 Shortfalls in key education indicators vary across subpopulations (as discussed earlier). Program targeting of participation-poor or
                                 achievement-poor subgroups is supported through Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs). Relevant education indicators for subpopulations of
                                 interest will be monitored as well.

                                 The proposed institutional arrangements include (1) designating the Deputy Director (Planning), Program Monitoring and Implementation Unit
                                 (PMIU), as the environmental and social focalpoint, with overall responsibility for fulfilling the safeguard requirements of the proposed project,
                                 and (2) a full-time Environment Officer responsible for implementing various activities required for safeguard compliance. Both positions are
                                 already functional. Capacity building for implementing the safeguard policies is one of the key functions of the Environment Officer. In addition,
                                                                                                                                                                           Page 3 of 4
                              the School Education Department (SED)/PMIU will (1) adhere to the agreed plan for regular visits to the districts for monitoring ESMF
                              compliance and for training of district officials, (2) require the districts to regularly submit ESMF monitoring reports, (3) prepare and submit the
                              quarterly ESMF compliance reports to the Bank, highlighting the results of its own analysis, (4) discuss environmental aspects in its regular
                              meetings with district education administrations and the Chief Minister's Monitoring Force (CMMF) external monitoring system officers, and (5)
                              ensure that the district governments include environmental checklists in Project Concepts (PC-Is) for school-related civil works. The
                              government also plans to revise the school inspections form used by CMMF to integrate in the current separate proforma for collecting
                              information on ESMF compliance; this step would reduce some of the redundancy in the collection of information and increase the frequency of
Public Disclosure Copy




                              data collection (from quarterly data collection to monthly).

                              The ESMF discusses mechanisms for the redressal of grievances related to PESRP II. Key established mechanisms include the Chief
                              Minister's Complaints Cell and the Chief Secretary's Petition Cell, with subcells in the District Coordination Officer (DCO) offices in all districts,
                              and the e-complaints system under the School Education Department (SED). The systems allow multiple avenues for registering complaints
                              and tracking progress in complaint handling, including through the web. Experience from supporting PESRP indicates that grievances often
                              stem from the absence of information (or misinformation) on program activities, procedures and practices, and benefit eligibility rules. To lessen
                              the problem, the government expects to proactively and widely communicate relevant information on PESRP II through a proposed
                              Communications Unit at PMIU.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                               on potentially affected people.
                               Key PESRP II stakeholders include students, parents, local communities served by government schools, school-council members, teachers,
                              district education administrations, SED and its sub-departments, and the provincial and district administrations. Under PESRP, the provincial
                              government prepared the ESMF, following consultations with the above stakeholders. The ESMF will continue to apply to PESRP II in its
                              entirety. SED/PMIU has engaged and consulted with stakeholders during the design of PESRP II and will continue to engage and consult with
                              stakeholders over the implementation period. All documents are disclosed on the PMIU website and in district education administration offices.
                              The ESMF compliance checklist is also included in the documentation received by contractors for school-related civil works, and is in the
                              process of being integrated into the fiduciary guidelines offered to school councils.

                            B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                            Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                              Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                                Yes
                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                   23-Mar-2012
                              Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                               20-Mar-2012
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                21-Mar-2012
                              For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                              Directors
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                            disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                            C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                              Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                    Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [     ]

                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?                    Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [    ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language            Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [    ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for         Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [    ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?                    Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [    ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard          Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [    ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same              Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [    ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Task Team Leader:                    Dhushyanth Raju
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:     Name: Sanjay Srivastava (RSA)                                                    Date: 27-Apr-2012
                            Sector Manager:                      Name Amit Dar (SM)                                                               Date: 22-Mar-2012


                                                                                                                                                                        Page 4 of 4
