                                                                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                             CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC501
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Apr-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        China                                     Project ID:                        P128919
                              Project Name:                   CHINA: ZHENGZHOU URBAN RAIL PROJECT (P128919)
                              Task Team Leader:               Gerald Paul Ollivier
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 14-Dec-2012                                     Estimated Board Date:              06-Aug-2013
                              Managing Unit:                  EASCS                                     Lending Instrument:                Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                         Urban Transport (90%), Public administration- Transportation (10%)
                              Theme:                          Other urban development (90%), Municipal governance and institution building (10%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                           Amount
                                   Borrower                                                                                                                   2180.00
                                   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                                        250.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                      2430.00
                              Environmental Category:         A - Full Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              B. Project Objectives

                              The proposed project development objective (PDO) is to improve sustainable mobility in Zhengzhou by providing integrated and accessible public
                              transport of suitable capacity and quality along the Line 3 corridor from Xinglongpu Lu to Hang Hai Dong Lu station.

                              C. Project Description

                              The project would support the development of Line 3 of the Zhengzhou urban rail system from Xinglongpu Lu to Hang Hai Dong Lu station. This
Public Disclosure Copy




                              includes the construction of 22.5 km of urban rail, 20 stations, including 9 transfer stations and one depot; systems for power supply, signaling,
                              communications, train control, fare collection, drainage, fire fighting, ventilation, air conditioning and monitoring; rolling stock; integration with other
                              transport modes; and all stations and other ancillary activities required to complete construction and support operations. The preliminary cost
                              estimate is US$2.43 billion, or US$108 million per km. This line is fully self standing and not dependent on future extensions, which may take place
                              after 2020.

                              The proposed project components to be financed by the Bank loan are:

                              a) Civil Works (US$ 212 million): Construction of six contiguous stations between Baizhuangjie and Hanghai Dong Lu stations and one depot.
                              These proposed stations include a range of stations typical of other stations in the city urban network in areas with different density levels: two
                              transfer stations, one station that may become a transfer station, a regular station, a terminal station, and a station with a large stabling area for
                              trains. The station would include the necessary interchange with other transport modes where appropriate. The depot would be in the outskirts of
                              the city in a rural area.

                              b) Equipment (US$ 38 million): Procurement and installation of critical systems to support operations, including (but not necessarily limited to):
                              power supply, elevator/escalators, and communications systems.

                              c) Technical Assistance (US$ 2 million): Provision of: (i) Study and guidelines on multi-modal system integration; (ii) Study on increasing public
                              transport quality and usage, with emphasis on implementing integrated land use planning along the corridor; (iii) Project management capacity
                              building, including risk management best practices; and (iv) Operations management support.

                              D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                              The project is located in Zhengzhou City, capital city of Henan Province in middle of China.


                              E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

                              This is the first Bank financed project to be prepared and executed by the City of Zhengzhou alone. As such, the City has limited experience with
                              the Bank’s Safeguard Policies. In order to effectively address the social safeguard issues, Zhengzhou has retained the Engineering Resettlement
                              Research Center (ERRC) of Wuhan University with previous experience in preparing social and resettlement components of the Bank funded
                              projects. To address the environmental issues, Zhengzhou has retained the Environmental Protection Center (EPC) of Ministry of Transportation
                           (MOT) to prepare the EA reports. To further assist them, the Bank mission provided them with guidance, booklets and CD ROM on the World Bank
                           Safeguard Policies. The Bank’s social and environmental specialists will work closely with the City and its Consultant to provide further guidance
                           and if necessary, training to assist them with successful preparation of the RAP and EA reports.

                            F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

                           Yiren Feng (EASCS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Jun Zeng (EASCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

                            Safeguard Policies                             Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01            Yes                The proposed project will have substantial net positive environmental benefits
                                                                                            through promotion of mass public transport and consequent reduction of vehicle
                                                                                            emissions at city level. Based on initial environmental screening, there are no
                                                                                            ecologically sensitive sites affected by the project, given its urban context.

                                                                                            The major environmental concerns related to the project are expected to be
                                                                                            urban utility and traffic disruption; accessibility to business during construction,
                                                                                            tunnel construction safety; potential impact on surrounding buildings and
                                                                                            physical cultural sites, and proper transportation and disposal of spoil material
                                                                                            during the construction stage; and noise/vibration impact, aesthetics integration,
                                                                                            groundwater subsidence, and waste management from rail operation facilities.
                                                                                            The project is classified as a Category A project as per OP4.01.

                                                                                            The environmental safeguards documents will include an EIA, EMP, and EA
                                                                                            Executive Summary, addressing, among other common construction / operation
                                                                                            impacts, the following key aspects:
                                                                                              - Disruption of urban traffic, access to businesses, NMV/pedestrian access
                                                                                            connectivity at metro stations during construction;
                                                                                              - Construction safety and potential impact on surrounding buildings, especially
                                                                                            cultural property sites;
                                                                                             - Noise and vibration during construction and operation;
                                                                                              - Spoil material transport and disposal;
                                                                                              - Ground water;
                                                                                              - Waste management from rail operation facilities;
                                                                                              - Geological risk assessment;
                                                                                              - Cumulative impacts of the projects being built concurrently (two other rail
                                                                                            lines)
                                                                                              - Analysis of alternatives;
                                                                                             - Public consultation following national guidelines and OP4.01;
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              - Environmental Management Plan: A detailed EMP will be prepared for the
                                                                                            project including sufficient mitigation measures (activities and impacts, mitigation
                                                                                            measures, implementation and supervision responsibility, monitoring indicators
                                                                                            and cost estimates) for incorporation into bidding documents. Environmental
                                                                                            supervision of construction and environmental monitoring will also be included in
                                                                                            the EMP. The EMP measures will be developed in consistency with IFC’s EHS
                                                                                            Guidelines.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                    No                Given the urban context, and sites visit confirmed that the project will not affect
                                                                                            any natural habitats or critical natural habitats.
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                             No                 The project will not cause significant conversion or degradation of natural
                                                                                            forest.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09                        No                The project will not involve procurement of pesticide or have any impact on
                                                                                            pest management practice.
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11         Yes                The proposed line 3 rail project will pass nearby or pass underneath some
                                                                                            cultural relics including Shang Dynasty City Wall Relics, ErqiTower among
                                                                                            others. Therefore there is a potential risk of impact from tunnel excavation during
                                                                                            construction and vibration during operation. The PCR policy is therefore
                                                                                            triggered. The potential impacts will be carefully addressed through project
                                                                                            design, selection of construction technologies, and good construction
                                                                                            management including monitoring of settlement. Adequate consultation with
                                                                                            relevant authorities will be ensured during EA preparation. It is agreed that PMO,
                                                                                            FS team and EA team will consult with relevant cultural relic bureau for further
                                                                                            survey during the preparation process of EA, to ensure all the relevant cultural
                                                                                            relics along the rail are identified, and mitigation measures are incorporated into
                                                                                            the design, construction and operation appropriately. Chance-find procedures
                                                                                            will include provisions and procedures stipulated in the Cultural Property Law
                                                                                            and will be included in bidding documents and contracts.
                                Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                      No                     The Social Specialist visited the project area to conduct a screening to
                                                                                                                        determine whether ethnic minority peoples are present in, or have collective
                                                                                                                        attachment to, the project area. A small Hui district is located in the city center
                                                                                                                        of Zhengzhou. The Hui people is an officially recognized national minority and
                                                                                                                        include all historic muslim communities in People's Republic of China not
                                                                                                                        included in China's other Muslim groups. Hui people speak Chinese, do not
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        have their own traditional language and are mainly entrepreneurs in Zhengzhou.
                                                                                                                        The project will be constructed within the downtown of Zhengzhou City and no
                                                                                                                        indigenous people groups as defined in Bank’s OP4.10 have been identified
                                                                                                                        within the project area. The Social Specialist concluded that no indigenous
                                                                                                                        people groups as defined in Bank’s OP4.10 is present in, or have collective
                                                                                                                        attachment to the project area. Therefore, this policy is not triggered.
                                Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                                Yes                    Based on the site visit and primary project alignment, land taking caused by the
                                                                                                                        project construction will be unavoidable. The main involuntary resettlement
                                                                                                                        impact will include urban house demolition, removal of shops/restaurant and
                                                                                                                        other public facilities. Therefore, the Bank’s Social Safeguards policy on
                                                                                                                        Involuntary Resettlement will be triggered and a Resettlement Action Plan will be
                                                                                                                        prepared by the client in both English and Chinese, and an experienced
                                                                                                                        consultant is hired to assist the RAP preparation. The RAP will cover all
                                                                                                                        resettlement impact caused by Line 3. Construction of Line 1 and Line 2
                                                                                                                        commenced in 2009. These lines are not directly and significantly related to the
                                                                                                                        Bank-assisted project, and are not necessary to achieve its objectives as
                                                                                                                        defined in the PDO. Therefore, no linkage project has been identified.
                                                                                                                        In case of any project sites that will not be determined during preparation, a
                                                                                                                        Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared.
                                                                                                                        If the land was acquired prior to project identification with an intention that it be
                                                                                                                        used for the construction of rail Line 3 a review will be undertaken to confirm that
                                                                                                                        the substantive aspects of OP4.12 have been met with (e.g., replacement for
                                                                                                                        loss of assets, restoration of livelihood to pre-project conditions). The review will
                                                                                                                        determine if measures are needed to address any gaps found by the review. In
                                                                                                                        deciding how far back such due diligence review should go, it is necessary to
                                                                                                                        consider the context of the project in order to determine an appropriate time
                                                                                                                        frame. As a matter of guidance, such review should go back at least two years
                                                                                                                        prior to project identification, but the appropriate time point is dependent on the
                                                                                                                        TT’s assessment in the due diligence review.;
                                                                                                                           In all other cases (i.e., the land was acquired prior to project identification but
                                                                                                                        for reasons other than construction of Line 3), the review would be carried out
                                                                                                                        with reference to national laws and regulations, and will confirm that there are no
                                                                                                                        legacy issues or unresolved disputes.
                                Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                          No                    The project will not finance construction or rehabilitation of any dams as
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        defined under this policy.
                                Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                          No                    The project is not located in any international waterways as defined under the
                                7.50                                                                                    policy.
                                Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                              No                    The project is not located in any known disputed areas as defined under the
                                                                                                                        policy.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 19-Oct-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
                                  should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                    Environmental Safeguards: EA and EMP will be undertaken, with first draft available by May 10, 2012, draft final report to be completed by
                                    pre-appraisal, and final report for public disclosure prior to appraisal.

                                    Social Safeguards: A resettlement plan (RAP) will be developed, with first draft available by April 10, 2012, draft final report to be completed
                                    by pre-appraisal, and final report for public disclosure, prior to appraisal.

                         IV. APPROVALS
                                Task Team Leader:                                Name: Gerald Paul Ollivier
                                Approved By:
                                Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                 Name: Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan (RSA)                                                           Date: 09-Apr-2012
                                Sector Manager:                                  Name: Paul Kriss (SM)                                                                                 Date: 30-Mar-2012




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
