                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC3063

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-May-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-Jun-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Burkina Faso                     Project ID:      P124015
                            Project Name:      Social Safety Net Project (P124015)
                            Task Team          Azedine Ouerghi
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          13-Dec-2013                      Estimated        17-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTSW                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Other social services (100%)
                            Theme(s):          Social safety nets (70%), Other social protection and risk management (10%),
                                               Education for all (10%), Nutrition and food security (1 0%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     30.00                     Total Bank Financing:         30.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                                Financing Gap:                 0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                 30.00
                              Total                                                                       30.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective (PDO) is to provide income support to poor and vulnerable
                           groups and to lay the foundations for a basic safety net system in Burkina Faso.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed project will be implemented using a Specific Investment Loan (SIL) for a period of 5
                           years starting in FY14. The project is expected to be financed by an IDA credit of US$30.00 million.
                         Specifically, the project will implement a cash transfer program to poor and vulnerable households in
                         order to contribute to poverty reduction, improved household consumption, and support the
                         development of the basic building blocks for a national safety net system. Based on the existing
Public Disclosure Copy




                         evidence and on-going activities, the project will achieve the PDO by: i) designing and implementing
                         a cash transfer program as one of the building blocks of an national safety net system, and ii) assist
                         the country in establishing mechanisms for coordinating existing safety net programs.

                         The design of the proposed operation reflects the extensive analytical work carried out by the
                         government, the Bank, and other development partners on safety nets in Burkina Faso (including the
                         safety net assessment, poverty analysis, and the recent impact evaluations of pilot transfer programs).
                         The key recommendations of the safety net assessment was that the objectives of the social safety
                         nets should be to directly support the consumption of the chronically poor and vulnerable populations
                         and ensure access to basic social services to poor and vulnerable populations, in order to promote
                         human investment. Key conclusions of the impact evaluations note that transfer programs can
                         increase food consumption both in quantity and quality. Therefore, the priority principle of the social
                         safety net system is to ensure poor and vulnerable populations receive regular and predictable
                         support along with complementary programs to ease demand side constraints preventing them from
                         accessing to basic social services. This project will support transfers to poor and vulnerable
                         households to help them stabilize and protect their consumption and reducing financial barriers
                         (demand side constraints) for access services such as nutrition, health care and education for their
                         children.

                         The Bank is already engaged in strengthening safety nets in Burkina Faso through on-going dialogue
                         as well as the parallel support to establish a public works program as part of a youth employment
                         project. The Bank’s social protection team has been engaged in dialogue with the government for
                         more than 2 years and has established a strong relationship with the government and other partners
                         on the safety net agenda. And given the parallel skills building project, the proposed safety net
                         project will help coordinate the objectives, implementation, and outcomes of the public work
                         program with the cash transfer program so as to establish a coordinated safety net system in Burkina
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Faso with these two programs functioning as the main cornerstones. For instance, during discussions
                         with the government it was proposed that the cash transfer program of the safety net project would be
                         implemented in the same disadvantaged geographic zones as the public works program of the youth
                         employment project in order to concentrate the efforts in the fight against food insecurity, exploit
                         synergies, and maximize impact.

                         The project will have 3 components:

                         Component 1: Cash transfers to poor and vulnerable households (US$24 million). This component
                         will support the development and implementation of a cash transfer program to serve as one of the
                         cornerstones of the social safety net. The cash transfers will help poor and vulnerable households
                         (target group) by increasing household income. Targeting methods may include proxy means testing
                         (PMT), community-based targeting and geographic targeting in order to identify the poorest and
                         most vulnerable households. Cash transfers to the beneficiaries will be made by payment agencies
                         based on a list of selected beneficiaries. The transfers will be provided publicly to a household
                         representative once they present their beneficiary ID cards. The payments will be made on a regular
                         basis and ensure good timing to allow beneficiaries to use the transfers to stabilize their consumption
                         and afford regular expenditures related to investments and productive activities (such as the
                         schooling and health care of their children) and to reduce transaction cost. The exact transfer level
                         will be determined during project preparation based on careful analysis of household level data and
                         existing impact evaluations findings. In other African countries , a level equivalent to around 20
                         percent of household expenditures has been shown to be sufficient to allow households to improve
                         their consumption yet lowenough not to create any work disincentives.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The program will operate in the most disadvantages regions of the country - where poverty and
                         childhood malnutrition are the highest and access to schooling is the lowest. These regions may
                         include the Est, Nord, Sud-Ouest, Plateau Central and Centre-Est. The focus will be on rural areas
                         but the program may also operate in some urban areas. The specific locations will be determined
                         during project preparation based on recently available data on the regional and socio-economic
                         distribution of educational outcomes and malnutrition indicators.

                         This component will finance cash transfers to beneficiary households as well as technical assistance
                         and administrative costs for developing and implementing the program. The component may also
                         include accompanying measures for beneficiary household to improve the awareness and behavior of
                         households in the areas of human development. These activities may include training activities and
                         other communication on essential family practices (such as proper nutrition, hand-washing, keeping a
                         clean and safe home, sanitation and waste disposal, breast feeding, etc.) especially if resources and
                         know-how from other development partners operating in Burkina Faso are available.

                         Component 2: Laying the foundations to a basic national safety net system (US$3 million). This
                         component will assist the country in developing the capacity and sound mechanisms for coordinating
                         existing safety net programs and designing operational building blocks that can be used for making
                         safety net programs better targeted to the poor and vulnerable. The objective is to contribute to the
                         establishment of a long-term effective and sustainable (institutionally, politically and financially)
                         system of safety nets anchored in the national social protection strategy. Some of the most important
                         building blocks for coordinating and operating safety net programs are a) an effective targeting
                         system for identifying beneficiary households; b) a managing information system for keeping track
                         of registered and non-registered households, coordinate benefits and beneficiaries between programs,
                         and producing regular monitoring reports; c) a secure and efficient payment system for making and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         validating payments; d) a monitoring and evaluation system to allow evidence based policy making
                         and addressing system functioning over time; and e) a grievance and appeals mechanism. This
                         component will support the development of some of these building blocks. The specific building
                         blocks to be supported will be determined during preparation in consultation with the government.

                         The component would finance technical assistance, capacity building (such as training for
                         government staff), and inputs geared at developing and the key building blocks of a national safety
                         net system.

                         Component 3: Project management and evaluation (US$3 million). This component will support the
                         management and evaluation of the overall project. It will finance project management, coordination,
                         and monitoring and evaluation activities related to the first two project components. In particular, this
                         component would support impact evaluation of the cash transfer program for learning more about
                         what particular aspects of cash transfer programs and other accompanying measures are important
                         for reducing poverty and improving and sustaining human development outcomes in low-income
                         countries such as Burkina Faso.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         This project is classified as Category C (Not Required) because no civil works or other project
                               activities will be undertaken that have adverse environmental or social impacts. The project does not
                               require any land acquisition leading to involuntary resettlement and/or restrictions of access to
                               resources and livelihood.
Public Disclosure Copy




                               The program will operate in the most disadvantages regions of the country - where poverty and
                               childhood malnutrition are the highest and access to schooling is the lowest. These regions may
                               include the Est, Nord, Sud-Ouest, Plateau Central and Centre-Est. The specific locations will be
                               determined during project preparation based on recently available data on the regional and socio-
                               economic distribution of educational outcomes and malnutrition indicators.
                               E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                               The country has continued to build its capacity on safeguards management during the
                               implementation of several World Bank financed projects. The Ministry of Finance which will be in
                               charge of implementing the project is familiar with World Bank safeguards policies. An institutional
                               capacity assessment will be carried out during project preparation if needed.
                               F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                               Liba C. Strengerowski-Feldblyum (AFTN2)
                               Paivi Koskinen-Lewis (AFTCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                                 Safeguard Policies                                                Triggered?                    Explanation (Optional)
                                 Environmental Assessment OP/                                      No
                                 BP 4.01
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No
                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Oct-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             NA
                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Task Team Leader:   Name: Azedine Ouerghi

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name:                            Date:
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Stefano Paternostro (SM)   Date: 13-Jun-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
