                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                  Report No.: ISDSC816

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-Jul-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Europe and Central Asia          Project ID:       P131138
                            Project Name:       ENPI East Countries FLEG II Program (P131138)
                            Task Team           Andrew Michael Mitchell
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           08-Aug-2012                      Estimated         22-Oct-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      ECSS3                            Lending           Technical Assistance Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector:             Forestry (90%), Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (10%)
                            Theme:              Biodiversity (20%), Climate change (20%), Environmental policies and
                                                institutions (20%), Rural policies and institutions (20%), Othe r public sector
                                                governance (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                              Amount
                              Borrower                                                                        0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Free-standing TF for ECA                                                       11.78
                              Total                                                                          11.78
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The overall objective of the project is to promote sustainable forest governance, management, and
                           protection of forests in the participating Program countries, ensuring the contribution of the region's
                           forests to climate change adaptation and mitigation, to ecosystems and biodiversity protection, and to
                           sustainable livelihoods and income sources for local populations and national economies.

                           The three specific Program objectives are:
                           i)      the implementation of the 2005 St. Petersburg FLEG Ministerial Declaration and ensuring
                           continuation of the process launched in 2005 (regional level),
                           ii)     the formulation and implementation of sustainable forest sector policies, including legal and
                         administrative reforms for sustainable forest management and protection (national level), and
                         iii)     the demonstration of best sustainable forest management practices in targeted areas for
                         further replication (sub-national level).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Project Description
                         Detailed design of the country and regional activities will be based on country demand and capacity.
                         The countries and their FLEG focal points (usually a high-ranking official) have  after country
                         consultations  presented preliminary priorities for action. The country-specific activities will be
                         designed more thoroughly during the inception phase (which will be completed during the first six
                         months of the program implementation). The detailed activities will be presented in a work program
                         and approved by the Steering committee of the program. These activities will be largely based on the
                         results of the Phase I, analysis of stakeholders and main challenges as well as the ambition of the
                         countries to tackle these challenges. The program will not approve or implement activities in any
                         disputed territories as defined by WB OP/BP 7.60.

                         As the first FLEG Program has not yet been fully completed, final conclusions cannot yet be drawn.
                         However, the project has been monitored by various missions by the EU, the Donor, with very good
                         scores. There is a general recognition that the ENPI-FLEG Phase I project has played a useful and
                         concrete role until now. Its importance has been further raised by the catastrophic forest fires in the
                         region in the summer of 2010. All relevant concrete recommendations from the EU monitoring
                         report will be incorporated in FLEG II. The main recommendations were: inclusion of regional and
                         country logical frameworks in the project reporting; harmonization of country logframes, using
                         quantifiable objectively verifiable indicators; taking into account of an increased need for translation,
                         printing, dissemination and training activities; establishing cooperation with relevant other EU-
                         funded projects, including those under the EU thematic program for Environment and Natural
                         Resources including Energy.

                         The participating countries have shown strong ownership of the Program and see the structure and
                         approach from FLEG I relevant also for the follow-up phase. The main changes proposed for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         FLEG Phase II should include strengthening: the impact assessment of the Program; the
                         collaboration with the EU Member States and EU Delegations in the participating countries; the
                         implementation of the EU Timber Regulation; and, the collaboration with other international
                         organizations (e.g. European Forest Institute and FAO). Phase II also needs to present a roadmap for
                         the follow-up of the St. Petersburg ministerial conference held in 2005.

                         Phase I has implemented a large number of activities in the countries. When planning for Phase II,
                         success from these activities will be assessed and selectively continued. The approach is to build on
                         successful initiatives and scale these up.

                         The main indicative activities, linked to objectives (1), (2) and (3) are:
                         1.       Regional level activities
                         1.1.     Strengthening policy dialogue between participating countries and institutions regarding the
                         2005 St. Petersburg Declaration by organizing of thematic meetings on FLEG issues of shared
                         interest, and FLEG II steering committee meetings at least annually.
                         1.2.     Monitoring the implementation of the St. Petersburg Declaration in the participating
                         countries through stakeholder reporting and preparation and regular up-dating of tracking tables on
                         implementation of the declaration; identifying areas of the St Petersburg declaration where
                         implementation needs more focus and support.
                         1.3.     Conducting regional studies and publications to be developed in the framework of the 2005
                           St. Petersburg Declaration.
                           1.4.     Contributing to communication activities to promote regional and national activities
                           developed within the framework of 2005 St. Petersburg Declaration; maintaining a high-quality
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Internet site in English and Russian on state of the art of forest sector governance and reform.
                           1.5.     Contributing to the implementation of FLEG country work plans based on partner
                           government requests.
                           2.       National level activities
                           2.1.     Supporting the formulation and implementation of forest policy legal and administrative
                           reforms on the national and sub-national levels.
                           2.2.     Supporting the use of modern technology (timber tracking, GPS, and other ICT) through
                           pilot activities addressing FLEG issues.
                           2.3.     Promoting good investment climate for credible private sector operators
                           2.4.     Providing capacity building, training and advice on administrative reforms.
                           2.5.     Liaising and co-operating with forest sector experts from EU member states.
                           3.       Sub-national and local level
                           3.1.     Providing support on forest governance techniques, remote sensing to forest staff to ensure
                           law enforcement.
                           3.2.     Documenting and communicating concrete local results on forest governance and forest law
                           enforcement.
                           3.3.     Involving local communities in policy development and in sustainable forest management.
                           Quantify information that is easy to use and relevant for local decision makers.
                           3.4.     Increasing public awareness and participation.

                           Allocation of program budget will be decided during the inception and adjusted based on country
                           progress, demand and capacity. It is assumed that the allocation will initially be equal distribution
                           between countries and regional envelope. However, it can be assumed that larger countries and
                           countries showing notable progress will be allocated more resources. Countries with slow progress
                           would see their allocation decline.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the             safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The FLEG 2 Program will be implemented in seven countries that are part of the EU's European
                           Neighborhood and Partnership Instrument (ENPI) East region: Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus,
                           Georgia, Moldova, Russia and Ukraine, at both national and sub national level.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The FLEG 2 program will be executed by WB in partnership with the grant recipients IUCN and
                           WWF. While the Bank has in its team qualified Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists,
                           IUCN and WWF might be not familiar with the WB and EU safeguards policies. To build relevant
                           capacities in this regard, at the inception phase of the Program implementation, special training will
                           be given for representatives from these institutions along with the Quality Control Specialists, to be
                           hired in each of participating country and National Program Advisory Committee members.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Arcadii Capcelea (ECSS3)
                           Chukwudi H. Okafor (ECSS4)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                         Safeguard Policies             Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes          While the Program does not involve support for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BP 4.01                                     identification or preparation of investments
                                                                     which would have direct environmental and
                                                                     social impacts, the forest policies/laws, national
                                                                     forestry programs and plans to be developed
                                                                     might have a wide range of environmental and
                                                                     social issues and potential impacts (positive and
                                                                     negative). To address these issues and potential
                                                                     impacts it was agreed a Strategic Environment
                                                                     and Social Assessment Framework (SESAF)
                                                                     will be prepared by the Bank as the Safeguards
                                                                     instrument for the operation as a whole. The
                                                                     SESAF should identify the types of
                                                                     environmental and social issues which can be
                                                                     expected to be associated with the types of
                                                                     policy document which the project will support,
                                                                     and provide guidance on how these aspects
                                                                     should be integrated into the analytical and
                                                                     decision-making processes. The overall
                                                                     objective of the SESAF is for the draft laws and
                                                                     policies, national programs and plans to be
                                                                     developed under the Program, to be consistent
                                                                     with the WB policies. As the European
                                                                     Commission is the major financer of FLEG2,
                                                                     the activities and outputs should also be
                                                                     consistent with applicable EU Directives and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     policies and thus the SESAF would include a
                                                                     special section in this regard. The SESAF will,
                                                                     in particular include, the following: (a)
                                                                     Procedure for environmental screening and
                                                                     determination of the scope of the Strategic
                                                                     Environmental Assessment for policy
                                                                     documents; (b) WB OPs and their main
                                                                     provisions with a focus on their implications for
                                                                     the forestry sector; (c) Main provisions of the
                                                                     relevant to forestry sector and to EA procedure
                                                                     EU Directives; (d) Procedure how the OPs and
                                                                     EU Directives provisions should be taken into
                                                                     account while designing the policy documents,
                                                                     describing the roles and responsibilities in this
                                                                     regard, as well as procedures for Strategic
                                                                     Environmental Assessment (SEA) disclosure
                                                                     and public consultation; (e) SEA reviewing
                                                                     process and responsibilities in this regard; (f)
                                                                     Capacity building activities for IUCN, WWF,
                                                                     NPACs representatives as well as for Quality
                                                                 Control Specialist to be hired under the FLEG 2
                                                                 program in each participating countries.
                                                                 The SESAF will be a freestanding document to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 be disclosed in Infoshop and in-country. The
                                                                 consultation on the SESAF will be done at a
                                                                 special session of the National Program
                                                                 Advisory Committee in each country, ensuring
                                                                 that all key stakeholder groups are appropriately
                                                                 represented.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes   This policy is triggered and relevant
                                                                 recommendations on how to address Natural
                                                                 Habitats issues within the policy documents to
                                                                 be developed under FLEG 2 Program will be
                                                                 included in the SESAF.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes   This policy is triggered and relevant
                                                                 recommendations on how to address the forestry
                                                                 issues within the policy documents to be
                                                                 developed under FLEG 2 Program will be
                                                                 included in the SESAF.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes   This policy is triggered and relevant
                                                                 recommendations on how to address Pest
                                                                 Management issues within the policy documents
                                                                 to be developed under FLEG 2 Program will be
                                                                 included in the SESAF.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   This policy is triggered and relevant
                         BP 4.11                                 recommendations on how to address the issues
                                                                 of this OP within the policy documents to be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 developed under FLEG 2 Program will be
                                                                 included in the SESAF.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   This policy is triggered and relevant
                                                                 recommendations on how to address IP issues
                                                                 within the policy documents to be developed
                                                                 under FLEG 2 Program will be included in the
                                                                 SESAF.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   This policy is triggered and relevant
                         4.12                                    recommendations on how to address
                                                                 resettlement issues within the policy documents
                                                                 to be developed under FLEG 2 Program will be
                                                                 included in the SESAF.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

                         Projects on International        No
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                         7.60
                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Oct-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The SESAF will be prepared, and disclosed in the countries before program implementation
                                      commences in October 2012. By October 01, 2012 the final version of the document will be
                                      disclosed in the countries and in the Infoshop.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Andrew Michael Mitchell

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 12-Jul-2012
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Kulsum Ahmed (SM)                                                                                                    Date: 05-Jul-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
