                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA2210
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Feb-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 29-Mar-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Nepal                              Project ID:    P132289
                            Project Name:      Kali Gandaki A Hydropower Plant Rehabilitation Project (KGAHPRP)
                                               (P132289)
                            Task Team          Pravin Karki
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       31-Jan-2013                           Estimated   14-May-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: SASDE                                  Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector:           Hydropower (100%)
                            Theme:            Other economic management (70%), Water resource management (30%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         31.11            Total Bank Financing:      27.26
                            Total Cofinancing:                           Financing Gap:              0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                             3.85
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                   27.26
                              Total                                                                         31.11
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           The objective of the proposed project is to improve the reliability of power supply of Kali Gandaki A
                           Hydropower Plant through rehabilitation and safety measures and to and improve the response
                           capacity of Nepal in case of an emergency.
                            3. Project Description
                           Background



                                                                       Page 1 of 12
                         Kali Gandaki A Hydropower Project (Kali Gandaki A) is a 144 MW run-of-river plant with six hours
                         of daily peaking capacity, located on Kali Gandaki river in Syangja. The dam is located below the
                         confluence of Kali Gandaki and Andhi Khola rivers. The plant was largely funded by the ADB and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         commissioned in 2002 at a cost of US$453 million. Today it is the largest hydroelectric power
                         station in Nepal, and it supplies nearly 50% of NEA’s total annual electricity generation which
                         represents a quarter of the country’s total annual electricity generation. Kali Gandaki A is unique of
                         its kind in Nepal offering both by its large capacity (144 MW) and its peaking capacity (6 hours).
                         This important plant is currently facing: low availability of generation capacity from erosion and
                         cavitation leading to severe damage to its power generation equipment and safety management
                         issues.

                         Severe Damages to Power Generation Equipment. Severe damage was found at critical plant
                         equipment, including the main inlet valve, guide vane, and turbine runners caused by both erosion
                         and cavitation. The erosion is caused by increased sediment concentration dominated by quartz
                         particles in the water passing through these parts of the power generation units. Reduced efficiency
                         of the sediment handling facilities at the headworks was identified as a significant cause of this
                         increase in sediment concentration. In addition to erosion, the electro-mechanical equipment is
                         affected by cavitation caused by decrease in the tail water level. The damage from erosion and
                         cavitation is increasing, in turn reducing generation efficiency (2-3%) and reliability, and threatening
                         the safety of the plant. For example in 2011, the production was recorded as 848 GWh, 8% lower
                         than the maximum achievable production under the corresponding hydrological conditions. Expert
                         advisers concluded that civil works at the headworks and tailwater areas are needed to address these
                         issues. They also recommended that electro-mechanical equipment be retrofitted to avoid more
                         severe damage and to enhance the performance of the equipment against silt erosion. Special
                         coatings of turbines were also recommended.

                         Sediment issues at Kali Gandaki. Both Kali Gandaki and Andhi Khola rivers lie in the middle
                         mountains, a physiographic region of Nepal where increased erosion and sedimentation takes place.
                         Sediment transport is a natural phenomenon in the Himalayas. Young Geology causes high sediment
Public Disclosure Copy




                         loads in the rivers during the monsoon season which carry increased sediments and floating debris to
                         the plant. The abrasive sediment particles in high concentrations (above permitted limits) are
                         transported into the flow passage of the power generation units, causing severe damage to the
                         turbines. Unless sediment management is improved, wear and tear of the machinery will continue to
                         be significant, and require unnecessarily long and frequent unscheduled shutdowns of the power
                         generation units for repairs, subsequently further reducing the availability of this critical plant. In
                         2011, the maximum power delivered per unit was 46.4 MW, 3.3 % lower than the 48 MW installed.

                         Floating Debris. As with suspended and bedload sediments, transport of floating debris in the rivers
                         is a natural phenomenon. Emerging towns and increasing population along the Kali Gandaki and
                         Andhi Khola rivers introduce greater quantities of solid wastes including plastic and paper that
                         contribute to the clogging of the intakes at Kali Gandaki. Poor control of the floating debris chokes
                         the intake screen and reduces the efficiency of the sediment settling basins by introducing accelerated
                         flows. The trash rack raking machine cannot keep up with the debris accumulation and operations
                         must be stopped regularly to clean the screen, manually and/or via back flushing. For example in the
                         summer of 2012, NEA engineers had to back flush the settling basin, resulting in a 13-hour plant
                         shutdown and a generation loss amounting to 2 GWh or about US$174,000 when calculated at 8.7
                         cents per kWh. The loss amounts to a staggering US$ 796,000 when considering diesel-based self-
                         generation at 40 US cents/kWh. Only data from 2012 is presented here because extensive data from
                         earlier years is not available due to two reasons: 1) NEA’s automatic data recording systems are

                                                                      Page 2 of 12
                         malfunctioning , and 2) in 2012 NEA decided to collect detailed information for a comprehensive
                         analysis.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The original designers of the plant had recommended continuous monitoring of sediments and
                         shutting down the plant when the concentrations exceeded 10,000 Parts Per Million (PPM). This has
                         never been practiced in Kali Gandaki simply because the country is always suffering from a power
                         deficit and cannot afford to close the plant during periods of high sediments during the summer
                         months. Physical model testing was performed to assess the performance of headworks and
                         sedimentation handling facilities, based on which, modifications to the headworks and the
                         sedimentation handling facilities will be conducted under the project to improve the performance of
                         the settling basins.

                         Cavitation. During maintenance, the dismantled runners, wicket gates and plates on the machine
                         shop’s floors show typical wearing due to cavitation rather than the action of sand alone. Field
                         measurements have confirmed that the cavitation problems exist mainly due to the lowering of the
                         tail water level under the action of water release at the exit of the power house. This issue cannot be
                         left unaddressed as it causes important vibration in the powerhouse which can damage all the
                         equipment. Therefore the project will physically increase the level of the tailwater to restore the
                         suction head and pressure on turbine runners to the design levels by installing a concrete sill at the
                         junction with the river bed. This simple solution causes a head loss of 1meter which is compensated
                         by an expected turbine efficiency gain of 2 to 3% and a decrease in maintenance frequency. Indeed,
                         the runner must be repaired every year or two whereas experts estimate that combined with hard
                         coating, the repairs could take place every fifth year. The observed cavitation causes vibrations that
                         can negatively affect several important equipment including the runners, the wicket gates, guide
                         bearings, thrust bearings. It could lead to ultimate destruction of these parts if the problems are
                         neglected.

                         Safety Management Improvements. Kali Gandaki A was funded through ADB and major
                         international firms designed and constructed the project. The team’s assessment of the dam suggested
Public Disclosure Copy




                         good quality construction works and no evidence of structural concern. However the team identified
                         the need to re-establish a satisfactory dam safety management. Adequate instruments need to be re-
                         installed and properly maintained and staff trained in monitoring the instruments regularly. For NEA
                         to regain control on dam safety management, the rehabilitation project will assist NEA in creating a
                         central cell to house amongst other things technical archives of Kali Gandaki and other projects.
                         NEA will also implement priority non-structural measures such as an emergency preparedness plan
                         and an instrumentation plan with the assistance of a consulting firm. The proposed project will
                         address three safety concerns at Kali Gandaki A. First, the Main Inlet Valves (MIV) that function as
                         safety devices for the power plant are eroded and need repairs. Sediment deposition in the lower part
                         of the valves hinders complete closure of the MIVs and headwork modifications proposed by the
                         project will help reduce sedimentation in the MIVs. Secondly, the project will address some dam
                         safety management issues consisting mainly of improper maintenance and lack of use of dam
                         instrumentation. Lastly, the deficient control systems will be fixed in the plant to provide the
                         operators with the emergency information necessary to maintain the plant.

                         The need for an Operation Manual. Since the construction of the plant in 2002, the draft Operation
                         Manual was not finalized. The draft manual clearly stated that “Sediment Management on [Kali
                         Gandaki A] is one of the key elements in the project operation? and recommended sediment
                         management strategies such as regular flushing, and shutdown of the plant when sediment
                         concentrations reached threshold values. The plant has always been run according to the instructions

                                                                      Page 3 of 12
                         of the Load Dispatch Center (LDC), which dispatches the electrical power supplied to the consumers,
                         works towards maintaining balance between demand and supply, and tries to minimize power
                         interruptions. This process is designed to meet consumer demand rather than to reflect plant
Public Disclosure Copy




                         conditions, such as sediment levels. As long as Kali Gandaki remains under pressure to generate
                         regardless of its operating conditions, ensuring proper maintenance, safety and efficiency at Kali
                         Gandaki A will continue to be compromised. The project will be completed in 2016. By that time
                         new generation capacity is expected to come online. The project provides a good opportunity for the
                         World Bank team to help the GoN, the LDC and NEA agree on optimal operating rules of Kali
                         Gandaki in the medium and long term, based on the recommendations of the consulting firm hired
                         for the project.

                         Project Components

                         Component A: Civil Works will address the main items related to civil works and will consist of the
                         following sub-components.

                         •        Headworks modifications. Under this sub-component, modifications will be made to the
                         headworks including the intake and the settling basins.
                         •        Improving Dam Safety & Instrumentation. Under this sub-component, instruments installed
                         in the project will be repaired and others added as necessary to meet state of the art requirements. An
                         operation and maintenance manual will be prepared which will include an instrumentation plan.
                         Real-Time sediment monitoring instrument will be installed.
                         •        Maintenance Works. Under this sub-component, maintenance of the headworks and the
                         powerhouse areas, including the stabilization of the slope in the headworks area and the
                         modifications to the tailrace to address cavitation.
                         •
                         Component B: Electro-Mechanical Works. This component consists of mechanical and electrical
                         works divided into two sub-components.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •        Mechanical Works. Under this sub-component the mechanical parts in the powerhouse and
                         the intake will be repaired and upgraded.
                         •        Electrical Works. The electrical works will repair and upgrade the control system of the
                         power house and the dam.

                         Component C: Technical Assistance and Capacity-Building. This component consists of the
                         following four sub-components.

                         •        Consulting Firm (Consulting Services for Dam Safety, Civil & Electro Mechanical works).
                         Under this sub-component, technical advisory services will be provided to NEA through a consulting
                         firm, for overseeing all the three components of the Project. The consultant will also provide the
                         detailed technical design, held NEA with implementation and procurement, and help prepare the
                         Operation and Maintenance Manual, Emergency Preparedness Plan and the Instrumentation Plan
                         (IP).
                         •        Asset Management. Under this sub-component technical assistance will be provided to NEA
                         to improve and upgrade their asset management systems.
                         •        Safeguard Implementation. This sub-component will provide technical assistance to NEA in
                         implementing the Environmental Management Plan (EMP), Community Support Program and the
                         Vulnerable Community Development Plan, including monitoring and evaluation.
                         •        Capacity-Building. This sub-component will provide training to increase NEA’s capacity in

                                                                      Page 4 of 12
                         asset management, sediment management, safeguard implementation, and operations and
                         maintenance of specialized fields of electro-mechanical equipment and safety instruments.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis (if known)
                         The existing Kali Gandaki A Hydropower Plant is located approximately 180 km west of
                         Kathmandu. The project was designed as a run-of-river type hydroelectric plant on the Kali Gandaki
                         River, near the confluence with Andhi Khola river, with an installed capacity of 144 MW at a net
                         head of 115 m utilizing a rated discharge of 142 m3/s to generate about 840 GWh of electric energy
                         per annum.

                         The existing headworks are located near the villages of Mirmi, Andhi Muhan and Harmichaur,
                         downstream of the Andhi Khola confluence. The reservoir extends upstream to Set Beni at the
                         confluence of the Seti Khola. The powerhouse is located underground except for the control building.
                         During the dry season (Nov-May), the reservoir level is kept at 524 m and drawdown to generate
                         max power of 144 MW. Power generation is reduced during the infilling. During the wet season
                         (June-Oct) the reservoir is kept at a lower elevation of 518 m to minimize build up of sediments in
                         the reservoir area. Based on continuous monitoring during the monsoon, the plant is to be shut down
                         when the sediment concentrations reach 5,000 ppm. In reality real-time sediment monitoring
                         instruments to measure sediment concentrations are not available in the plant. About 13 km
                         downstream of the existing dam is dewatered section, after which a main tributary joins.

                         The Kali Gandaki basin is sub-tropical to temperate with hot (max 40 degrees Celsius) and wet
                         summers and cool winters (10 degrees Celsius). The basin is situated in the midland of the lower
                         Himalayas. Most of the basin is hilly and deeply incised with elevations between 400 m and 1600 m
                         in the project area. The sediment transport capacity of the Kali Gandaki river is quite high, especially
                         during the monsoon.

                         The Kali Gandaki River is inhabited by Snow Trouts in the upper reaches, Mahseer in the middle
Public Disclosure Copy




                         reaches and the River Carp and Catfish in the lower reaches. Out of a total 128 species of fish
                         reported from the Gandaki River system, 57 species were collected from the Project area.

                         As per the project completion report prepared by the Asian Development Bank (ADB), the project
                         concept evolved as a result of increased environmental and social concerns at international and
                         national levels. Environmental considerations were taken into account during the pre-feasibility and
                         feasibility studies. Further site investigations, design changes and project optimization, reviews and
                         recommendations by a Panel of Experts and ADB staff provided basis for detailed environmental
                         studies and formulating mitigations measures. Some design parameters were changed or modified
                         and additional studies have been conducted regarding environmental impacts during the detailed
                         engineering design and planning phase. Important provisions and modifications were made to
                         minimize and to mitigate and the adverse impacts as follows:

                         •        The dam height was carefully selected to ensure that the water storage level did not inundate
                         the religious “Holy Stone? and the Seti Beni Market at the end of the backwater zone upstream.
                         •        To sustain the aquatic and wildlife in the reduced flow zone below the diversion dam the
                         result of model studies recommended a riparian release of 4 m3/s water from the dam during the dry
                         season and an additional 2 m3/s would be provided during religious events.
                         •        The locations of project sites including the transmission line alignment and substations were
                         carefully sited to protect major settlement, school, hospital and cultural, religious and


                                                                      Page 5 of 12
                         environmentally sensitive area.
                         •       Provision of 1 % investment from the project net revenues for rural electrification program
                         of surrounding areas of the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •       Allocation of US$ 4.3 million for environmental measures excluding in built contractors
                         costs.

                         The proposed Kali Gandaki A Hydropower Plant Rehabilitation Project is located within the project
                         area of the existing power plant. Therefore, it will not occupy additional or new land area. No new
                         additional ancillary facilities, such as access roads, camps, and transmission lines will be required.
                         The proposed rehabilitation: i) will not change the original dam height, ii) will not increase the water
                         level in the upstream reservoir, and iii) will not reduce the minimum water release that was
                         established during the original project. Hence no new impact on forests, and land-use is expected
                         from the proposed rehabilitation works.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Drona Raj Ghimire (SASDI)
                         Parthapriya Ghosh (SASDS)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              OP/BP 4.1 is triggered because the rehabilitation
                         BP 4.01                                              activities, although small scale and confined to
                                                                              the existing plant area, activities may have
                                                                              moderate adverse impacts on natural
                                                                              environment, human health and safety.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No               Habitat (OP/BP 4.04) is triggered because
                                                                              project will support fish trapping and hauling
                                                                              program as an enhancement measure although
                                                                              rehabilitation activities will not have new or
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              additional impacts on fish or natural habitat.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09              No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/      Yes               Physical Cultural Property (OP/BP 4.11) is
                         BP 4.11                                              triggered because the project is implementing
                                                                              measures to protect and enhance the temples at
                                                                              Seti Beni and Rudra Beni.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        Yes               There are indigenous communities in the project
                                                                              area. Consultations were carried out with them
                                                                              during the preparation stage and a VCDP has also
                                                                              been prepared.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       No                The policy is not triggered as Social Impact
                         4.12                                                 Assessment carried out shows that proposed
                                                                              project is not expected to have any land
                                                                              acquisition or involuntary resettlement issues.
                                                                              However, it identified some outstanding issues



                                                                      Page 6 of 12
                                                                                and certain recently emerged issues. Project has
                                                                                prepared Social Action Plan in consultation with
                                                                                the community to address the outstanding issues.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           Yes               Although the proposed rehabilitation project
                                                                                does not involve any dam rehabilitation works,
                                                                                the dam safety policy is triggered because the
                                                                                proposed rehabilitation project includes a
                                                                                component on preparing a dam safety plan,
                                                                                including an emergency preparedness plan and
                                                                                instrumentation plan.
                            Projects on International           Yes               OP/BP 7.50) triggered because the dam is
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                located on the Kali Gandaki River which is a
                                                                                tributary to the Ganges, an international river.
                                                                                However, the rehabilitation work is unlikely to
                                                                                make substantial change in the river water quality
                                                                                and/ or quantity that might affect downstream
                                                                                user. Hence, a request for exception to the
                                                                                notification requirement under OP 7.50 is being
                                                                                sought from the Regional Vice President,
                                                                                SARVP.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                   The project is not located in a disputed area, nor
                            7.60                                                is the project area likely to become one in the
                                                                                foreseeable future.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The Project is not expected to cause any significant environmental and social safeguard impacts.
                              Consisting largely of rehabilitation work, the proposed project consists of physical activities that
                              will be mostly restricted to the existing plant facilities and its immediate surroundings. There will
                              be no land acquisition and involuntary resettlement expected as a result of the civil works
                              proposed. Possible social impacts could be more related to the contractor’s construction
                              operations, such as noise, dust and public health issues. There are indigenous communities in the
                              project areas. They may be affected with these impacts. Broad consultations were carried out with
                              them to understand their attitude towards the proposed project, assess possible impacts in
                              designing the necessary mitigation measures. The indigenous community is represented by Bote,
                              Magars and Newars. A Vulnerable Community Development Plan in consultation with the
                              community has been prepared to address the issues raised by the vulnerable communities.

                              The moderate potential environmental impacts of the activities under the proposed rehabilitation
                              project includes: temporary increase in flow release below the dam during construction, improper
                              waste disposal during implementation, air and noise pollution during the construction, and
                              variations in the water quality due to changed flushing regime during operation phase. The
                              proposed rehabilitation works will take place within area already occupied by the existing power
                              plant. Most of the measures identified for mitigation of construction period impacts likely to be


                                                                        Page 7 of 12
                          caused by the proposed project will be the responsibility of the contractor. These measures will be
                          included in the bidding documents and monitored during the implementation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Though there are no adverse impacts due to the proposed project, the SIA revealed that there are
                          certain outstanding issues that include: (i) release of 2 m3/s of water from the dam during the
                          important cultural and religious festivals as per the EIA provision to facilitate the people
                          downstream of headwork to take ‘holy bath’ in the Kali Gandaki River; (ii) transfer of ownership
                          of land and houses to Bote families; (iii) transfer of ownership of Bote School to the School
                          Management Committee; and (iv) extension of existing siren warning system to cover at least 13
                          km dewatered stretch at Rudrabeni to warn and inform the people regarding the emergency and/or
                          sudden release of water downstream of dam and associated risks during operation. The
                          outstanding environmental issues include: insufficient environmental flow and additional flow for
                          religious purposes, landscape restoration at the former contractor camp (in Mirmi) and disposal
                          site of the original plant (at Thulobagar), continued support for the fish hatchery and fish trapping
                          and hauling program, and strengthening of the siren warning system.

                          Some issues emerged recently and include the need for protection work at Setibeni Holy Stone and
                          for maintenance of resettled Bote houses and the school. During the implementation of the original
                          project, suitable protection structure of gabion filled walk way around the holy stone of height
                          more than 12 meters was provided that enabled access to the Sheela (Holy Stone), particularly
                          during the peaking operation when the water level reached 524 m elevation. However, the holy
                          stone has been suffering from current scouring from underneath and its concrete base may fall
                          away in the foreseeable future. Due to a recent flood, the protection work carried out earlier has
                          been completely destroyed. The community requested support for further repairs. The project will
                          protect, enhance and will develop mechanism for the management of this holy site in consultation
                          with the community. The second issues regards maintenance of resettled Bote houses and school.
                          These houses were constructed ten years ago to resettle the affected Bote (Fisherman) families.
                          Due to lack of resources, the Bote community could not maintain the houses and the school. As a
                          goodwill measure the Project will renovate the houses and the school building. To ensure that Bote
Public Disclosure Copy




                          families are able to maintain their houses in the future, the project is providing them with
                          subsidized boats for boat transportation for a sustained income.

                           Newly emerged environmental issues include: sedimentation impacts and water level at Seti Beni,
                           landslide on the access road to dam, catchment area watershed management, and water boat
                           transportation safety and pollution.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             No long term impact
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             The proposed project is largely of a rehabilitation nature with limited impact. The proposed
                           works will consist of headworks modifications to address the floating debris and suspended
                           sediment problems and increase the effectiveness of the settling basins. The electro mechanical
                           works consist of repairs of the machines.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.




                                                                     Page 8 of 12
                           The implementation of EA/EMP, SAP and VCDP will be the responsibility of the Project
                          Manager who will be assisted by ESSD. ESSD will set up a social cell at the project level. The
                          social cell of ESSD will comprise of one Social Development Officer (SDO) with adequate
Public Disclosure Copy




                          experience of hydro projects. The SDO will be assisted by two social mobilizers. ESSD will hire
                          these mobilizers from a pool of locally qualified persons. One of the mobilizer will be a woman.
                          For day to day operations, the SDO will directly report to the Project Manager. The Social Cell
                          will be responsible for planning and designing of project information campaigns, group based and
                          individual income generating activities, and community mobilization for implementation of SAP.
                          As and when required, the social cell will hire the services of local NGOs or firms for the
                          implementation of project information campaigns, poverty alleviation and income-generation
                          activities, especially the formation of self-help groups (SHGs).

                          An Environmental Management Unit (EMU) will be established within the proposed rehabilitation
                          project site office under the technical supervision of the ESSD of NEA. EMU will carry out
                          regular/ day-to-day monitoring and data recording and prepare monthly briefs for joint review at
                          site by the project management, contractor and EMU. ESSD will visit the project site every three-
                          month for internal monitoring and reporting. NEA will also engage an external agency for external
                          evaluation twice during the project implementation (during mid-term and at the end of the project
                          implementation). EMU will immediately report to the Project/NEA ESSD, if there is any issue that
                          needs immediate attention or intervention.

                          The ESSD/ Social Cell staff will coordinate with relevant department for the delivery of these
                          activities. The success of implementation will largely depend on staff’s liaison with the
                          community and other concerned government agencies. Other involved agencies are expected to
                          collaborate with the Project, based on instructions from the KGA HPP. These arrangements have
                          to be made during the first month of Project implementation in order to set up the various
                          committees and implementation mechanisms required for the project. The role of the social cell
                          and specifically of SDO will be that of a facilitator. The SDO will work as a link between the
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Project and the Community. They will educate the community on the need of the Project, on
                          aspects relating to community development measures and ensure that help is extended to the
                          community as per the SAP finalized in consultation with the community.

                          Assessment borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures:
                          The primary responsibility of coordinating work related to social and environmental safeguards
                          will rest with the Project assisted by the Environment and Social Studies Department (ESSD). The
                          project will establish an Environmental Management Unit (EMU) and a Social Cell. The EMU
                          and the Social Cell will be staffed with specialized social and environment professionals either
                          hired from the marked or on deputation from ESSD. ESSD over a period of time has acquired
                          skill and experience to address social and environmental safeguard issues. Currently ESSD is
                          working on several Bank funded projects. An Environmental and Social Specialist each from
                          ESSD will be posted at the project site to monitor the implementation of environmental and social
                          safeguards mitigation measures. The specialists will be responsible for generating monthly
                          progress reports. The midterm and end term evaluation of implementation process will be carried
                          out by an independent agency.

                           Proposed Rehabilitation project will support orientation/ training to the site staff.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.


                                                                   Page 9 of 12
                            Public Consultation, Participation and Disclosure (PCPD) program was developed and
                           implemented taking into account the various areas of influence that were identified during initial
                           part of the SIA study. Based on these recognized areas of influence, KGA HEP stakeholders
Public Disclosure Copy




                           comprise of following groups:

                           •       Communities/families/ individuals who will be benefited by the Project;
                           •       Government agencies at the district and regional level;
                           •       Local Government Bodies ( VDCs and DDCs); and
                           •       Political party representatives and NGOs operating in the Project area;

                           The project undertook consultation with the community at four different locations. The issues
                           discussed include (i) employment opportunities; (ii) protection work at holy stone and banks of
                           Rudrabeni temple, (iii) rural electrification; (iv) extension of siren warning system to the
                           dewatered stretch; (v) release of additional 2 m3/s of water; and (vi) transfer of land ownership to
                           Bote families and school. Though the proposed works at the head works of the KGA HEP will not
                           have any adverse social impacts, the project will continue to consult the community especially on
                           community support program. Following consultation mechanism is proposed during the
                           implementation of the proposed rehabilitation works in the KGA HEP:

                           Upstream area at Setibeni Bazaar
                           The local people at the Setibeni Bazaar will be closely consulted during the implementation of the
                           proposed maintenance works for Setibeni Sheela. Moreover, platform for cremation will be
                           constructed in consultation with the local people of the area. A committee comprising local key
                           persons and the project officials will be formed for proper implementation of the proposed
                           programs.

                           Downstream Area at Rudrabeni
                           The famous religious site of Rudrabeni Shree Ram temple is located at downstream area (about 13
Public Disclosure Copy




                           km from the dam) just before the Badigad tributary. The area holds significant importance for
                           performing the final ritual that has been impacted due to low flow of the river. The local key
                           persons and the priest of the Rudrabeni temple need to be consulted for maintenance works of
                           bank protection in the area.

                           Head works Area
                           The Bote Community is the marginalized indigenous community residing at the head works area.
                           They need to be consulted for the implementation of maintenance works for the resettled houses
                           and the Bote school prior to the implementation of the works. Consultation will also be required
                           for the land transfer issue .

                           Disclosure: The safeguard documents (SIA, SAP and VCDP, EA and EMP) were disclosed in
                           country on February 3, 2013 and were disclosed in Bank’s infoshop on 02.05.2013. The executive
                           summary of the safeguard documents (EA, EMP, SAP and VCDP) has been translated into Nepali
                           language language and disclosed in the country (on NEA’s website www.nea.org.np) and will also
                           be displayed in the project affected area. Hard copies of the safeguards documents will be placed
                           at the project office and respective VDCs. A copy will also be placed at the contractor’s project
                           office.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements



                                                                     Page 10 of 12
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      05-Feb-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   05-Feb-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Nepal                                                            05-Feb-2013
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      05-Feb-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   05-Feb-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Nepal                                                            05-Feb-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                          Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                          Has the RVP approved such an exception?                          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?


                                                                   Page 11 of 12
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Pravin Karki
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Sanjay Srivastava (RSA)                        Date: 11-Feb-2013
                            Coordinator:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Jyoti Shukla (SM)                              Date: 29-Mar-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 12 of 12
