                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC3574

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Aug-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Aug-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                            Project ID:       P133017
                            Project Name:      Guilin Integrated Environment Management (P133017)
                            Task Team          Sing Cho
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          22-Jan-2014                      Estimated         11-Jul-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASCS                            Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Wastewater Treatment and Disposal (35%), General water, sanitation and flood
                                               protection sector (25%), Water supply (20%), Wastewater Collection and
                                               Transportation (20%)
                            Theme(s):          Pollution management and environmental health (55%), Water resource
                                               management (45%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:    162.00                      Total Bank Financing:        100.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                                 Financing Gap:                   0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      62.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        100.00
                              Total                                                                        162.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed project objective is to improve the water and sanitation services in Guilin
                           C. Project Description
                           The project includes investments in water supply and wastewater systems in new urban areas located
                         up-stream of Guilin Municipality, further wastewater (drainage) system investments in the urban area
                         of Guilin Municipality, water quality monitoring and industrial pollution control, as well as
                         institutional development and capacity building of the PIUs: Guilin Water Company/Guilin
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sewerage Company/Environmental Protection Bureau. Given the nature and history of the
                         infrastructure in the built up urban areas, the sewers are combined wastewater and drainage. The
                         project will therefore also improve the drainage within the core urban area. The corresponding total
                         estimated project cost is RMB 940 million (US$ 162 million) and the agreed Bank loan is US$ 100
                         million, with a targeted World Bank financing percentage of about 60 %. The proposed project has
                         the following five components:

                         Component 1: Water Supply. Install about 37 km of drinking water distribution network
                         (transmission main) linking the expanded Chengbai WTP (increased from 100,000 m3/day to
                         300,000 m3/day) to Linqui District and Balijie Area. The water supply will be further secured thru
                         the formation of ring-main supply network. The existing drinking water distribution network is
                         supplying around 330,000 m3/d drinking water from four existing WTPs with a total capacity of
                         340,000 m3/day to nearly 900,000 urban residents in Guilin urban area, as well as business and
                         industries, and the proposed expansion of Chengbai WTP which will be financed locally and the
                         proposed drinking water distribution network financed by the project will expand the coverage to an
                         additional 255,000 urban residents, as well as public institutions (GMG is moving all their offices to
                         the new urban area), business and industries in new urban area by 2020. Provision of a ring-main
                         type of water distribution network will ensure the security of the entire water supply system, so that
                         the system can be protected and provided a more flexible operation mode, in order to ensure water
                         supply in case of WTP or major pipe incident.

                         Component 2: Wastewater and Sludge Management. Upgrade the existing five WWTPs, namely
                         Shanyao WWTP, Qilidian WWTP I/II, Beichong WWTP, Lingui WWTP and Yanshan WWTP to
                         meet enhanced discharge standards. Improve sludge dewatering and odor removal equipment in
                         WWTPs, and replace and rehabilitate the aged equipment, including sewerage and storm water pump
                         stations and 41km of sewers. No further expansion of WWTPs under the project is needed after
Public Disclosure Copy




                         thorough review of current and future water demand and taking account of the current expansion of
                         Qilidan and Lingui WWTPs financed locally to be completed by end of 2013.

                         Component 3: Water Reclamation. Construction of a 32,000 m3/day reclaimed water treatment units
                         (polishing and pumping units) developed by phasing approach and associated pipes to key consumers
                         in Linqui District. The main market for the initial phase is for replenishing the water courses and
                         landscaping (public parks) purpose, and institutional usages (street cleansing and toilet flushing of
                         public buildings), which will be funded by the government until more users (public and private) are
                         added into the entire system. The phasing of the wastewater recycling capacity will be determined
                         during project preparation as the supply of recycled water has to match the demand and has to be
                         transferred through infrastructure that needs to be built.

                         Component 4: Water Environment Monitoring and Pollution Control Capacity Building. Support for
                         information systems to enhance the capacity of the Guilin Environmental Protection Bureau (GEPB)
                         for water quality monitoring and pollution source control in Guilin.

                         Component 5: Project Management and Implementation Support. Provide project management and,
                         external monitoring assistance, training and study tours, and improve urban management in Guilin.
                         The capacity building for PIUs may focus on training components for monitoring, operation &
                         maintenance of WTPs/WWTPs and sludge treatment, benchmarking of utilities’ operation
                           performance and NRW reduction, as well as a study tour to anaerobic digesters, to solar drying
                           facilities and to any other installations of particular interest.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                           analysis (if known)
                           Guilin is located in Guangxi Autonomous Region, one of 12 provinces in the Western Region.
                           Despite impressive advances in recent years, average income levels in Guangxi are only about a
                           third of the national average income, and there is a high incidence of poverty. Recognizing the
                           growing disparity between the Guangxi and other regions, the Government is placing major emphasis
                           on promoting economic and social development, alleviating poverty, and supporting infrastructure
                           investments in Guangxi.

                           The city of Guilin, with a population of 0.9 million, is the most famous tourist destination in China.
                           Its population is expected to reach 1.2 million by 2020. In 2011, the GDP of Guilin Municipality
                           was 133.6 billion Yuan, an annual growth rate of 20.5% which was the highest of the period from
                           2005 to 2011. The treasury incomes of Guilin Municipality also hit its highest level of 14.2 billion
                           Yuan as of the end of 2011, an increase of 17.35%. Its GDP per capita was 25,675 Yuan (US
                           $4,141). In line with its continuously strong economic development and mandate to protect Lijiang
                           River, the Guilin Municipal Government (GMG) intends to escalate promoting “environmental
                           protection” and developing “low carbon and circular economy”. In December 2013, State Council
                           passed its Outline of the Plan for Constructing the International Destination Guilin. The Government
                           has allocated the responsibility for economic development and protecting the water environment of
                           Lijiang River, to GMG at various levels and the performance of local government officials will be
                           evaluated by new management systems including target accountability.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The PMO has little experience in preparation and implementation of Bank’s Environment and Social
                           Safeguards policy. An experienced environment and social consulting team will be hired during the
                           project preparation and an external monitor will be hired during theproject implementation. Primary
Public Disclosure Copy




                           training was delivered and more technical capacity building activities will be arranged during project
                           preparation and implementation when needed.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Ximing Zhang (EASCS)
                           Jun Zeng (EASCS)
                           Xin Ren (EASCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The component on water supply will involve
                           BP 4.01                                              mainly pipelining along the existing right-of-
                                                                                way. The component on wastewater and sludge
                                                                                will not support any expansion but upgrading
                                                                                existing WWTPs with limited civil work except
                                                                                the proposed sludge treatment plant in suburb of
                                                                                Lingui District. Standard process of bio-
                                                                                digestion followed by composting was proposed
                                                                                for the sludge treatment with a capacity of 150
                         tons/day planned in order to absorb sludge from
                         all five WWTPs in Guilin. Similar application
                         of comparable scale can be found in some recent
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Bank projects (e.g. bio-digestion of garbage in
                         Ningbo solid waste project in China). The
                         wastewater reclamation component will use the
                         existing WWTP in Lingui for necessary further
                         treatment of WWTP discharge for final
                         application, mainly replenishing the urban
                         streams and ponds in Lingui.

                         The project will bring positive environmental
                         benefits through reducing the volume and
                         impacts of WWTP sludge, most of which is
                         presently dumped on-site or in landfill, and
                         upgrading WWTPs. Major negative
                         environmental impacts are related to the
                         pipeline construction, operation of WWTPs, and
                         sludge treatment and application. These impacts
                         are site-specific, few of them are irreversible;
                         and in most cases mitigatory measures can be
                         designed more readily than for Category A
                         projects.
                         Guilin PMO plans to prepare one EA report for
                         all subprojects for the Bank approval to ensure
                         better consistency and easier coordination, even
                         if subprojects belonging to different owners
                         might need to carry out separate EA for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         domestic approval according to China’s EA
                         regulations and procedure. Based on the EA,
                         Environmental Management Plans (EMP) will
                         be prepared separately for each component to
                         facilitate implementation and supervision. The
                         EMPs will detail mitigation measures,
                         supervision arrangement and monitoring
                         scheme to address these impacts, according to
                         the Bank safeguard requirements.

                         Related activity:
                         According to the present proposal, expansion of
                         Chengbei Water Plant and associated road and
                         underneath pipelines connecting it to the Second
                         East Ring road will be funded outside the Bank
                         project. They are identified as linked project as
                         defined by the Bank’s OP4.12. Consequently, as
                         per the Bank’s requirements, due diligence of
                                                                 their EAs, construction and operation of linked
                                                                 projects will need to be carried out.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       TBD   The project will take place in built-up area and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 suburb of Guilin with no natural habitats as
                                                                 defined by this OP in the vicinity of any project
                                                                 sites (to be confirmed in next mission).
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The reclaimed water will be used for
                                                                 replenishment of water bodies, irrigation of
                                                                 public parks (landscaping), street cleansing and,
                                                                 flushing in public buildings, so use of pesticides
                                                                 is NOT anticipated, and thus the policy is NOT
                                                                 triggered.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   Although no physical cultural sites was noticed
                         BP 4.11                                 at the proposed project sites and roads, given
                                                                 Guilin’s rich history and culture, systematic
                                                                 survey during the EA process is needed to
                                                                 determine if this OP be triggered.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No    The project activities are all within constructed
                                                                 urban areas, where there is no ethnic minority
                                                                 community present, so the policy is not
                                                                 triggered.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   Based on the site visit and primary project
                         4.12                                    alignment, land taking caused by the project
                                                                 construction will be unavoidable. The main
                                                                 involuntary resettlement impact will include
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 urban/rural structure demolition, land
                                                                 acquisition and temporary land taking.
                                                                 Therefore, the Bank’s Social Safeguards policy
                                                                 on Involuntary Resettlement is triggered and a
                                                                 Resettlement Action Plan will be prepared by
                                                                 the client in both English and Chinese. To deal
                                                                 with small changes in the project that might
                                                                 easily go beyond the coverage of the RAP, a
                                                                 Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) is also
                                                                 needed and will be prepared during the project
                                                                 preparation.

                                                                 According to the present project proposal, the
                                                                 domestic funded expansion of Chengbei (City
                                                                 North) Water Plant and the construction of
                                                                 connecting road between Chengbei Water Plant
                                                                 and East 2rd Ring road were identified as
                                                                 linkage project as defined by the Bank’s
                                                                                                                                 OP4.12. All related resettlement plan will be
                                                                                                                                 included in the project RAP.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         Yes                           One existing reservoirs - Qingshitian (62m high
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 earthfill dam with concrete core) will supply
                                                                                                                                 water to the existing service areas of Guilin city
                                                                                                                                 (including the expansion of Chengbei WTP).
                                                                                                                                 The OP 4.37 is therefore triggered. An
                                                                                                                                 independent dam safety expert will be hired by
                                                                                                                                 Guilin PMO. The dam safety review report by
                                                                                                                                 the independent dam safety expert will be
                                                                                                                                 prepared by pre-appraisal.
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            Lijiang river is tertiary tributary of Pearl River
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            which flows through China before entering the
                                                                                                                                 South China Sea in Guangdong, thus not an
                                                                                                                                 international waterway, according to the OP’s
                                                                                                                                 definition.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 28-Jan-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Draft EA and EMP by the environmental consulting team will be prepared by pre-appraisal

                                      Draft RAP and RPF by the social consulting team will be prepared by pre-appraisal.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      The dam safety review report by the independent dam safety expert will be prepared by pre-
                                      appraisal.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Sing Cho

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name:                                                                                                                      Date:
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Mark R. Lundell (SM)                                                                                                 Date: 12-Aug-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
