                                                                     INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                              CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSC639
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Mar-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                         Uruguay                                   Project ID:                        P126408
                              Project Name:                    Full-Time School Expansion Project (P126408)
                              Task Team Leader:                Peter Anthony Holland
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 11-Jun-2012                                      Estimated Board Date:              25-Sep-2012
                              Managing Unit:                   LCSHE                                     Lending Instrument:                Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                          Primary education (100%)
                              Theme:                           Education for all (100%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                             Amount
                                   Borrower                                                                                                                        33.80
                                   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                                           40.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                           73.80
                              Environmental Category:          B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              B. Project Objectives

                              The proposed Project Development Objective is to improve the quality, equity and internal efficiency of preschool and primary education, through
                              expanding the Full-Time School program.

                              C. Project Description

                              The proposed Project would reach approximately 10,000 beneficiaries, living primarily in marginalized urban areas. Beneficiaries would be the
Public Disclosure Copy




                              students, teachers and school directors in schools to be converted to FTS, and students and families living in areas ofhigh urbanization that would
                              benefit from new school construction.

                              The proposed loan instrument would be a Specific Investment Loan, in the amount of approximately US$ 40 M. The operation would likely use
                              traditional operational and fiduciary modalities for carrying out activities related to infrastructure, with the possibility of having a result-based
                              component for activities related to qualitative improvements, such as student assessments, teacher training and support to school directors.
                              Preliminary discussions have led to a Project structure consisting of three components, to be organized as follows:

                              Component One: Expanding and Modernizing the FTS Infrastructure

                              This component would support the objective of improving equity in the education sector between income quintiles, through expanding supply and
                              improving preschool and primary infrastructure. It would finance works related to the new construction of schools and the reconstruction and
                              refurbishment of schools. It would also provide maintenance funds for existing FTS, and provide participating schools with equipment and
                              education materials, including for classrooms and school libraries.

                              Targeting would be an important factor in the selection of beneficiaries. For new schools, sites would be selected according to: i) quickly growing
                              urban areas, and ii) indicators of social and economic marginalization. For existing schools to be converted to FTS, selection would be according
                              to marginalization indicators. The component would result in 8,000 additional FTS spaces and 159 schools with maintenance funds that currently
                              don't have resources for maintaining school infrastructure.

                              Component Two: Improving Instruction and Learning in FTS Schools

                              This component would aim to improve quality and internal efficiency of primary education, by supporting activities linked to improved pedagogical
                              approaches in the classroom. The component would finance in-service teacher training and support to teachers in the classroom, training for
                              school directors, and technical assistance to design improvements in the instructional methods in the classroom, with a focus on the digital
                              classroom, reading instruction and math in grades 1 and 2. During preparation, the possibility of linking disbursements to the achievement of
                              certain results in these areas would be explored, in contrast to financing the inputs for the activities (training, goods, non-consulting services).

                              This component would ensure the optimization of the use of extra time in schools, and strive to improve the use of laptops. Mechanisms for
                              identifying students at risk of repetition or overage will be introduced, and extra time will be directed to efforts that intensify and tailor instruction to
                              them. Teacher training will focus on laptop use, effective instruction in Spanish, mathematics, social sciences and natural sciences. Finally, a
                           sharper focus will also be placed on supporting 6th grade teachers to better prepare students for transitioning to secondary school.

                           Component Three: Monitoring, Evaluation and Project Management

                           This component would contribute to the objective of improving quality of education service delivery, and would ensure good management,
                           monitoring and evaluation of the Project. It would finance the operating costs of the Project, including costs related to the team currently in place.
                           It would finance the monitoring systems (including the Gurí system) to provide school administrators and education policymakers throughout the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           preschool and primary education system with timely and accurate information about school, and student assessments. Specifically, it would
                           strengthen an early warning system for students at risk of grade failure, and to monitor compliance with the conditional cash transfer program.
                           Finally, it would finance studies relevant to future education policy, such as impact evaluations of the FTS model (including the teacher training
                           program), tracer studies of FTS graduates, and exploratory studies of the causes of low school attendance among younger students.

                            D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                           Project’s physical interventions are foreseen under Component 1. Specific sub-Project locations have not been confirmed; they will be selected
                           during Project implementation. However, 113 potential eligible sites have been identified. Preliminary information regarding identified sites
                           indicates that works would be conducted on disturbed land where sensitive natural habitats are not present and existence of cultural resources is
                           not known or suspected.

                            E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

                           The implementation arrangements under the Project would be the same as those for the ongoing Third Basic Education Improvement Project.
                           ANEP would remain the key responsible agency, while the PAEPU Implementation Unit would continue to be entrusted with the implementation
                           arrangements and the Project fiduciary-related aspects as detailed in the Project's Operational Manual. Social and environmental safeguards will
                           be managed by the specialists within PAEPU. The proposed implementing agency has a very strong track record in executing Bank financed
                           operations. Since 1994, ANEP has implemented three education operations, all of which have been satisfactorily executed. The current operation
                           (including the Additional Financing) was rated “Satisfactory? in the last December 2011 ISR, including safeguard related issues. In addition, the
                           valuable experience gained during the implementation of the education projects will be taken into account in the preparation of this operation.

                            F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

                           Ricardo Schusterman (LCSSO)
                           Elba Lydia Gaggero (LCSEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

                            Safeguard Policies                               Triggered?        Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01              Yes                The physical interventions foreseen in the Project are included in Component 1
                                                                                               and refer to i) construction of new schools; ii) the reconstruction and
                                                                                               refurbishment of schools. Funds for maintenance of existent FTS are also
                                                                                               envisioned.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               The rest of the Project’s components essentially involve institutional
                                                                                               development, training, and capacity building activities.

                                                                                               No major adverse environmental impacts are anticipated with this Project.
                                                                                               Expected potential negative impacts are primarily during the construction phase
                                                                                               of civil works and they will be mitigated through specific measures to be included
                                                                                               in the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for the
                                                                                               project. Based on the nature of the works, which are similar to the TBEIP
                                                                                               Category B Project, this Project is classified as Category B requiring a partial
                                                                                               environmental and social assessment in accordance with the World Bank's
                                                                                               Environmental and Social Safeguards Policies.

                                                                                               To comply with Bank policies, ANEP will prepare an ESMF that, among other
                                                                                               aspects, will: (i) ensure compliance with pertinent national laws and Bank
                                                                                               policies for works of the type considered under the project; (ii) identify potential
                                                                                               environmental and social impacts based on the scope of physical interventions
                                                                                               and site characteristics; (iii) establish appropriate procedures for sub-project
                                                                                               screening as well as mitigation, management, and monitoring measures; (iv)
                                                                                               identify and assess specific strengthening needs for the environmental and
                                                                                               social management of the Project. The ESMF preparation will include the
                                                                                               evaluation and update of the existing Environmental and Social Management
                                                                                               Guidelines (Directrices de Ordenación Ambiental y Social), with specific
                                                                                               recommendations for improvements to be considered in this operation. This
                                                                                               would also consider specific safety and building standards needed for schools
                                                                                               as well as any abatement work that might be necessary should asbestos
                                                                                               removal be required during upgrading per Bank standards. Although preliminary
                                                                                               information indicates that works would be conducted on disturbed land where
                                                                                               sensitive natural habitats are not present and existence of cultural resources is
                                                                                               not known or suspected, these aspects will be carefully evaluated as part of the
                                                                                               ESMF preparation.
                                                                                                                        ANEP will carry out public consultations on the instrument to be prepared with
                                                                                                                        educational community representatives, government representatives, local
                                                                                                                        NGOs. The ESMF will document the results of the consultations and will take
                                                                                                                        into account the participant's views.
                                Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                        TBD                   As part of the ESMF preparation, potential locations of sub-projects will be
                                                                                                                        screened for natural habitats, and will be considered if natural habitats would be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        affected by new school construction. All resulting considerations will be
                                                                                                                        appropriately documented and included in the ESMF as required
                                Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                 No                     The Project will not support management of forests.

                                Pest Management OP 4.09                                            No                     This safeguard does not apply as the Project does not require the purchase,
                                                                                                                        application or storage of pesticides and will not lead to an increased use of
                                                                                                                        pesticides. While the safeguard is not triggered, schools may use pesticides
                                                                                                                        during their operational phase to control pests. This aspect will be considered
                                                                                                                        within any efforts to improve or strengthen ANEP’s protocols for school
                                                                                                                        infrastructure management.
                                Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                             TBD                   As part of the ESMF preparation, potential locations of sub-projects will be
                                                                                                                        screened for physical cultural resources, as sites for upgrading schools may
                                                                                                                        potentially be in historic buildings. All resulting considerations will be
                                                                                                                        appropriately documented and included in the ESMF as required.
                                Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                      No                     This safeguard policy is not triggered in Uruguay.

                                Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                                TBD                   The preliminary survey carried out by ANEP concluded that all schools to be
                                                                                                                        expanded into FTS do not require any land acquisition. Given that the list of
                                                                                                                        schools will remain open, the client has decided to apply ANEP land ownership
                                                                                                                        as an exclusion criteria, in order to ensure no project will require land acquisition.
                                Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                          No                     The project will not support the construction or rehabilitation of dams nor will it
                                                                                                                        support other investments which rely on the services of existing dams therefore
                                                                                                                        the policy is not triggered.
                                Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                          No                     The project will not affect international waterways as defined in the policy
                                7.50                                                                                    therefore this policy is not triggered.
                                Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                              No                    The policy is not triggered because the project will not be implemented in areas
                                                                                                                        known to involve disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 22-May-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
                                  should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                    TBD

                         IV. APPROVALS
                                Task Team Leader:                                Name: Peter Anthony Holland
                                Approved By:
                                Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                 Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                                                                        Date: 09-Mar-2012
                                Sector Manager:                                  Name: Janet K. Entwistle (SM)                                                                         Date: 09-Mar-2012




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
