                                                                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                            CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC356
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Jan-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        Africa                                  Project ID:                       P129565
                              Project Name:                   West Africa Agricultural Productivity Program 2A (P129565)
                              Task Team Leader:               Abdoulaye Toure
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 06-Feb-2012                                   Estimated Board Date:             26-Apr-2012
                              Managing Unit:                  AFTAR                                   Lending Instrument:               Adaptable Program Loan
                              Sector:                         Agricultural extension and research (70%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (20%), Public administration-
                                                              Agriculture, fishing an d forestry (10%)
                              Theme:                          Rural services and infrastructure (30%), Regional integration (28%), Technology diffusion (27%), Rural policies and
                                                              institutions (10 %), Climate change (5%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                       Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                        15.00
                                   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                              180.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                    195.00
                              Environmental Category:         B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              B. Project Objectives

                              The development objective of WAAPP-2A is to scale-up the generation, dissemination and adoption of improved technologies in the participating
                              countries’ priority agricultural commodity areas. The participating countries’ priority areas are aligned with the sub-region’s top agricultural
                              commodity priorities, as outlined in the ECOWAP. In order to reach this objective, the Project will strengthen the regional cooperation in generation
                              of technology, and scale-up dissemination and training programs focused on regional and national priority commodities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              C. Project Description

                              The proposed WAAPP-2A development objective, components, results framework, outcome indicators, builds on the achievements of WAAPP-1A
                              and takes also into account lessons learned from the Eastern Africa Agricultural Productivity Program (EAAPP), and from the designs of
                              WAAPP-1B and WAAPP-1C. Key innovations in the design will be:               (i) the detailed regional priority planning and enhanced technology
                              exchange mechanisms integrated in the WAAPP design; (iii) the enhanced R&D linkages and broader partnerships with sector stakeholders,
                              including farmer organizations and the private sector, for scaling-up technology dissemination and use; (iv) a detailed mandate and responsibilities
                              of CORAF and NCOS as facilitators of regional exchanges ; and (v) integration of WAAPP into national and regional agricultural investment
                              programs.

                              Component 1: Enabling conditions for Regional Cooperation in Technology Generation, Exchange and Dissemination. Through this component the
                              Project will continue to support the strengthening of the mechanisms and procedures for generating, disseminating, and the exchange of improved
                              agricultural technologies, so as to allow participating countries to benefit fully from the regional cooperation in technology generation and
                              exchange. The component will build on the achievements of WAAPP-1A.

                              At regional level, CORAF will continue to closely collaborate with specialized ECOWAS services to: (i) finalize the application texts for harmonized
                              regional regulations and common procedures for genetic materials and agro-chemicals, facilitating exchanges between countries, including
                              regional information gathering and sharing systems; (ii) develop a regional framework for the application of intellectual property rights; and (iii) on
                              the basis of member country experiences, consolidate and promote sustainable financing mechanisms for R&D activities at national and regional
                              levels.

                              Component 2: Strengthening the National Centers of Specialization (NCOS). During this second phase of WAAPP, the Component 2 will support
                              the upgrading of the National Centers of Specialization (NCOS) into Regional Centers of Excellence (RCoE), focusing on drought-resistant cereals
                              in Senegal, rice in Mali and root and tuber crops in Ghana. . At the regional level, research networks will be established with related national
                              commodity research teams in WAAPP countries, and technical support be sought from specialized CGIAR centers, as required. For each targeted
                              priority value chain, CORAF will support the NCOS for joint annual planning and monitoring of research activities to ensure alignment of regional
                              and national priorities and enhance technology exchanges. These annual workshops will ensure synergies and collaboration between participating
                              countries, facilitate networking and mobility of researchers working in the same field and avoid duplication.

                              Component 3: Support to Demand-driven Technology Generation, Dissemination and Adoption. Through this Component the Project will continue
                              to strengthen priority-focused demand-driven agricultural R&D and scale-up technology dissemination and training for targeted priority value
                           chains within participating countries. This component will be executed on the basis of an action plan that defines the national priorities and the
                           specific contribution of WAAPP in terms of (quantified) technology generation and dissemination activities.

                           This component will have three sub-components that are: (i) Subcomponent 3.1: Demand-driven Technology Generation. Through which the
                           Project will continue to strengthen priority focused transparent funding mechanisms for demand-driven R&D within the existing CARG scheme in
                           each of the participating countries; and (ii) Subcomponent 3.2:Support to accelerated adoption of released technologies through which the Project
                           aims at speeding-up the the adoption of released technologies to continue bridging the gap between farmers’ and researchers’ yields for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           priority commodities. The strategy consists of disseminating technologies developed under WAAPP and National research programs by
                           strengthening of technology delivery systems, in order to achieve large-scale sustainable impact (productivity increase) on the ground. And
                           Subcomponent 3.3: Facilitating access to improved genetic material. This sub-component will increase the availability of and producers' access to
                           improved genetic materials (seed, planting materials, fingerlings and animal breeds) for the identified priority value chains. The sub-component will
                           provide support to all key stakeholders along the chosen priority supply chains to scale up the production of breeder, foundation and certified seed,
                           including planting materials, fingerlings and animal stocks.

                           Component 4: Project Coordination, Management and Monitoring and Evaluation. This component will continue to strengthen the effective
                           coordination, management, M&E System, Social and Environmental dimensions (including safeguards) at the national and regional level.

                            D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                           The project will cover Senegal, Mali and Ghana. It will provide a regional framework on the basis of which participating countries will collaborate
                           between them and with all other ECOWAS countries to implement national and regional agricultural strategies in the area of technology generation
                           and dissemination.

                            E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

                           The following safeguards policies OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment), OP 4.09 (Pest Management), and OP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement)
                           have been triggered. Consequently, the safeguard instruments (the Regional Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and the
                           Regional Pest and Pesticide Management Plan (PPMP)) prepared for the first phase (WAAPP-1A) will be updated and adapted within the context
                           of the present project and re-disclosed before appraisal. Additionally, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared to address issues
                           of land acquisition, loss of assets or access to livelihood support means. Study is underway and expected to be completed by mid-January. Once
                           finalized, the RPF will be consulted upon and cleared by both the Bank Safeguards Team/ASPEN and CORAF (the Safeguards team), before
                           being publicly disclosed both in-country and at the InfoShop prior to appraisal.

                            F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

                           Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTCS)
                           Africa Eshogba Olojoba (AFTEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

                            Safeguard Policies Triggered                      Yes        No       TBD                                  Explanation
                            Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                ✖                           WAAPP 2A is a Category-B project due to the fact that potential
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                           social and environmental impacts are expected to be local, site-
                                                                                                           specific and easily manageable. Because it is the second stage of
                                                                                                           the parent project (WAAPP 1A) the phase 1 ESMF will be updated,
                                                                                                           revised and adapted within the context of the new orientations of
                                                                                                           WAAPP 2A which follows the same line of intervention than WAAPP
                                                                                                           1A, with a focus on technology dissemination. The ESMF includes
                                                                                                           further provisions for capacity strengthening at all levels for the
                                                                                                           successful implementation of the project safeguard measures, in
                                                                                                           compliance with national and Bank safeguard policies. Upon
                                                                                                           completion, the ESMF will be reviewed, cleared by both CORAF and
                                                                                                           World Bank and then disclosed simultaneously both in CORAF
                                                                                                           websites and at the InfoShop prior to appraisal.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                   ✖                The project is not supporting any agricultural sites near wetlands,
                                                                                                           mangroves, or other critical habitats . It will work on existing
                                                                                                           developed land.
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                                            ✖                The project is not supporting any extension of cropping area and
                                                                                                           therefore no damage of forests is expected. It will develop its
                                                                                                           activities on land already under exploitation.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09                            ✖                           WAAPP-2 builds on WAAPP-1A, the first phase. The initial PMP will
                                                                                                           be revised, updated and adapted to reflect WAAPP 2A interventions
                                                                                                           and set forth the basic principles each member-country would follow
                                                                                                           to adequately handle the possible usage of pesticides, especially
                                                                                                           during this second phase mostly focused in dissemination of
                                                                                                           agriculture technologies. As a planning tool and mean for a
                                                                                                           harmonious integration of the project in its bio-physical and social
                                                                                                           environment and as a way to maximize positive effects on the same
                                                                                                           environment in the sub-region. Upon completion, the PMP will be
                                                                                                           reviewed, and cleared by both CORAF and World Bank, and then
                                                                                                           disclosed simultaneously both in CORAF websites and at the
                                                                                                           InfoShop prior to appraisal.
                            Safeguard Policies Triggered                                      Yes           No           TBD                                             Explanation
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                                           ✖                      The project is not financing any infrastructure affecting Physical
                                                                                                                                    Cultural Resources.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                                    ✖                      There are no indigenous people in the project area.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                                 ✖                                   WAAPP-2A is a category –B project due to the fact that foreseen
                                                                                                                                    social and environmental impacts are expected to be local, sites
                                                                                                                                    specific and easily manageable. OP/BP 4.12 is triggered because
                                                                                                                                    of the expected land acquisition, loss of assets or loss of access to
                                                                                                                                    livelihoods support means upon which local beneficiary communities
                                                                                                                                    depend. To comply with WB OP/BP 4.12 policy principles and
                                                                                                                                    guidelines, OCRAF, as the regional implementing agency, will, on
                                                                                                                                    behalf of the participating countries prepare a Resettlement Policy
                                                                                                                                    Framework applicable to each country on how to comply with the
                                                                                                                                    above mentioned land use/right issues. Upon completion, the RPF
                                                                                                                                    will be reviewed, cleared by both CORAF and World Bank and then
                                                                                                                                    disclosed simultaneously both in CORAF websites and at the
                                                                                                                                    InfoShop prior to appraisal
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                                        ✖                      The project is not involving any construction or rehabilitation of
                                                                                                                                    dams.
                            Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                                        ✖                      The Project does not affect or involve international waterways.
                            7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                                            ✖                      This is not a Project in disputed area.


                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                           A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 23-Jan-2012
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
                              should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                Studies are underway in each country to revise, update and adapt the existing ESMF and the PMP within the context of the new project. In
                                addition a resettlement policy framework (RPF) is under preparation in each country. A regional workshop will be held around mid-January
                                2012, with participation of stakeholders from each targeted country to validate these documents.

                                The regional ESMF together with the regional PMP and RPF will be disclosed in CORAF website (including in-country in Mali, Ghana and
                                Senegal, preferably on project sites) and at the InfoShop prior to appraisal.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         IV. APPROVALS
                            Signed and submitted by:
                            Task Team Leader:                                Name: Sossena Tassew                                                                                  Date: 04-Jan-2012
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                 Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                     Date: 05-Jan-2012
                            Comments:
                            Sector Manager:                                  Name: Iain G. Shuker (SM)                                                                             Date: 18-Jan-2012
                            Comments:          This revised ISDS is approved.




                            1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                             form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
