                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC2567

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Mar-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-Mar-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Turkey                          Project ID:     P144534
                            Project Name:      Renewable Energy Integration (P144534)
                            Task Team          Sergio Augusto Gonzalez C
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          01-Sep-2013                     Estimated       15-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSEG                           Lending         Specific Investment Loan
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Other Renewable Energy (80%), Transmission and Distribution of Electricity
                                               (20%)
                            Theme(s):          Infrastructure services for private sector development (80%), Regional
                                               integration (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    475.00                    Total Bank Financing:       300.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                               Financing Gap:                0.00
                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                   125.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                      300.00
                              Clean Technology Fund                                                       50.00
                              Total                                                                      475.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The PDO is to assist Turkey to meet its increased electricity demand while containing Green House
                           Gas (GHG) emissions by strengthening the transmission system and facilitating large-scale
                           renewable energy generation.
                         C. Project Description
                         I.      Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The REI project is expected to strengthen the transmission system by increasing its capacity and
                         expanding the automation of control, management, and protection systems to maintain high voltage
                         grid stability and counteract the propagation of large disturbances. This includes upgrading the
                         Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) system software expanding the number of
                         Remote Telemetry Units and Communication Equipment; modernizing the Human Machine
                         Interface, a new National Control Centre with a renewable dispatch console; constructing a
                         submarine and underground power cable, and Gas-insulated substations (GIS). The REI project
                         consists of the following four components:

                         1. Construction of wind power grid connection structures;
                         2. Smart-grid applications to improve grid operation and management;
                         3. Lapseki-Sutluce 380 KV submarine power cable;
                         4. Expansion of urban transmission networks.

                         More details for each component are provided below:

                         1. Construction of Wind Power Grid Connection Structures: This component includes the
                         development of four 380kV 500 MVA highly digitalized wind power grid connection structures in
                         the provinces of Can, Izmir, Hamitabat, and Catalca consisting of: i) high voltage (HV) wind power
                         substations; ii) HV grid interfacing equipment; iii) commercial smart-metering systems; iv) feeders
                         (underground cables) to evacuate power from the site; v) telemetered dispatch systems; vi) digital
                         protection systems; vii) supervisory systems; and viii) automatic voltage control systems;

                         2. Smart-grid Applications to Improve Grid Operation and Management. These applications will
                         provide detailed information to enable operators to manage demand/supply balance in real time to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         reduce outages, the need for peak power, and the need for spinning reserves in the system. They will
                         add new capabilities for measurements and control through Phasor Measurement Units (PMUs) to
                         make the Turkish grid much more reliable and minimize the possibilities of blackouts in the face of
                         the progressive integration of variable renewable generation. This component comprises protective
                         relays with digital microprocessors to analyze power system voltages, currents, and other process
                         quantities for the purpose of detecting system faults. It also comprises the upgrade of the existing
                         SCADA system with a new functionality for renewable energy management. It involves the
                         replacement of a comprehensive SCADA/EMS operational database customized to accurately
                         replicate the existing TEIAS HV grid. The subcomponent includes the development of a new
                         National Control Center with a dedicated Renewable Dispatch Desk. These facilities will have
                         Human Machine Interface (HMI) capabilities consisting of large, dynamic, and high-performance
                         wall-mounted boards illustrating the HV grid single line diagram. The component also involves the
                         installation of 200 Remote Telemetry Units (RTUs) to bolster TEIAS’ smart grid solutions. The
                         RTUs will have capabilities that include data collection and monitoring, grid analytics, and rules-
                         based economic decision-making tools to help TEIAS realize its next-generation strategies.

                         3. Lapseki-Sutluce 380 KV Submarine Power Cable (phase II): Just as the first phase of this
                         undersea project under the ongoing Adaptable Program Loan (APL6) project, the cable under this
                         component will go under the Dardanelles strait. The cable is expected to be one single length 3.8 km
                         long. This is a crucial project for connecting the Asian and the European sides of Turkey. Its
                         relevance to renewable energy lies with the transmission of bulk electricity including renewable
                         generated power from the Anatolia side to the high-growth Istanbul area and beyond towards the
                         European ENTSO-E networks.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4. Expansion of Urban Transmission Networks. The component adds two open air 380/154 kV
                         substations to help reduce transmission losses and voltage drops in the provinces of Antalya and
                         Urgup and will increase system capacity to cope with the rapidly rising demand. In addition, it will
                         add six 154/33 kV (GIS) located in the provinces of Atasehir, Hadimkoy, Selcuk, Yakuplyu,
                         Muratpasa, and Sultanbeyli. The component also contains five 154/33kV underground cable projects
                         to be built as part of a loop to serve increased load growth and to boost system reliability. The cables
                         will connect the following substations: Yeni Ambarli – Yenibosna with a length of 14 km;
                         Karabaglar – Buca with a length of 8.7 km; Kucukbakkalkoy – Kadikoy with a length of 8.5 km;
                         Yakuplu – Ambarli with a length of 5 km; and Umraniye – Dudullu with a length of 9 km.

                         II.     Cost Breakdown

                         The estimated cost breakdown and financing by sub-components are as follows:

                         Sub- Components            IBRD CTF                     TEIAS (VAT & Project Management)
                         Wind power grid connection USD $ 25 million                USD $ 50 million
                         Smart-grid applications      USD $ 23 million
                         Submarine power cable       USD $ 83 million
                         Urban Networks USD $169 million

                                            TOTAL        USD $300 million USD$50 million               USD $125 million

                         As with the previous loans to TEIAS, this proposed project cove rs a time slice of the investments
                         required. Given the unpredictability of system access requests from system new/old users (in the face
                         of the sustained demand growth showed in the last years), including new generators, the priorities
Public Disclosure Copy




                         around investments identified under this loan could change over time. Therefore, actual investments
                         financed by this proposed loan may be different in the future contingent upon changes in priorities of
                         the grid and market evolution. However, because of the contributio n expected from the CTF funds,
                         CTF co-financed investments can only be replaced with CTF-eligible investments. In spite of this
                         provision, the proposed investments can be changed if and only if they comprise subprojects
                         originally listed under this proposed loan to build underground cables and/or to develop substations
                         (GIS and open air) exclusive of those (and their specific equipment and systems) to serve the
                         evacuation of renewable (wind) generation.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         TEIAS has identified a tentative list of investments within the scope of the new project. The list
                         includes GIS substation installations, underground cable construction and a Phase II stage of an
                         undersea cable (the first phase is being financed under ongoing APL 6 project). The projects will be
                         realized in different provinces of the country, some of them could be listed as: Istanbul, Antalya,
                         Urgup, etc.)
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The project will be implemented by TEIAS in its roles as the Transmission System Operator and
                         Owner and Market Operator. TEIAS has been effective in supervising and monitoring individual
                           sub-projects in accordance with the specifications of their EMPs which were prepared along with the
                           procedures outlined in the framework documents. TEIAS is successfully implementing the APL 6
                           project and previously had implemented APL 2 and 3. TEIAS is getting experienced for complying
Public Disclosure Copy




                           with WB's social safeguard policy (OP 4.12). Bank and TEIAS team also agreed that a training on
                           OP 4.12 will be conducted to increase TEIAS' capacity (both in central and regional level) for
                           implementing the requirements of the policy and providing necessary documentation to WB. TEIAS
                           will need support and training for getting familiar with Natural Habitats (OP 4.04 ) Policy of the
                           World Bank. Since, the area of influence for component 1 will not be limited to the footprints of the
                           substations but it will also cover the areas that would be used for establishing the wind power plants
                           which will be connected to the substations that would be financed by this project, TEIAS should
                           make sure that the requirements of OP 4.04 are met. Bank will support TEIAS by conducting some
                           baseline studies and rapid ecological/biodiversity assessments, which will provide an initial
                           indication of whether there are any critical or important natural habitats within the areas of influence
                           of the substations. These initial studies will be followed up with more detailed surveys by TEIAS as
                           appropriate when they are preparing the EAs/EMPs for the sub-projects. WB will also offer
                           safeguard training to TEIAS (SG training tailored for PIUs) which is planned for May 2013.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Zeynep Durnev Darendeliler (ECSSO)
                           Esra Arikan (ECSEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              Expected environmental impacts of the
                           BP 4.01                                               proposed list of investments (substations,
                                                                                 underground transmission lines and 1 undersea
                                                                                 cable) are generation of dust, noise, disposal of
                                                                                 non-hazardous waste (packing materials,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 vegetation from ROW clearing), construction of
                                                                                 any access roads, and issues related to worker
                                                                                 camps if any (water supply, sewage, and
                                                                                 domestic waste disposal). Environmental
                                                                                 impacts of a 4.5 km long undersea cable is
                                                                                 expected to be temporary and short term on
                                                                                 undersea/aquatic environment and marine
                                                                                 traffic. Expected environmental issues
                                                                                 associated with operation of the substations
                                                                                 include electric and magnetic field strength. The
                                                                                 project could be categorized as 'B' under OP
                                                                                 4.01, as the types of potential impacts are
                                                                                 limited and should be relatively easy to assess
                                                                                 and mitigate through careful siting and good
                                                                                 construction practices. It is planned to have an
                                                                                 environmental review framework which will be
                                                                                 prepared by the client and disclosed in country
                                                                                 and in Infoshop before appraisal. As it will be
                                                                                 detailed in the environmental framework it is
                                                                 expected that sub-projects will be reviewed by
                                                                 TEIAS for having national environmental
                                                                 clearances and then necessary environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 assessment documentation in line with OP 4.01
                                                                 requirements will be completed by the client.
                                                                 Sub-project partial EAs/EMPs will be submitted
                                                                 to WB for prior review and after getting no-
                                                                 objections these will be disclosed in client's
                                                                 websites and will be included in the
                                                                 corresponding bidding documents of the
                                                                 investment projects.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes   The area of influence for the substations to be
                                                                 financed under this project will not be limited to
                                                                 the substation footprints. Since, the substations
                                                                 are intended for connecting the energy produced
                                                                 by wind power plants to the national grid,
                                                                 TEIAS should also consider the potential
                                                                 impacts of the the construction and operation of
                                                                 these wind power plants on natural habitats. In
                                                                 order to form a basis for screening high risk
                                                                 areas (regarding OP 4.04) a Rapid Ecological
                                                                 Assessment will be conducted. Results of the
                                                                 assessment will guide TEIAS to finance
                                                                 substations which are receiving energy from
                                                                 wind power plants that are not creating any
                                                                 significant adverse impacts on natural habitats
                                                                 and that are not placed in critical natural
                                                                 habitats. Issues related to natural habitats will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 detailed in the EAs and EMPs that will be
                                                                 prepared for the substations.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   Since sub-project specific civil works could
                         BP 4.11                                 potentially be within a historic district, the
                                                                 World Bank safeguard policy on Physical
                                                                 Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) is applicable
                                                                 to these investments. For sub-projects in
                                                                 recognized historic areas and/or involving
                                                                 cultural property issues, the local authority of
                                                                 Ministry of Culture and Tourism is responsible
                                                                 for application of Turkish laws and regulations,
                                                                 including those relating to cultural heritage. The
                                                                 sub-borrower will be required to secure all
                                                                 necessary permits and approvals from these
                                                                 local authorities. For all sub-projects, whether
                                                                or not they are in historic areas, any sub-project
                                                                EMP/Mitigation Plan/Checklist will include
                                                                procedures and responsibilities for managing
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                accidentally discovered or chance find cultural
                                                                artifacts. Consideration of such concerns is
                                                                provided in the works contracts that will include
                                                                requirements that the contractor is obliged to
                                                                look for chance finds and immediately stop
                                                                work at the contested location and alert
                                                                responsible authorities in case of chance finds,
                                                                and only continue works after official approvals
                                                                from the responsible authorities are secured.
                                                                Since the national regulations on the
                                                                conservation of cultural properties are strict, it is
                                                                not anticipated that any additional requirements
                                                                would arise from the World Bank safeguard
                                                                policies.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes   The proposed list of investments (substations,
                         4.12                                   underground transmission lines and 1 undersea
                                                                cable) will require land acquisition, though
                                                                exact locations are not known at the moment
                                                                due to the designs not being finalized. The
                                                                underground transmission lines are expected to
                                                                be on public land, but the substations will likely
                                                                acquire private land. The Resettlement Policy
                                                                Framework (RPF) prepared by TEIAS for APL6
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                and disclosed by TEIAS in June 2010 will be
                                                                revised. The revised RPF will cover all possible
                                                                involuntary project land use scenarios currently
                                                                envisioned under this project. Special attention
                                                                should be paid to potential linkages with
                                                                associated facilities (i.e. wind farms) and the
                                                                guidance provided in OP 4.12, paragraph 4 as
                                                                well as any potential loss of livelihood
                                                                (temporary or otherwise) to fishermen during
                                                                the laying of the undersea cable. This RPF will
                                                                be disclosed in country and in Infoshop before
                                                                appraisal. For each sub-project TEIAS will
                                                                prepare a RAP or ARAP (depending on the
                                                                magnitude of impacts) that will need to be
                                                                reviewed and cleared by the WB, and disclosed.
                                                                All project affected people will be compensated
                                                                at replacement value before any land acquisition
                                                                takes place. In addition, OP 4.12 can apply to
                                                                land acquisition that has been conducted under
                                                                                                                                 ancillary components of the project, if these are
                                                                                                                                 directly related, necessary to achieve objectives
                                                                                                                                 and carried out contemporaneously. In addition,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 if any land is acquired involuntarily before the
                                                                                                                                 project but in anticipation of this project, social
                                                                                                                                 audits of completed involuntary land acquisition
                                                                                                                                 will be carried out in line with the objectives of
                                                                                                                                 OP 4.12. If any significant gaps exist, a time
                                                                                                                                 bound plan, satisfactory to the World Bank, will
                                                                                                                                 be developed to address these gaps.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International                                         No                            The laying of a submarine cable under the
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            Dardanelles does not require triggering of this
                                                                                                                                 policy, as was confirmed by LEGEN in relation
                                                                                                                                 to the first submarine cable established under
                                                                                                                                 APL6. Adequate systems are in place to notify
                                                                                                                                 ship traffic of the temporary closure of the Strait
                                                                                                                                 which will be required for the cable laying.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 02-Sep-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      An environmental framework satisfactory to the World Bank was prepared under the previous
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      APL 2,3 and 6 projects, which included very similar investments (substations, underground cables
                                      and an undersea cable). It is planned that these frameworks will be used as a basis for the
                                      preparation of an environmental framework for this project. It is expected that it will be consulted
                                      and disclosed to public in August/ September 2013. Sub-project specific environmental
                                      assessment documents (most probably Category B partial assessments/EMPs) will be prepared
                                      separately during project implementation when the detailed designs are being done, and shared
                                      with WB for prior review and will be disclosed for local consultation. The Resettlement Policy
                                      Framework prepared under APL 6 will be revised for this project. It is expected that consultations
                                      and disclosure of the final Resettlement Policy Framework will proceed in tandem with the
                                      Environmental Framework. Sub-project specific plans will be prepared during implementation to
                                      be reviewed and cleared by the World Bank before any land acquisition occurs.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Sergio Augusto Gonzalez C

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 27-Mar-2013
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Ranjit J. Lamech (SM)                                                                                                Date: 25-Mar-2013


                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
