                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA1258
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-Aug-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Nepal                             Project ID:   P128304
                            Project Name:      Additional Financing for the Project for Agriculture Commercialization and
                                               Trade (P128304)
                            Task Team          Gayatri Acharya
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       15-Aug-2012                          Estimated   18-Oct-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: SASDA                                 Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector:            General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%), Crops (25%), Animal
                                               production (25%)
                            Theme:             Rural markets (50%), Rural services and infrastructure (30%), Rural policies and
                                               institutions (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                               Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              International Development Association (IDA)                                  40.00
                              Financing Gap                                                                 0.00
                              Total                                                                        40.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective remains largely unchanged, but in order to recognize a) very
                           high demand for the project and b) comprehensively address the value chains of important
                           commodities the PDO is proposed to be revised as follows: to improve the competitiveness of
                           smallholder farmers and the agribusiness sector in selected commodity value chains supported by the
                           project. The revised PDO removes the restriction of 25 districts but maintains the focus on selected
                           commodity value chains so that the project can have a meaningful impact on developing a few,
                           commercially viable value chains.



                                                                       Page 1 of 8
                         3. Project Description
                         The Project Development Objective is to improve the competitiveness of smallholder farmers and the
                         agribusiness sector in selected commodity value chains in districts supported by the project. This will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         be achieved by: (i) helping farmer groups and cooperatives engage in profitable market-oriented
                         production and improved access to markets through the provision of technology and information
                         services and critical public infrastructure and linkages to agribusiness; (ii) creating and strengthening
                         industry-wide partnerships along the value chain, thus forging linkages between producers, traders,
                         processors, and other stakeholders and, (iii) reducing existing obstacles to agriculture and food trade
                         thereby increasing the ability of farmers and agribusiness to respond to sanitary and phytosanitary
                         (SPS) and food-quality standards to meet domestic and international market requirements.

                         Project components:
                         1. Component 1 (Agriculture and Rural Business Development) will finance demand-based sub-
                         projects proposed by farmer groups, cooperatives, agribusinesses and Public Disclosure Authorized
                         Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized Public Disclosure Authorized other
                         value chain participants to build strategic linkages with a view to increase
                         competitiveness, productivity, quality and market access. The component will also finance the
                         facilitation of value chain plans, sub-project proposal development and monitoring of sub-projects.

                         The objective of this component is to enable farmers to engage in profitable market-oriented
                         production and to promote partnerships and market linkages with other value chain participants and
                         agribusinesses. The component will help agro enterprises, commodity associations, cooperatives and
                         farmer groups to actively engage in the development of commodity value chains by partially
                         financing demand-driven investment proposals through a competitive matching grant. The
                         component will also support investments aimed at creating viable enterprise-based farmer institutions
                         that are linked to other value chain participants and are actively engaged with the markets.

                         The specific activities supported under this component are: (i) providing pre-investment and advisory
Public Disclosure Copy




                         support to enable FOs and value chain participants to prepare subproject proposals and business
                         plans for grant funding under the project; (ii) direct financing of approved subproject proposals in
                         technology and information support and market infrastructure; (iii) agribusiness development
                         through partial financing of demand-driven investment proposals by agro enterprises, commodity
                         associations and cooperatives that are actively engaged in the development of commodity value
                         chains.

                         All three types of activities noted above will be supported after a consultative process of value chain
                         development. Value chain development plans will be developed through a consultative process
                         involving different stakeholders.

                         2. Component 2 (Support for Sanitary and Phytosanitary Facilities and Food Quality Standards) will
                         finance activities to strengthen the efficiency and effectiveness of sanitary and phyto-sanitary
                         services in order to reduce existing obstacles to agricultural and food trade. It will also support the
                         private sector’s efforts to gain market advantage through improved food quality management. As
                         such it provides critical backing to the value chain investments being supported by component 1 and
                         other related projects by Development Partners.

                         The component will finance (i) food quality and safety enhancing activities through improving
                         laboratory facilities and certification capabilities and (ii) technical assistance and capacity building


                                                                        Page 2 of 8
                           measures to meet food safety and quality standards. It will also provide technical assistance to
                           industries to help them meet hygiene requirements so as to earn the confidence of importing country
                           authorities and private sector importers.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           3. Component 3 (Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation) will finance overall project
                           management, monitoring and evaluation and reporting. This component will also support a Project
                           Management Unit (Team) comprising of a Project Director, a Monitoring and Evaluation Officer,
                           Finance Officer, Procurement Officer, Accounts Officer and two accountants. A Tehnical Secretariat,
                           recruited as a firm, will be responsible for the overall functioning of the competitive grant program
                           and will report to the PMT. A public awareness company will be hired to manage local and national
                           level awareness activities for the project.
                            4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Unlike the original project, the Additional financing removes the restriction of 25 districts but
                           maintains the focus on selected commodity value chains so that the project can have a meaningful
                           impact on developing a few, commercially viable value chains.
                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Drona Raj Ghimire (SASDI)
                           Bandita Sijapati (SASDS)

                            6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes
                            BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Pest Management OP 4.09            Yes

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      Yes

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     Yes
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues



                                                                       Page 3 of 8
                         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                           Identify and describe any potential l arge scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                            The PACT is an AE Category “B? project, given that significant adverse environmental and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           social impacts are not expected as a result of project activities. The social and environmental
                           assessment carried out in sample districts reveal that the project activities proposed related to
                           production, processing, testing, trading and marketing of different agro-based commercial
                           commodities are relatively small in size with limited adverse social and environmental impacts.

                           The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), prepared by the GoN and
                           endorsed by the Bank, is currently being used in the ongoing PACT. Progress on the
                           implementation of social issues in the project has been satisfactory to date. The additional
                           financing activities will continue to use the established frameworks for the mitigation of social
                           impacts like the Framework for Indigenous People Development Plan and the Resettlement and
                           Rehabilitation Policy Framework.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             Land Acquisition and Resettlement: To date, land has been made available for the sub-project by
                           farmers and members of cooperatives at market price thus preempting the need for land
                           acquisition, compensation and resettlement. However, as large scale projects are envisaged to be
                           supported through additional financing, it is likely that the provisions contained in the
                           Resettlement and Rehabilitation Policy Framework will become more paramount. This will
                           require closer scrutiny and enhanced social assessment and implementation capacity through: (i)
                           additional human resources and training; (ii) incorporation of social issues in the Environmental
                           Codes of Practice by developing a joint ‘Environmental and Social Codes of Practice’; and (iii)
                           periodic social auditing/third-party monitoring of sub-project activities to check for social
                           safeguards compliance.

                          Indigenous Peoples and Vulnerable Communities: In accordance with the Framework for
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Indigenous People Development Plan, the project, to the extent possible and applicable, has been
                          organizing regular consultations with members of farmer’s organizations and cooperatives,
                          including with Dalits, Janajatis, and women. However, for the additional finance, documentation
                          and reporting on social management needs to be strengthened through: (i) regular monitoring and
                          supervision of sub-projects to ensure implementation of the Indigenous People Development Plan;
                          (ii) documentation of findings from monitoring and supervision visits to examine progress, record
                          good practices and lessons learnt which if necessary, can be used to take corrective actions; and
                          (iii) systematic analysis of beneficiary data to monitor and ensure that women and other
                          disadvantaged groups are benefiting from the project. The latter can be done effectively through
                          the comprehensive MIS system that PACT has developed.

                          Similarly, as per the ESMF, there is also the need to continue focusing on developing the capacity
                          of vulnerable groups by defining training/income generation activities based on the identified
                          needs and priorities of vulnerable people in the subproject area, providing targeted assistance/
                          training to vulnerable groups aimed at enhancing their participation in PACT subprojects, and
                          increasing their access to resources to carry out commercial agriculture.

                          Environmental Safeguards: The additional financing activities will also be subject to the existing
                          ESMF’s provisions, processes and procedures for environmental screening, assessment and
                          monitoring. Activities supported under the ongoing PACT until MTR (July 2012) have been


                                                                      Page 4 of 8
                           relatively small scale and have low environmental risks: none of the activities required
                           Environmental Assessments beyond screening and preparation of Environmental Code of Practice.
                           The type and size of investments/activities being considered under the proposed additional
Public Disclosure Copy




                           financing such as rehabilitation of the Kalimati Wholesale Fruit and Vegetable Market a cut
                           flower market and larger agribusinesses, are larger in size and may also have higher environmental
                           risks than the ongoing activities. It is likely that these activity/subprojects require either Initial
                           Environmental Examination (IEE) or Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) depending on the
                           location and activities. This needs be confirmed by conducting a formal environmental screening
                           of the proposed activity/subproject once more detailed information about the subproject/activity
                           and location is known. The provisions in the ESMF of the parent project are adequate to provide
                           environmental guidance to the type of subprojects being considered. However, considering the
                           higher environmental risks of the proposed larger size activities, a provision needs to be made for
                           adequate support from environmental specialist in addition to orientation and training. The
                           Government has provided for this specialist in the additional financing budget.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.

                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             Based on an assessment of legal and regulatory framework and institutional arrangements for
                           social and environment management, and the observed environmental and social
                           issues in agriculture sector at large, the borrower has prepared an Environment and Social
                           Management Framework (ESMF) with the objective of minimizing project risks and
                           impacts through design suggestions and/or mitigation and management measures. The ESMF is
                           developed through a consultative process with potential beneficiaries in selected
                           district and subproject site. The assessment included primary beneficiary survey of 450
                           households, focus group discussions with various stakeholders including vulnerable
                           members of the community, group meetings, institutional surveys, and consultations with local
Public Disclosure Copy




                           government bodies, private and civil society organizations, and secondary
                           stakeholders at district and village levels. SWOT analysis was carried out to fully realize the
                           strengths and weaknesses, and constraints and opportunities of the existing
                           institutions both at national and local level.

                           Stakeholders’ consultation: As part of IESA, stakeholder consultations were held prior to the start
                           of the original project with different social groups, NGOs, local government bodies and staff of
                           relevant line agencies. Feedback from these consultations provided input to the development of the
                           ESMF. The process of stakeholder consultations will continue during implementation. The ESMF
                           prepared for the project takes into account the field level situation and the existing GON policies
                           and requirements of the Bank’s operational policies. The guidelines included in the ESMF relate to
                           (i) environmental and social screening of subprojects; (ii) environmental codes of practices; (iii)
                           integrated pest and nutrition management plan; (iv) social policies and strategies on resettlement
                           and rehabilitation, indigenous or vulnerable people development plan, strategy for gender
                           development, and community consultation and communication, (vi) institutional arrangement, and
                           (vii) monitoring and evaluation. All subprojects proposed to be covered under the project will
                           undergo environmental and social screening to determine their inclusion under the project. For
                           subprojects that may result in negative environmental and social impacts activities, appropriate
                           Environmental and Social Management plans (ESMP) would be prepared and implemented.



                                                                      Page 5 of 8
                           Planning and implementation capacity is weak with the Borrower both within the project
                           executing Ministry and its major departments. By and large there is lack of trained manpower with
                           basic knowledge on emerging environmental and social issues, weak linkage between agricultural
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and other institutions directly or indirectly involved in ESMP and weak monitoring and
                           evaluation. Therefore, the project includes an institutional strengthening component to develop
                           and strengthen technical and managerial capacity both within the Ministry and its associated
                           institutions and agencies.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The key stakeholders are potential value chain participants including farmer organizations and
                           farmer groups (commodity associations, cooperatives, women groups, etc.), traders, processors,
                           input suppliers, agribusinesses and other service providers. Public sector entities such as the
                           MOAD and its departments, local government authorities, private sector entities and NGOs, are
                           also important stakeholders. As part of project preparation and undertaking IESA, specific
                           consultations were held with various stakeholders including potential affected communities,
                           farmers’ organizations, traders, processors, exporters, transporters and project implementers and
                           facilitators.

                           Besides making this available to farmer organizations who might participate in project activities,
                           ESMF will be available at the District Development Councils, District Agriculture, Livestock
                           Services Offices, District Chamber of Commerce and Industry, etc. The public and private sector
                           entities will have access to copies of the ESMF for distribution among their staff who will be
                           involved in project implementation.

                           During project implementation, the Borrower will continue to hold consultations with various
                           stakeholders at different levels on planning and implementing project activities. A major
                           awareness campaign about the project is envisaged at the district level involving potential value
                           chain participants and this will also be used as a forum for disclosure and consultation. In addition,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the TA component (supporting subproject planning, formulation and implementation) that is
                           aimed at strengthening the capacity of farmer groups and participants in the value chain will
                           continue to be a vehicle for consultation on social and environmental issues.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                          05-Feb-2008
                          Date of "in-country" disclosure                                      07-Apr-2009
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                       24-Apr-2009
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                          05-Feb-2008
                          Date of "in-country" disclosure                                      07-Apr-2009
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                       28-Apr-2009
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                          05-Feb-2008
                          Date of "in-country" disclosure                                      07-Apr-2009


                                                                      Page 6 of 8
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   28-Apr-2009
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      05-Feb-2008
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  07-Apr-2009
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   24-Apr-2009
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:

                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
                         ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Sector Manager?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?

                                                                     Page 7 of 8
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Gayatri Acharya
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Sanjay Srivastava (RSA)                      Date: 15-Aug-2012
                            Coordinator:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Simeon Kacou Ehui (SM)                       Date: 13-Sep-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 8 of 8
