                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA2854
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Apr-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Apr-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Bangladesh                        Project ID:    P132634
                            Project Name:      Bangladesh Safety Net Systems for the Poorest Project (P132634)
                            Task Team          Iffath Anwar Sharif
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          17-Apr-2013                       Estimated   20-Jun-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASSP                             Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Other social services (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Other accountability/anti-corruption (15%), Social safety nets (70%),
                                              Vulnerability assessment and monitoring (15%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:    2670.00           Total Bank Financing:                500.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                       Financing Gap:                         0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                      2170.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                              500.00
                              Total                                                                                   2670.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective is to improve the equity, efficiency and transparency of major
                           social safety net programs to benefit the poorest households.
                            3. Project Description
                           The Project Development Objective is to support major social safety net programs in Bangladesh to

                                                                       Page 1 of 8
                         improve their equity, efficiency, and transparency.

                         To meet its objectives, the project will focus on achieving results for five safety net programs of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Ministry of Disaster Management and Relief (MoDMR) in the following three intermediate areas:
                         (i)          improve targeting of program resources to the poorest households to promote more pro-
                         poor coverage;
                         (ii)     strengthen management, program information systems and monitoring capacity to ensure
                         efficient administration; and
                         (iii)    strengthen governance and accountability measures for increased transparency.

                         These results be achieved under the proposed project's three components: (i) support to MoDMR
                         safety net programs (EGPP, FFW, TR, GR and VGF) by financing a portion of program costs (cash
                         payments) in line with progress against a set of disbursement linked indicators (DLIs); (ii)
                         strengthening of MoDMR program administration and transparency; and (iii) development of the
                         Bangladesh Poverty Database. The first component would reimburse the GoB for results, while the
                         second two components can be seen as a financing instrument for the inputs needed to achieve the
                         results under component 1. These two latter components will finance all inputs such as personnel,
                         design of IT systems as well as hardware, monitoring systems, vehicles and other equipment,
                         consultants, and incremental operating costs.

                         Component 1: Support to MoDMR Safety Net Programs (total estimated cost US$430 million)
                         The objective of this component is to support improvements in five safety net programs implemented
                         under the MoDMR and provide co-financing for a share of the total consolidated expenditures of
                         cash wage payments under EGPP and TR (from January 2014 – December 2017). Financing will be
                         provided against progress on 8 DLIs which will support results in three areas: (i) improving the
                         targeting of program resources to the poorest areas and households to promote more pro-poor
                         coverage; (ii) strengthening management, program information systems and monitoring capacity to
                         ensure efficient administration; and (iii) strengthening governance and accountability measures for
                         increased transparency.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2: Strengthening of MoDMR program administration and transparency (total estimated
                         cost US$30 million)
                         The objective of this component is to strengthen the MoDMR/Department of Disaster Management's
                         (DDM) institutional capacity to implement these programs efficiently and transparently, and thus can
                         be seen as a financing instrument for the inputs needed to meet the DLI targets under component 1.
                         Activities financed under this component include: (i) preparation of the overall Operations Manual
                         based on the revised guidelines for the implementation of the DDM programs (EGPP, FFW, TR,
                         VGF and GR); (ii) development of the specifications for the consolidated program MIS that will
                         include a full set of modules including selection and verification of eligible beneficiaries, registration
                         of selected beneficiaries, payments/transfers, case management, grievances and appeals; (iii)
                         improving program monitoring at the field level; (iv) strengthening program management with the
                         help of a consolidated program MIS; and (v) conducting evaluation reports.

                         Component 3: Development of the Bangladesh Poverty Database – Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics
                         (BBS) (total estimated cost US$40 million)
                         This component will support BBS in the development of the Bangladesh Poverty Database (BPD)
                         that will be used to better target the poor in DDM programs, and by other key safety net programs
                         implemented by other Government agencies. The BPD would consist of a set of uniform, objective
                         and transparent criteria to select the poor, and is expected to reduce the overall costs and errors

                                                                        Page 2 of 8
                         associated with targeting. This Database consisting of roughly 34 million households, of which
                         around 10 million can be expected to be poor, and about 12 million vulnerable households who live
                         just above the poverty line, will also help in improving the coordination, efficiency and effectiveness
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of all Social Safety Nets (SSNs).
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented nationwide and the exact locations of sub-projects cannot be
                         determined at this stage.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi (SASDI)
                         Sabah Moyeen (SASDS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes               Environmental Category: B Partial Assessment
                          BP 4.01
                                                                              The project has triggered ‘Environmental
                                                                              Assessment OP/BP 4.01’ to avoid potentially
                                                                              adverse environmental impacts and enhance
                                                                              environmental outcomes in sub-project
                                                                              implementation. The project will be implemented
                                                                              allover Bangladesh and site selection is important
                                                                              in order to avoid any environmentally sensitive
                                                                              areas. Although the project is not expected to
                                                                              create any major impact, improper planning and
                                                                              implementation of the physical interventions may
                                                                              have localized environmental impacts, which will
                                                                              mostly be short-term and reversible. Considering
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              the nature and magnitude of potential
                                                                              environmental impacts and scale of community
                                                                              level infrastructure development, the SNSP is
                                                                              classified as category ‘B’.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                          BP 4.11
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       Yes               The project will be implemented nationwide.
                                                                              Since the location of the sub-projects is not
                                                                              known at this stage, there is a possibility of
                                                                              triggering OP 4.10 should the sub-projects be
                                                                              implemented in tribal areas or areas where Tribal
                                                                              Peoples are present. A Tribal Peoples Planning



                                                                      Page 3 of 8
                                                                                 Framework (TPPF) will be included as part of the
                                                                                 Social Management Framework (SMF). The
                                                                                 TPPF will guide the preparation of Tribal
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 Peoples' Plans for sub-projects as and when
                                                                                 required as well as guidance on disclosure
                                                                                 processes.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No                Based on the findings of the EGPP it has been
                            4.12                                                 seen that no land acquisition or displacement of
                                                                                 communities has been encountered. Hence the
                                                                                 current project will not permit any sub-projects
                                                                                 where there is a chance of land acquisition or
                                                                                 displacement. These will be mentioned on a
                                                                                 “negative list? in the SMF. Sub-project schemes
                                                                                 will be screened at the proposal stage to establish
                                                                                 that they do not trigger any land acquisition or
                                                                                 displacement.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                The project comprises three components, of which two components are TA support and are not
                              expected to have any environmental impact. Component 1 will support the safety net programs
                              under the DDM, namely TR and EGPP, however the TA inputs will be provided to all programs,
                              and thereby support FFW. FFW basically supports construction and maintenance of basic rural
                              infrastructure and create rural employment during slack/lean periods and the rainy season. The
                              sub-projects under FFW are largely construction and maintenance of rural roads, river
                              embankments and irrigation channels. TR supports cleaning ponds/bushes and minor repair work
                              to rural roads, schools, mosques and madrasa. EGPP is already being supported under an IDA and
                              mainly covers earthen works such as (i) construction and maintenance of rural roads; (ii)
                              excavation or re-excavation of irrigation canals and drains; (iii) construction and maintenance of
                              earthen embankments; (iv) land-fill for community institutions like schools, mosque, pagoda,
                              temple, graveyards, prayer grounds etc.; (v) earthen shelters to protect animals against cyclones;
                              (vi) re-excavation of public ponds or fish firms; (vii) organic fertilizer production; (viii) further
                              development of rural markets or helipad, and (ix) excavation or re-excavation of water reservoirs.
                              The environmental impacts from the majority of sub-projects under SNSP are likely to be minor,
                              local and, in most cases, temporary.

                              Given that the workfare sub-projects are national programs, it is probable that they may impact
                              areas with tribal people (TPs), thereby triggering the safeguards policy for Indigenous Peoples (OP


                                                                         Page 4 of 8
                           4.10). The scale and magnitude of social impacts expected under the project are minor. Since no
                           land acquisition or displacement will be permitted under the project, no long term or irreversible
                           impacts are expected. In rare cases where some soil may be required from adjacent plots for rural
Public Disclosure Copy




                           roads, it will be carried out under mutually agreed terms. The SMF clarifies and specifies these
                           modalities. Appropriate consultation, communication strategies and modalities for consensus
                           building and establishing feedback loops with Tribal Communities are spelled out in the SMF as
                           part of the Tribal Peoples Planning Framework

                           The SMF also looks at gender, participation and inclusion issues.

                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            No long-term or indirect impacts are envisaged from the project interventions.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            The sub-projects will be identified during the project implementation phase. The environmental
                           and social screening along with the Environmental Code of Practice (ECoP) will help to consider
                           the alternative options at the grassroots-level planning stage.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            The Ministry for Disaster Management and Relief (MoDMR) and the Bank team have agreed
                           that no land acquisition or displacement of communities (economic or physical) from private or
                           public lands will be required and since most sub-projects will be carried out in rural settings where
                           squatters are not widely found, no large scale displacement is expected. Land acquisition and
                           displacement of communities/people will not be allowed and this requirement will be included in
                           the program guidelines. Each sub-project proposal assessed by the Union Parishad - Project
                           Implementation Committee/Humanitarian Assistance Implementation Committee (UP-PIC/HAIC)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           will include a social screening form that will demonstrate specifically that no acquisition or
                           displacement is undertaken. Screening for TPs will also be part of the sub-project proposal
                           screening format.

                           The Environmental Management Framework (EMF) and Social Management Framework (SMF)
                           prepared for the ongoing Employment Generation Program for the Poorest (EGPP), which is
                           implemented by the same Ministry, has been reviewed and revised for the proposed project based
                           on field assessments of EGPP sub-projects. The framework identifies and assesses the potential
                           impacts under different sub-projects of the proposed project. The EMF and SMF details the
                           criteria for community level environmental and social screening and planning, and sub-project
                           level Environmental Code of Practice (ECoP) to mitigate possible negative environmental
                           impacts. Community-level environmental and social screening will be an integral part of sub-
                           project planning to understand possible impacts, and to identify concerns and ensure they are
                           addressed early on to mitigate negative impacts or enhance opportunities. If any sub-project
                           requires additional measures beyond what is already described in the ECoP, a simple
                           Environmental Management Plan (EMP) will be prepared by the Union Parishad-Project
                           Implementation Committee/Humanitarian Assistance Implementation Committee (UP-PIC/UP-
                           HAIC) in consultation with the Project Implementation Officer (PIO) and Field Supervisor.
                           Similarly, the SMF will guide the preparation of Social Management Plans in response to triggers
                           pointed out by the screening process, i.e. if there is a need to prepare a Tribal Peoples


                                                                      Page 5 of 8
                           Development Plans and/or inclusion and participation action plans or gender action plans. The
                           screening formats (environmental and social), ECoP and sample EMP will be included in the
                           project Operations Manual (in Bangla) as part of the guidance to prepare and implement sub-
Public Disclosure Copy




                           projects. The PIO will be responsible for reviewing the environmental and social screening and
                           mitigation measures of sub-projects.

                           PIOs and Field Supervisors will also review environmental and social compliance as part of their
                           regular monitoring activities and will maintain a database for sub-project specific environmental
                           screening and mitigation measures. Given the large number of small-scale sub-projects, the
                           implementing agency will involve an independent consultant (third party) to monitor compliance
                           with the EMF and SMF and implementation of mitigation measures of sub-projects on random
                           sampling basis.

                           Lessons learned from the ongoing EGPP suggest that the implementing agency and other
                           stakeholders have limited experience in environmental and social assessment and management.
                           Component 2 will help strengthen DDM capacity in monitoring and evaluation of its programs. It
                           was agreed that environmental management, social management climate change adaptation and
                           disaster risk reduction will be included in the capacity building program for PIOs and Field
                           Supervisors. In addition, the project will organize several orientation programs on the Operations
                           Manual, including screening and ECoP.

                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The Environmental Management Framework (EMF) and Social Management Framework (SMF)
                           have been drafted by the Ministry of Disaster Management and Relief (MoDMR) in consultation
                           with local communities where sub-projects are implemented. A draft EMF/SMF have been
                           disclosed on the Ministry website on April 8, 2013, with hard copies provided in the implementing
                           agency's office, for comments from the public before finalization.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                 07-Apr-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                              09-Apr-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Bangladesh                                                  08-Apr-2013
                           Comments: Draft EMF disclosed on MoDMR website (www.dmrd.gov.bd) and hard copies
                                         available in implementing agency office.
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                 07-Apr-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                              09-Apr-2013




                                                                     Page 6 of 8
                            "In country" Disclosure
                              Bangladesh                                                       08-Apr-2013
                              Comments: Draft SMF (including Tribal Peoples Development Plan) disclosed on MoDMR
Public Disclosure Copy




                                            website (www.dmrd.gov.bd) and hard copies available in implementing agency
                                            office.
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Iffath Anwar Sharif
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name:                                                 Date:
                            Coordinator:


                                                                         Page 7 of 8
                         Sector Manager:   Name: Pablo Gottret (SM)      Date: 11-Apr-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                           Page 8 of 8
