                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC3758

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Jun-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Jun-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            China                            Project ID:       P133116
                            Project Name:       China-Qinghai Xining Water Environment Management Project (P133116)
                            Task Team           Ximing Zhang
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           20-Mar-2014                      Estimated         16-Oct-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      EASCS                            Lending           Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Agricultural extension and research (33%), Wastewater Treatment and Disposal
                                                (30%), Sanitation (27%), Water supply (10%)
                            Theme(s):           Other rural development (34%), Water resource management (33%), City-wide
                                                Infrastructure and Service Delivery (33%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    250.00                       Total Bank Financing:        150.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                                  Financing Gap:                  0.00
                              Financing Source                                                              Amount
                              Borrower                                                                       100.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                          150.00
                              Total                                                                          250.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective is to reduce water pollution and conserve scarce water resources
                           in Xining Municipality.
                           C. Project Description
                           The project rationale is to achieve reduction in river water pollution and increase in water
                         availability, through integrating environmental management (such as wastewater collection,
                         treatment and reclamation, and river ecological environment) and water resources management (e.g.
                         reducing soil erosion and use of alternative/reclaimed water resources) in a basin context.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Indicative Project Components

                         The project will consist of the following four components with a total estimated cost of US$
                         250million, including an IBRD loan of US$150 million:

                         Component A: Construction of wastewater collection (estimated cost USD123 million). This
                         component includes construction of 95.6km of wastewater collection pipes along rivers and urban
                         wastewater distribution networks (wastewater collection network for No.4 WWTP – total length of
                         16 km; wastewater collection network for No.5 WWTP – total length of 63.6km, and sewerage
                         interceptor along Chaoyangqu Cannel for No.2 WWTP with length about 16 km); storm water
                         collection and pre-treatment facilities (mainly in Beichuan area with total length of 35.8 km);

                         Component B: Construction of reclaimed water treatment plants and reclaimed water transfer pipes
                         (estimated cost USD60 million). This component includes construction of three reclaimed water
                         plants with total capacity of 75,000 ton/day (20,000 m3/day at No.5 WWTP, 20,000 m3/day at No.4
                         WWTP, and 35,000 m3/day at No.3 WWTP), and 78.7km of reclaimed water transfer pipes to the
                         end users(20.6 km for No.3 WWTP, 34.1 km for No.4 WWTP, and 24km for No.5 WWTP); the
                         reclaimed water will be used for urban (30%) and sanitation (30%) purpose and irrigation for forest
                         (40%).

                         Component C: Construction of wastewater collection systems and Beichuan River landscape
                         improvement (estimated cost USD27 million). This component includes construction of landscape
                         works, affiliated access roads etc. in Beichuan River bank area;

                         Component D: Integrated gully improvement (estimated cost USD35 million). This component
Public Disclosure Copy




                         includes construction of numbers of silt retention facilities in key selected gullies around Xining
                         Municipality. There are 62 gullies around Xining City; most of the gullies have been conducted
                         watershed management. However, some gullies are severely polluted by disposal of solid waste and
                         discharge of wastewater. The project chose three most serious polluted gullies to treat.

                         Component E: Project management and capacity building (estimated cost USD5 million). This
                         component includes activities of project management, monitoring and evaluation (M&E),
                         institutional strengthening and capacity building. It would fund management information systems
                         (MIS), establishment of M&E systems; office equipment, training and workshops, study visits,
                         technical assistance for research and development, policy studies.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed project is located in Xining, the capital of Qinghai Province in the western part of
                         China.
                         Xining is located in the eastern part of Qinghai province and in the Huang River Valley of the
                         Qinghai-Tibet Plateau with an average altitude of over 2200 meters. The urban population is about
                         1.2 million concentrating on the built up areas in a total size of 104 km2. The proposed three
                         reclaimed water treatment plants located in the urban area of Xining which are adjacent to the
                         existing No. 3 WWTP, No. 4 WWTP and No. 5 WWTP. Beichuan River is a tributary of Huangshui
                           River, which is originated from Datong County of Qinghai Province and flows into the Huangshui
                           River at Xining, with a total length of 154 km. Huangshui River arises in Haiyan County of Qinghai
                           Province and discharges through Qinghai and Gansu before confluences with the Yellow River on
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Hekou Town of Gansu. The total length of the Huangshui River is 374 km. The project will not
                           involve any international river. All the physical activities are in the urban and peri-urban area of the
                           Xining Municipality.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Xining has an ongoing Bank financed project. For this proposed project, a Project Leading Group
                           (PLG), which is chaired by the Mayor of Xining and comprises senior officials from relevant
                           municipal agencies, has been established to oversee the preparation and implementation of the
                           Project. A Project Management Office (PMO) has been established in Huangshui River Integrated
                           Management Committee in Xining. The PMO will be responsible for project management, detailed
                           designs, social and environment safeguard preparation, monitoring and evaluation etc. in accordance
                           with Bank guidelines. The PMO currently has established a strong technical team. The PMO will
                           include adequate dedicated staff responsible for different aspects of the project, including overall
                           social and environment management. The PMO and its consultants received safeguard trainings in
                           the identification stage of project preparation, and will continue to receive more training and
                           technical guidance during project preparation. The close interaction between the Bank’s task team
                           and the PMO will ensure the adequacy of the PMO’s capacity.

                           Xining has an ongoing project financed by the Bank-“ Xining Flood and Watershed Management
                           Project?. The project is to improve the protection of property and safety of people from flood events
                           and bring about sustainable utilization of land and water resources within Xining Municipality. The
                           PMO is based at Xining Water Resources Bureau. It has received trainings from the Bank Task team
                           and EA consultants. The safeguards implementation capacity achieved by the old project and the
                           values will be add to the new project, including lessons learned.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Songling Yao (EASCS)
                           Yongli Wang (EASCS)
                           Feng Ji (EASCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              It is expected that the project will overall
                           BP 4.01                                               increase the water use efficiency and reduce the
                                                                                 pollution loads into the water in Xining.

                                                                                 Environmental impacts during construction are
                                                                                 mainly related to small-scale construction under
                                                                                 Component A, B and C. e.g. disturbance to
                                                                                 traffic and local communities along the sites for
                                                                                 pipeline construction and near the sites for water
                                                                                 reclamation units, disposal of spoil, nuisance of
                                                                                 dust and noise. Environmental impacts during
                                                                                 operation mainly include noise, and nuisance
                                                             odor, wastewater from the water reclamation
                                                             units.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             The adverse impacts are localized, limited and
                                                             can be readily managed with accepted measures
                                                             of good engineering codes of practice (ECOP).
                                                             The project should be proposed as a category B
                                                             project considering the type, location,
                                                             sensitivity, and small scale of the project and the
                                                             nature and magnitude of its potential
                                                             environmental impacts. Most mitigation
                                                             measures will be included in engineering
                                                             designs and construction specifications.
                                                             However, considering the potential industry
                                                             users of reclaimed water (a thermal plant), the
                                                             project could be proposed as category A at this
                                                             stage. During Project Preparation, the TT will
                                                             work with client to identify the users of the
                                                             reclaimed water and re-propose the environment
                                                             category based on actual.

                                                             An EIA and EMP will be prepared for the
                                                             project. The EA will assess the positive and
                                                             adverse impacts during the construction and
                                                             operation phase. A due diligence will be
                                                             conducted on those associated facilities (to be
                                                             determined later) which are not funded by the
                                                             project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             The EMP will include (i) Environmental Code
                                                             Of Practices (ECOPs) for contractors for
                                                             inclusion in the bidding documents and
                                                             contracts. (ii) Specific mitigations measures for
                                                             potential adverse impacts during operation; (iii)
                                                             Institutional arrangement of Environmental
                                                             supervision, monitoring plan and Reporting
                                                             requirements and (iv) EMP implementation
                                                             budget.

                                                             EA will identify relevant associated facilities
                                                             following the IFC’s standard.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   TBD   The project is mainly in the urban and peri-
                                                             urban area of Xining and the areas already
                                                             disturbed by intensive human activities. The
                                                             project will not convert, degrade or restore any
                                                             natural habitats or critical natural habitats.
                                                                 However, at this stage given the type on
                                                                 infrastructures and in particular since gullies
                                                                 around rivers are known to possibly host
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 unknown natural habitats that couldbe analyzed
                                                                 during EA preparation stage, the TT consider it
                                                                 as TBD at this stage.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    This project will not have impacts on the health
                                                                 and quality of forests; nor affect the rights and
                                                                 welfare of people and their level of dependence
                                                                 upon or interaction with forests, nor aim to
                                                                 bring about changes in the management,
                                                                 protection, or utilization of natural forest or
                                                                 plantations.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The Project will not lead to purchase pesticide
                                                                 nor use of any pesticides. This policy is not
                                                                 triggered.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   Based on the available information and
                         BP 4.11                                 preliminary screening, there are no physical
                                                                 cultural resources identified to be affected by
                                                                 the project. It will be confirmed by a detail
                                                                 survey to be carried out during project
                                                                 preparation.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     TBD   The conducted IP screening did not found any
                                                                 ethnic minority village; however, some project
                                                                 activities and their impacts cannot be clear at
                                                                 this stage, so the OP 4.10 application could not
                                                                 be determined so far.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 A standalone social assessment will be
                                                                 conducted, in which further screening on ethnic
                                                                 minority will be implemented before the
                                                                 appraisal. IP related instrument will be prepared
                                                                 if any IP is found in the SA process.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   The proposed physical activities consist of
                         4.12                                    construction of reclaimed water plant,
                                                                 installation of sewers and reclaimed water pipe,
                                                                 construction of roads related to sewers and
                                                                 pipes, river bank rehabilitation, as well as gully
                                                                 treatment. Still, some activities, possibly linking
                                                                 to the project, entail land related issues. So
                                                                 Involuntary Resettlement will be triggered.

                                                                 Most resettlement impacts by the project and
                                                                 linkage activities can be clearly scoped and
                                                                 investigated prior to appraisal, while some
                                                                 especially on installation of some sewer and
                                                                                                                                 Reclaimed Water pipe within the project, as
                                                                                                                                 well as some on linkage activities could not be
                                                                                                                                 determined. So a RP will be prepared to cover
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 the impacts clearly identified prior to appraisal,
                                                                                                                                 and a RPF to handle the rest.

                                                                                                                                 Further, some resettlement for the proposed
                                                                                                                                 activities completed land taking and is under
                                                                                                                                 restoring livelihood, so due diligence review
                                                                                                                                 and external monitoring is required to include in
                                                                                                                                 the RP or to conduct external monitoring at
                                                                                                                                 once. At present, the due diligence review will
                                                                                                                                 cover such sites as No.4 and No.5 WWTPs and
                                                                                                                                 at some sites of Beichuan River Treatment.

                                                                                                                                 In summary, a RP will be prepared to cover:
                                                                                                                                 •       known sub-project sites under
                                                                                                                                 components A, B, and C.
                                                                                                                                 •       all associated facilities known prior to
                                                                                                                                 appraisal

                                                                                                                                 A RPF will be prepared to cover:
                                                                                                                                 •         all sub-project sites unknown prior to
                                                                                                                                 appraisal
                                                                                                                                 •         all associated facilities unknown prior
                                                                                                                                 to appraisal.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            This is an environmental project, the project
                                                                                                                                 will not finance construction of new or
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 rehabilitation of any existing dams (or related
                                                                                                                                 facilities) as defined under this policy.
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            No project activities will be located in
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            international waterways. The policy is not
                                                                                                                                 triggered and no actions are required.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             No project activities will be located in disputed
                                 7.60                                                                                            areas. The policy is not triggered and no actions
                                                                                                                                 are required.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 20-Jan-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      During next preparation mission (in July 2013) the draft EA, RP, RPF and SA reports prepared by
                                      the PMO will be reviewed by the Bank team.
                         IV. APPROVALS




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Task Team Leader:   Name: Ximing Zhang

                         Approved By:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Regional Safeguards Name:                        Date:
                         Coordinator:
                         Sector Manager:     Name: Mark R. Lundell (SM)   Date: 26-Jun-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
