                                                                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                            CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC751
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Apr-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        Bangladesh                              Project ID:                       P128276
                              Project Name:                   Coastal Embankment Improvement Project - Phase 1(CEIP-1) (P128276)
                              Task Team Leader:               Maria Sarraf
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 05-Mar-2013                                   Estimated Board Date:             08-Aug-2013
                              Managing Unit:                  SASDI                                   Lending Instrument:               Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                         General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (60%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (30%),
                                                              Other social se rvices (10%)
                              Theme:                          Natural disaster management (50%), Climate change (30%), Water resource management (20%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                        Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                          0.00
                                   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                              340.00
                                   Climate Investment Funds                                                                                                   25.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                    365.00
                              Environmental Category:         A - Full Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              B. Project Objectives

                              The overall project development objective is to increase the resilience of coastal population to natural disasters and climate change. More
                              specifically, the project aims at (a) reducing the loss of life, assets, crops and livestock during natural disasters; (b) reducing the time of recovery
                              after natural disaster such as cyclone; and (c) improving agricultural production by reducing saline water intrusion which is expected to worsen due
Public Disclosure Copy




                              climate change. This objective will be achieved by rehabilitating and improving the polder system in the coastal area.

                              C. Project Description

                              A multi-phased approach. The long term objective is to increase the resilience of the entire coastal population to tidal flooding and natural disasters
                              by upgrading the whole embankment system. With an existing network of embankment of nearly 6,000 km long with 139 polders, the magnitude of
                              such a project is enormous. Hence a multi-phased approached will be adopted over a period of 15 to 20 years. The proposed CEIP-I1 is the first
                              phase of this long term program. Studies for the preparation of the CEIP-I project are currently funded by the IDA credit for the Emergency Cyclone
                              Recovery and Restoration Project 2007 (Cr 45070).

                              Strategic assessment of polders. As indicated previously, the embankment system was originally designed to keep out the highest tides without
                              any consideration of possible storm surges. Recent cyclone storm damages and the anticipation of worse future situation due to climate change
                              have lead the Government to shift its strategy towards providing protection against future storm surges, instead of only tidal protection. BWDB with
                              the help of the major modeling institutes in Bangladesh is engaged in a strategic assessment of the overall polder system. This involves updating
                              the environmental baseline and using extensive modeling to determine present and future storm surge levels affecting embankment stability taking
                              into consideration the impact of climate change.

                              Polder selection. As part of the strategic polder assessment, a multi criteria analysis was developed to guide the gradual selection of polders. The
                              analysis relies on the following key criteria: physical condition of the embankment and the drainage system, economic activities in the polders
                              (agriculture or fishery), population and socio economic conditions, environmental condition and economic efficiency considerations (for example
                              the geographical proximity of polders can facilitate efficient execution of works). Based on this assessment a first priority group of 17 polders was
                              selected. Among the seventeen, 5 will be considered for the first year investment.

                              Level of protection. As clearly define in the strategy, the level of protection should be beyond the highest tides and protect against frequent storm
                              surges. In the course of this strategic assessment, protection against a 25 year return period maximum surge height with additional buffer for
                              climate change is likely to be adopted . A higher return period for the technical design of embankment structures would be prohibitively expensive.
                              However the intention is to make the design robust enough so that even if the embankment is overtopped, it should not be breached.

                              The project will comprise the following components:

                              Component A – Rehabilitation and Improvement of Polders (US$285 million)
                         Component A1: Rehabilitation and Improvement of Polders (US$275 million). The component will finance activities that aim to increase polders
                         resilience to tidal flooding and storm surges. Investments include: (i) improvements of critical portions of the polders embankment; (ii) restoration of
                         embankments and channel improvement in critical stretches; (iii) increasing embankment height in some stretches for improved resilience; (iv)
                         upgrading drainage systems within polders and, (v) improving operation and maintenance (O&M) programs. The reconstruction and rehabilitation
                         works will be designed with improved standards so that protection not only against tidal flooding but also frequent storm surges. Depending on the
                         length of embankment in each polder, it is expected that about 17-20 polders will be rehabilitated under this component.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The stakeholders and beneficiaries consultations and their participation would be central to carrying out the improvement works to the polder
                         system. The beneficiaries through their formal and informal water management associations (WMAs) would be involved in all stages of project
                         implementation from identification of works, prioritization, design, and construction. These consultations would be carried out by the consultants
                         and NGOs with support from the BWDB etc.

                         Improved embankment system, and enhance agricultural production and income of people in the polder area would increase resilience of the
                         people with better protection from natural disasters and improved housing, and more resources thus improving time taken in recovery after the
                         natural disasters like cyclones.

                         Component A2: Afforestation (US$10 million). Afforestation is critical to the security of embankment. The planting of selected species of trees on
                         the slopes of the embankment would commence after the completion of earthworks in restored and new embankments. The component will
                         attempt to engage community participation in the effort of afforestation activities and maintenance with emphasis on sustainability of these
                         operations. The component will finance effort to build capacity of local government institutions, Water Management Association, and community
                         organizations in secondary maintenance schemes for improved O&M, embankment afforestation, protection of embankment toe against erosion.

                         Component B–Implementation of Social Action and Environmental Management Plans (US$35 million).

                         Component B1: Social Action Plan (US$5 million). This component will support consultation with and strengthening of polders’ stakeholders and
                         beneficiaries as well as formal and informal water management organization (like water management groups, water management associations and
                         embankment management groups). It will also support the implementation of social action plan identified during the consultative, design and
                         implementation phases.

                         Component B2: Resettlement Action Plans (US$26 million). Polder scheme rehabilitation is a complex project that involves a variety of issues
                         ranging from land acquisition, physical and economic displacement and other unanticipated impacts. Generally there are squatters on the
                         embankments as they are safe structures. A Social Management and Resettlement Policy Framework (SMRPF) is currently under preparation
                         and will be disclosed in accordance with Bank guidelines. This component will finance the implementation of Social Management Plans,
                         Resettlement Action Plans (RAP), embankment monitoring and public consultation plans. The component will also finance resettlement and
                         rehabilitation of persons adversely affected by the project. It will also support the development of a system to computerize land acquisition data
                         with GPS reference and independent institute to undertake surveys and verify field data in order to guard against improper targeting of
                         beneficiaries and/or false delivery of benefits in case of SAP/RAP.

                         Component B3: Environmental Management Plan (US$4 million). An overall environmental assessment of the polder system and an
                         Environmental Management Framework (EMF) for the project are already under preparation. This component will finance polder specific
                         Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and Environment Management Plan (EMP). It will finance the implementation of an environmental
                         monitoring plan and environmental mitigation and enhancement measures. Some of the items under EMP will be integrated with the civil works
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and will be included in the budget sub component A1. The component will also support the establishment of an environmental management
                         system in BWDB to enable it to target, achieve and demonstrate continuous improvement in environmental performance of the polder system.
                         Some activities, development of protected area, and community environment management plan may be funded under this component.

                         Component C- Supervision and Monitoring and Evaluation of Project Impact (US$20 million)

                         Component C1: Supervision of Construction (US$16 million). This component will cover consulting services for surveys, designs, and construction
                         supervision of rehabilitation and improvement of coastal embankments. This will include facilitating consultations with local communities in
                         identifying needs and suitable design of the embankment as well as with other stakeholder such as local government, upazilla and union level
                         government. The component will finance surveys required prior to construction work.

                         Component C2: Monitoring and Evaluation and supervision of EMP, SAP/RAP (US$4 million). This component will also cover consulting services
                         for continuously monitoring project activities and providing feedback to the government and the implementing agency on the project’s performance.
                         It would also provide independent monitoring and supervision of the EMP, SAP and RAP.

                         Component D – Project Management, Technical Assistance, Training and Strategic Studies (US$25 million)

                         This component will support BWDB in implementing the project through the establishment of a fully functioning Project Management Unit (PMU). It
                         will provide resources for needed strategic studies (including the continuous updating of the strategic polder assessment as well as all necessary
                         preparatory studies for following phases CEIP), institutional capacity building, technical assistance and training.

                         Component E – Contingent Emergency Response (US$0 million).

                         A provisional zero amount component to be included under this project that will allow for rapid reallocation of loan proceeds during an emergency,
                         under streamlined procurement and disbursement procedures. In the event of an emergency during the implementation of the project, the
                         contingent component would be implemented following the rapid response procedures under OP/BP8.00 in combination with the IDA Immediate
                         Response Mechanism (IRM) guidelines dated November 3, 2011. In addition to reallocation of funds from other project components, the contingent
                         component may also serve as a conduit for additional funds to be channeled to the project in the event of an emergency. A specified amount could
                         also be earmarked for liquidity support through reimbursement of a pre-identified positive list of good purchased by the state.

                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)
                           The study area is the entire coastal region of Bangladesh. The coastal region borders the Bay of Bengal with 710 km coastal line and has three
                           distinct geographic sections, the Sundarban mangrove forest in the southwest, the very active delta in the central south, and the narrow coastal
                           strip along the Chittagong and Chittagong Hill Tracts area on the east. The coastal region of Bangladesh has 139 polders, which were constructed
                           in late sixties to protect the land from saline water intrusion and to increase the crop production.

                           Of the 139 polders, 17 polders have been selected using technical criteria and environmental consideration. The selection of polders has been
                           finalized in consultation various level of stakeholders and development partners. The 17 polders belong to 6 coastal districts such as Khulna,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Satkhira, Bagerhat, Pirojpur, Barguna and Patukhali.

                           As per embankment redesign for climate change adaptation, improvement of embankments and construction of water management structures will
                           require private land acquisition and displacement of people who may have been using public lands, including slopes on the existing embankments
                           that would be improved. Impacts of land acquisition and population displacement will be assessed after the polders to be improved under the
                           project have been selected and detailed engineering designs prepared.

                            E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

                           Bangladesh Water Development Board (BWDB) has the sole mandate for the construction, rehabilitation, and operation and maintenance of
                           embankments in Bangladesh. BWDB has a long experience in implementing Bank financed projects. Its collaboration with the World Bank has
                           started back in the 70’s with the Coastal Area Rehabilitation Project (Cr 339-BD). It has satisfactorily implemented the Coastal Embankment
                           Rehabilitation Project (Cr. 27830) between1996-2002. It is currently implementing two World Bank financed projects: Component C of Emergency
                           Recovery and Restoration Project (Cr. 45070) and Water Management Improvement Project. Although BWDB is well-versed in implementing
                           Environment Management Plan and Social Management Plans in accordance with Bank guidelines and procedures, it does not have dedicated
                           professionals or unit on environmental and social management which is necessary for a project with substantial environmental and social impact
                           like CEIP.

                            F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

                           Chaohua Zhang (SASDS)
                           Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi (SASDI)
                           Nadia Sharmin (SASDI)
                           Md. Akhtaruzzaman (SASDS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

                            Safeguard Policies                              Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01             Yes              An overall environmental assessment of the polder system and Environmental
                                                                                            Management Framework (EMF) for the project are already under preparation.
                                                                                            A provisional zero amount component (Component E) has been included in the
                                                                                            project which will allow for rapid reallocation of loan proceeds during an
                                                                                            emergency. The EMF will incorporate the guideline for dealing with emergency
                                                                                            operation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            The project will conduct polder specific Environmental Impact Assessment and
                                                                                            Environmental Management Plan.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                     Yes               The coastal zone of Bangladesh falls in ten different bio-ecological zones
                                                                                            namely the Ganges flood plain and major rivers, coastal marine water, Meghna
                                                                                            flood plaion, Sundarbans, Chakaria Sundarbans, coastal plains, offshore islands
                                                                                            and Meghna estauarine flood plain. There may be localized impact on the
                                                                                            natural habitats especially on the fish spawning site and protected areas, during
                                                                                            the implementation of the civil works. The impact will be determined during the
                                                                                            selection process of the polders
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                              Yes               Sundarbans the largest Mangrove forest of South Asia is in close proximity of
                                                                                            the 6 districts of 17 polders. Rehabilitation and reconstruction of polders may
                                                                                            have indirect impact on the water flow quantity and pattern within the channels
                                                                                            of Sundarbans. The technical studies will consider the flow changes criteria due
                                                                                            to the reconstruction and rehabilitation of the polders.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09                         No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11          No

                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                   No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12             Yes               Project works will require land acquisition and population displacement for
                                                                                            improvement of existing embankments, construction of retired embankments,
                                                                                            construction of new water management structures, and construction of bank
                                                                                            protection works. BWDB has therefore prepared the SMRPF for CEIP-I. It
                                                                                            includes issues related to Involuntary Resettlement, Indigenous Peoples and
                                                                                            social inclusion as well as gender. Among other issues, the SMRPF includes (a)
                                                                                            a legal framework outlining the principles and guidelines which will be used to
                                                                                            acquire lands and mitigate the adverse impacts, including those on indigenous
                                                                                                                        peoples; (b) facility for screening of social safeguard issues related to
                                                                                                                        involuntary resettlement and indigenous peoples; (c) mitigation principles,
                                                                                                                        guidelines, and a policy matrix in terms of different impact categories; (d) a
                                                                                                                        grievance redress procedure for the project affected persons; (e) stakeholder
                                                                                                                        consultation framework; and (f) arrangement for monitoring progress in the
                                                                                                                        implementation of impact mitigation plans. The SMRPF will provide the basis to
                                                                                                                        prepare Resettlement Action Plans and IPPs for annual civil work programs
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        under CEIP-I.
                                Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                          No

                                Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                          Yes                   The project is unlikely to have any adverse impact. During preparation the EA
                                7.50                                                                                    will evaluate any potential impact due to project activities.
                                Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                              No



                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 14-Dec-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
                                  should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                    Target date for preparing the PAD stage ISDS is December 14, 2012.

                                    Time frame for completing safeguard-related studies is December 14, 2012

                         IV. APPROVALS
                                Task Team Leader:                                Name: Maria Sarraf
                                Approved By:
                                Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                 Name: Sanjay Srivastava (RSA)                                                                         Date: 27-Apr-2012
                                Sector Manager:                                  Name: Herbert Acquay (SM)                                                                             Date: 28-Apr-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
