                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET


                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA2311
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Apr-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed:
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Mauritania                         Project ID:    P127543
                            Project Name:     Local Government Development Program (P127543)
                            Task Team         Brahim Ould Abdelwedoud
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         16-Apr-2013                        Estimated   19-Jun-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    AFTU2                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Sub-national government administration (97%), Central government
                                              administration (3%)
                            Theme(s):         Municipal governance and institution building (36%), Rural services and
                                              infrastructure (24%), Municipal finance (23%), Decentralizat ion (14%), Other
                                              public sector governance (3%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     102.00           Total Bank Financing:                25.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                       Financing Gap:                        0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                      Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                      52.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                              5.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                               20.00
                              EC European Commission                                                                  25.00
                              Total                                                                                  102.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)


                                                                      Page 1 of 11
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project consist of three components, building directly on the outline of PNIDDLE: (i) support to
                         the performance based grant for 100 LGs, (ii) support to a capacity building program for 100 local
                         governments, and for regional and national institutions, and (iii) support to overall program
                         management and oversight of PNIDDLE. The project is built on an incentive driven approach
                         centered on annual performance based grants. It provides a fiscal and assistance driven incentive to
                         LGs to improve their performance. It specifically addresses the core structural and geographical
                         features of Mauritanian local government system and the current level of low capacity by providing
                         an intensive support to local governments to enhance their basic capacity to plan and deliver services.
                         Achieving the PDO will require substantial strengthening of the capacity (technical, organizational
                         and financial) and the regulatory and legal framework at three levels (local government, regional and
                         national), supplemented by investments at the LG level. The project targets a total of 100 LGs: 32
                         urban LGs as the capitals of the departments, and 68 rural LGs. These LGs have been selected on a
                         set of criteria established with the Government. The total population of the selected LGs is
                         approximately 1,114,000 people (approximately one third of the total population of Mauritania), i.e.
                         the average population per commune is 11,300 people. The number of LGs selected is high, but as
                         evidenced above, the resource envelope relative to the existing resource envelope (as well as the
                         capacity to plan and deliver investment projects) available at LG level is sufficient to incentivize LGs
                         to deliver on time. Given the need to build an improved national framework for decentralization, the
                         project will be implemented over 5 years.

                         Component 1: Performance Based Grant for Local Governments (US$70 million – Government US$
                         42 million, IDA 15 million and EU 13 million)

                         The component supports the introduction of a Conditional Performance Grant providing funding for
                         LG infrastructure investment and management conditional on their performance and basic functional
                         capacity. The CPG has been established by an edict, and Government has made a specific budget
Public Disclosure Copy




                         provision for the fund, over and above the provision for FRD.

                         In order to be eligible for the grant, LGs would have to (i) sign and comply with a Grant Participation
                         Agreement (GPA) that describes the objectives of the grant and summarize its terms and conditions,
                         and (ii) meet the minimum conditions (MCs) for the CPG. The MCs measure a minimum level of
                         functional capacity in the following areas: (a) the functioning of the LG Council, (b) the functioning
                         of the LG administration.

                         Actual access by the LG to the projected annual transfer under the CPG will be determined by an
                         independently conducted technical assessment - the performance assessment (PA) - and only those
                         LGs meeting minimum conditions would qualify for the performance grant funding for the
                         forthcoming budget year. The PA will determine compliance with the MCs and the performance
                         score of each LG. The grant amount for each eligible LG will depend on its performances score,
                         which will be measured with criteria related to the following six performance areas : (a) planning and
                         budgeting; (b) organization and human resources, (c) financial management and revenue collection
                         (d) procurement management, (e) asset management and maintenance, and (f) transparency and
                         accountability.

                         In addition to the minimum conditions, the CPG requires three disbursement triggers that need to be
                         complied with in order for disbursements to be completed: (i) budget approved by the council with

                                                                      Page 2 of 11
                         commitments and specifications for the resources allocated under the CPG, (ii) annex to the budget
                         completed with detailed list of investments financed under the CPG, and (iii) a procurement plan
                         approved by the Council, and in accordance with the procurement requirements under the program
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (including compliance with thresholds and amounts) .

                         The allocation for each LG is divided into two portions: (i) Basic grant and (ii) Performance grant.
                         The basic grant is provided for all LGs that comply with minimum conditions and the provisions in
                         the GPA. The performance grant is provided on the basis of the performance score of each LG. For
                         2013 and 2014, before the completion of a performance assessment, the entire annual allocation will
                         be provided as basic grant. Starting for the allocation for 2015, the basic grant will be reduced and
                         share of the performance grant will increase.

                         The total annual amount of the CPG is allocated to LGs based on three parameters: equal share
                         (30%) population (50%) and poverty (20%). These parameters will determine the allocation amounts
                         for each LG for each year in 2013 and 2014. Starting from 2015, performance scores will be
                         integrated into the formula for allocation and the share of the total grant distributed on the basis of
                         performance scores will increase.

                         The CPG will be provided in addition to existing grants under FRD. The size of the performance
                         grant available to each participating LG will be determined annually according to an allocation
                         formula comprising transparent, objectively measurable criteria, and would be established as an
                         indicative five-year envelope for the LG, together with related projections for annual transfers within
                         the five-year timeframe. It is expected that that the CPG will provide additional approximately on
                         average US$12 per capita per year (over and above the US$3.5 per capita all LGs currently receive
                         annually under the existing, unconditional FRD.

                         The CPG is planned to be phased in over 3 years to allow for gradual uptake of LGs and to gradually
                         enable measurement of performance. Thus, in year 1 (2013) and year 2 (2014) of the project,
                         allocations will be made on the basis of a baseline study from December 2012 and a follow up
Public Disclosure Copy




                         baseline update in June 2013. For these two years, all LGs meeting the minimum conditions and the
                         disbursement conditions will be eligible (i.e. there is no performance score available until year 2014).
                         Starting from 2014, performance of LGs will be integrated into the grant model. The two year
                         phasing in model will allow Government to test the different tools and the approach, and to do the
                         needed adjustments at midterm.

                         For 2013, to allow for a gradual roll out of the grant, and taking into consideration the weaknesses in
                         the overall oversight and compliance system, only the 32 capitals of departments are eligible to
                         receive the grant. These 32 LGs are regional centers; they have all complied with MCs, and they
                         have completed detailed participatory investments plans. This reduced number of eligible LGs will
                         reduce the risk of capacity back logs and delays in disbursement due to lack of compliance with
                         disbursement triggers. For the allocation for 2014, which will be announced in October 2013 (based
                         on the updated baseline assessment), all 100 LGs will be eligible if they comply with the required
                         minimum conditions and have signed the agreement.

                         The overall principle for use of the CPG is that it is discretionary and aligned with the framework of
                         the legal mandate and functions of Local governments as defined in the Article 2 of the order of 87
                         289 October 20, 1987, i.e. construction, maintenance and supplies for local roads; school buildings of
                         primary education; clinics and maternal and child health; water supply and public lighting; Urban
                         transport, health and education; fire prevention; sanitation; garbage collection; markets; abattoirs,

                                                                      Page 3 of 11
                         sports and cultural grounds; parks and gardens; cemeteries; assistance to the poor; and development
                         and management of areas granted by the central government to the LG .
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The choice of sub-projects within these functional areas will be made by the LGs with the following
                         restrictions:
                         •        Allowable expenses include (i) maintenance of community and social infrastructure
                         (expenses related to furniture and fixtures, plant and machinery, and general equipment); and (ii)
                         expenses related to construction (new projects, completion of on-going/abandoned projects, and
                         rehabilitation of buildings, plant and machinery).
                         •        Disallowable/excluded expenses (negative list) are as follows: investments outside of the
                         Project Development Plan, purchase of cars, motor bikes, and bicycles; construction and furnishing
                         of LGs, Administration offices and residential accommodations; investments in loans, other micro,
                         credit schemes and other securities; payment of allowances to Assembly members and staff; and
                         acquisition of land . Exception could be granted to extend the city hall when it recognized by DGCT
                         as critical for the work needs. A request for waiver has to be approved by the DGCT, and submitted
                         for the Bank no objection.

                         Component 2: Targeted capacity support to Local Governments, regional and national institutions
                         and agencies (US$20m – GoM US$ 6.4m, World Bank and EU US$ 13.6)

                         The project, through support to the overall Government program, provides an integrated customized
                         package of support to systematically address the gaps in the local government system. The capacity
                         support will build and enhance the capacity of LGs to perform their mandates and strengthen the
                         supporting national framework for decentralized service delivery, thus enabling improved
                         performance. The programme applies a systematic and dynamic approach to capacity support, aimed
                         at ensuring that an appropriate enabling policy, regulatory and fiscal environment at the national
                         level support efforts to strengthen local government capabilities. The support is also designed to
                         ensure that the capacity of LGs is built in relation to functions that they actually perform (“learning
                         by doing”), and that they are held to account (by citizens and national government) and appropriately
Public Disclosure Copy




                         rewarded for the performance of these functions.

                         This component includes three subcomponents: (i) Targeted capacity support to local governments,
                         (ii) Institutional Support to regional and deconcentrated agencies, and (iii) Institutional support to
                         national agencies that facilitate effective delivery of the performance based grant.

                         Subcomponent 2-A: Targeted Capacity Support to Local Government (US$10m)

                         This subcomponent will provide targeted capacity support directly to LGs through two different
                         windows: (i) Mandatory but customized training in core aspects of LG management (including local
                         government regulations and laws, financial management, procurement, planning and budgeting, and
                         own source revenue management) linked to national framework of minimum qualifications and
                         conditions for different levels of staff in LGs, and (ii) A system of “mobile teams” staffed with key
                         personnel able to provide “just-in-time” on-the-job training and assistance. Both these type of
                         capacity interventions will strategically build upon the findings of the annual performance
                         assessments which will specifically identify weaknesses and strengths of each LG. The assessment
                         reports will provide valuable information for the identification of training programs and for the
                         elaboration of the work plans of the mobile teams.

                         The mandatory training will be based around the development of national training program with

                                                                      Page 4 of 11
                         minimum standards and modules for corresponding staff levels. The program will, in particular for
                         the first 2 years, be specifically targeted at the Secretary Generals as the core commune
                         administrative staff, as well as at the financial officer (RAF), but will also include other staff
Public Disclosure Copy




                         available as well as LG councilors. The mobile teams will consists of consultant teams staffed with
                         technical experts linked to the key performance areas of the annual assessments – i.e. financial
                         management, procurement and asset management, planning and budgeting, and environmental and
                         social safeguards. The teams will provide LGs with just-in-time support with particular focus on the
                         following core areas: (i) tracking and assisting LGs in addressing capacity gaps in the administration
                         and council level, (ii) supporting LGs to develop and/or revise as well as implement annual
                         investment plans, procurement plans, capacity building plans, and (iii) support the LG in ensuring
                         fiduciary and safeguards oversight and management of the activities under CPG.

                         Subcomponent 2 –B: Institutional Support to national, regional and deconcentrated agencies (US$9
                         million)

                         This sub component will provide support to national agencies and their deconcentrated departments
                         at regional and department level. Firstly, support will be provided to strengthen the capability of
                         central government to more effectively undertake their oversight and regulatory mandates, including
                         technical assistance to (i) operate the performance grant program including ensuring timely releases
                         of funds, regular reporting and auditing; (ii) more effectively monito r overall operation of the local
                         government system and the performance of individual LGs, including their financial management
                         and their management of environmental and social aspects; (iii) regulate the LG/decentralization
                         operating framework; develop and/or modify legislation as appropriate; and identify and arrange for
                         capacity support to LGs requiring further assistance. The support under this sub component will be
                         provided through specific performance contracts between the PCU and the relevant agencies
                         (including MIDEC, DGCT, Ministry of Finance, Cour des Comptes, Ministry of Environment,
                         MAED, MHUAT, MDEED, ARMP, and IGE) on delivery of specific outputs related to the effective
                         functioning of the performance based grant system. Provision of funding will be linked to specific
                         quantitative targets on an annual basis.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Secondly, support under this component will be provided to regional (the regional authorities
                         responsible for providing oversight and monitoring the implementation of programs at LG level in
                         each region) and deconcentrated agencies (Education, Health, Roads, Agriculture, Environment) as
                         well as the regional and department based Treasury offices of the Ministry of Finance to undertake
                         and perform their required, statutory roles facilitating decentralized service delivery. The particular
                         role depends on the institution in question but includes (i) planning and executing meetings with the
                         LGs, (ii) sharing plans and budgets with LGs, (iii) undertaking regularly monitoring visits to track
                         progress on projects and submitting timely reports to the national level as well as provide technical
                         support to the LG. For MoF regional offices, the particular tasks include (i) ensuring timely and
                         complete submission of financial reports from each LG to the national level, and (ii) providing
                         quality assistance and support to LGs in financial reporting. The support will be provided within a
                         performance framework based on a specific contract – i.e. each agency will have annual targets and
                         deliverables against which they will be measured every year. Support will be provided for logistical
                         expenditures and operational support only.

                         Component 3 – Project Management Support and Monitoring and Evaluation (US$ 12m) – (GoM US
                         $ 3.6m, World and EU US$ 8.4m)

                         This component will provide support to project management of the program. Specifically, support

                                                                      Page 5 of 11
                         will be given to the Project Coordination Unit to deliver the following tasks: (i) provide overall
                         project management and coordination of stakeholders, (ii) be overall responsible for all M&E of all
                         activities and components within the project, including oversight of compliance of LGs with
Public Disclosure Copy




                         fiduciary and safeguards requirements, (iii) contract and oversee independent consultant teams to
                         undertake the annual independent PA of all the participating LGs; (iv) a bi-annual audit of the quality
                         and independence of the PA process; (v) a baseline, mid-term and end-of-project (EOP) satisfaction
                         survey of residents in the participating LGs; (vi) an independent assessment of the effectiveness of
                         the mobile teams (at mid-term); (vii) an assessment of the effective use by the participating LGs of
                         investment resources (at mid-term and EOP); (viii) external financial audits of the participating LGs
                         and of the Special Account(s); and (ix) specialized studies to enhance overall operation of the LG
                         system.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         This is a national program, which will serve as a pilot to be implemented in 100 LGs from locations
                         across the country. The targeted LGs have been identified during preparation according to agreed
                         selection criteria, and the full list is provided as an Annex to the PAD. The ESMF details the physical
                         and socio-economic characteristics of the geographic regions where the LGs are located. Experience
                         gained during implementation will serve as the basis for the future scaling up of this government
                         program nation-wide, with possible support from the Bank through follow-up operations.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTN2)
                         Salamata Bal (AFTCS)
                         Yacouba Konate (AFTTR)
                         Dahlia Lotayef (AFTN2)
                         Melissa C. Landesz (AFTSG)
Public Disclosure Copy




                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The project has been classified environmental
                          BP 4.01                                             assessment (EA) Category B. During the
                                                                              preparation of the Environmental and Social
                                                                              Management Framework (ESMF) and the
                                                                              Resettlement Policy Frame (RPF), consultations
                                                                              with stakeholders helped to clarify the potential
                                                                              nature and size of activities to be funded through
                                                                              the Grant. Since the proposed menu of
                                                                              investments eligible for project financing is not
                                                                              exhaustive and in order to limit the potential
                                                                              negative impacts of sub-projects, the ESMF
                                                                              includes a negative list of projects that are
                                                                              excluded from financing under the project.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         Yes              The project will be implemented in 3 zones
                                                                              comprising protected areas, forests, pristine and/
                                                                              or biologically sensitive areas. The ESMF
                                                                              includes measures for protecting these areas and
                                                                              avoiding activities which may have a negative



                                                                      Page 6 of 11
                                                                            impact on them. The Project description includes
                                                                            a negative list precluding infrastructure
                                                                            investments in protected areas. All eligible
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            investments will on the other hand be screened to
                                                                            identify potential impacts on all aspects including
                                                                            the natural habitats, and recommended mitigation
                                                                            measures to avoid or at least minimize such
                                                                            impacts.
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                No             All investments financed under the project
                                                                            would be carefully screened in accordance with
                                                                            the procedures included in the environmental and
                                                                            social management framework to avoid any
                                                                            significant negative impacts.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09           No             The project will not finance any sub-projects
                                                                            involving the use of pesticides.
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes            Provisions have been included in the
                            BP 4.11                                         environmental and social management framework
                                                                            to ensure the requirements of the policy are met
                                                                            and the procedures are adhered to in the event
                                                                            that archaeological relics, historic sites or other
                                                                            physical cultural resources are discovered during
                                                                            any construction.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No             No Indigenous Peoples are associated with
                                                                            project area or activities.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes            Land acquisition may be required to facilitate
                            4.12                                            the development of some infrastructures. At this
                                                                            stage, only the general types of sub-projects are
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            known. Their scope, location and potential
                                                                            negative impact on the population are not known
                                                                            and will not be known until implementation.
                                                                            Hence, physical relocation and/or land acquisition
                                                                            will be determined based on individual site
                                                                            characteristics during the screening during
                                                                            implementation, using the Land Acquisition
                                                                            Assessment Procedure (LAA), a screening tool
                                                                            developed to determine the land status of project
                                                                            sites
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No             The project will not finance dams and is not
                                                                            dependent on dams for its activities.
                            Projects on International        No              Not applicable
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No               No project activities in disputed areas.
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues


                                                                    Page 7 of 11
                         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                           Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                            The project is expected to have limited, site-specific environmental and social impacts consistent
Public Disclosure Copy




                           with a Category B project. While the small civil works such as the construction of schools and
                           youth centers are expected to be relatively minor, other investments like road rehabilitation,
                           gutters, landfill rehabilitation, slaughterhouses rehabilitation, markets, bus terminals, parks, and
                           health centers may have moderate to significant negative impacts. The main negative
                           environmental and social impacts of the project are expected to come from the construction work
                           and could include: soil erosion, soil and water pollution, loss of vegetative cover (tree cutting),
                           inadequate disposal of construction site waste, traffic disruptions, noise and dust nuisances, risks
                           of accidents, unauthorized use of private; and, frustration within affected communities if
                           contractors do not recruit local workers. The borrower has prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed
                           an ESMF and an RPF which identify the potential impacts of the project along with associated
                           mitigation measures for each type of potential investment.

                          The ESMF outlines the screening and selection process of project activities which will help
                          classify projects very early at the project identification stage. Category A sub-projects will not be
                          financed under the project. Moreover, a negative list is included in the ESMF which details the
                          types of sub-projects that will not be eligible for financing under the project. Based on the EA
                          classification, the ESMF guides the LGs through the next steps in the environmental screening
                          process – EIA, ESMP, or adoption of simple mitigation measures with no further need for
                          environmental work.

                           It is expected that involuntary resettlement and land acquisition cases will be limited and will
                           result primarily from construction of infrastructures to meet the needs of the local communities.
                           Consequently, the borrower has prepared an RPF for the project. During project implementation,
                           for each investment activity, a simple screening procedure called Land Acquisition Assessment
                           (LAA) will be conducted. If the LAA determines that land acquisition and/or displacements are
Public Disclosure Copy




                           necessary, then appropriate RAPs or abbreviated ones will be prepared, approved and disclosed
                           before the concerned investment activity starts.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             No direct or long term adverse impacts are anticipated. Emphasis will be put on screening
                           procedures and the adequate implementation of the mitigation measures outlined in the relevant
                           safeguards instruments.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             To avoid displacement and land acquisition, the Communes will aim at providing projects sites,
                           free of claims, from the public land patrimony.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             The project will finance targeted investments in small-scale infrastructure to support the
                           development of 68 rural communes and 32 urban communes. An Environmental and Social
                           Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) have been
                           preparedto provide a transparent, standardized process for the identification and screening of
                           potential environmental and social impacts associated with any infrastructure investments at the
                           local level.


                                                                     Page 8 of 11
                         The ESMF indicates the corresponding mitigation and enhancement measures for each type of
                         environmental and social impact identified (whether negative or positive). This includes
Public Disclosure Copy




                         procedures and provisions for any physical cultural resources that might be discovered during
                         investments activities (chance finds procedures for contractors will be included in bidding
                         documents). The RPF for the overall project specifies the basic principles and procedures to be
                         followed in the event that investments would lead to involuntary relocation of project affected
                         people, loss of assets or access to assets.

                         Consultations on the ESMF and the RPF were held in March 2013 at the national level in
                         Nouakchott as well as in 6 LGs and both documents have been publically disclosed through the
                         project unit and the World Bank prior to appraisal.

                         While the government and the European Union are co-financing the project, it was agreed that the
                         Bank’s safeguards policies will apply to the project as a whole and to all sub-projects.

                         Capacity to plan and implement the environmental and social measures required under the project
                         is limited and the Ministry of Environment has limited experience with the World Bank's social
                         safeguard policies and in overseeing implementation of activities under Bank-funded projects..
                         The ESMF outlines the capacity building/strengthening needed at each level of government to
                         adequately implement the safeguards instruments and in alignment with Component 2 which will
                         provide targeted institutional capacity support to key actors at each level of government. Further,
                         the project will finance assistance to the government to undertake an assessment of existing legal
                         provisions and make recommendations on additional measures the government could adopt to
                         strengthen and mainstream practice in these areas.

                         During a consultation workshop organized on January 10, 2013 in Nouakchott that grouped
                         representatives from line Ministries, the EU, the WB and civil society to discuss issues related to
                         environmental and social safeguards, it was recommended that supportive measures to strengthen
Public Disclosure Copy




                         national capacity be taken at three different but complementary levels:

                         (i)Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development (MDEDD) whose Directory of
                         Environmental Control (DCE) would be in charge of providing, nationwide, technical support,
                         technical reviews and monitoring and evaluation of activities related to environmental and social
                         safeguards policies. Support would include recruitment of social development experts, training,
                         technical assistance, equipment and financial support. Support would also be extended to
                         representatives of the MDEDD at the regional and departmental level;

                         (ii) PCU which will be in charge of managing, preparing and coordinating environmental and
                         social safeguard measures and instruments at the level of the program, will be enforced in terms of
                         human resources, technical assistance, training, and internal monitoring; and

                         (iii) LGs whose capacity in terms of decentralized and de-concentrated human, material and
                         financial resources, will be strengthened to ensure an adequate implementation of safeguard
                         mitigation and conservation measures in accordance with international standards.

                         It is expected that the combined effect of this support would help improve the borrower capacity to
                         plan, implement and monitor environmental and social mitigation and conservation measures and
                         policies.

                                                                   Page 9 of 11
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                                Stakeholders include Local Governments, Central Government including line-Ministries
Public Disclosure Copy




                              associated with the project (such as Equipment et transport ministry, interior and decentralization,
                              Habitat Ministry, Environment and sustainable Development), de-concentrated services, Civil
                              Society Organizations, project affected communities in each of the 100 targeted LGs, and the
                              European Union.

                              During a consultation workshop organized on January 10, 2013 in Nouakchott project stakeholders
                              such as representatives from line Ministries, the EU, the WB and civil society discuss issues
                              related to environmental and social safeguards and the recommendations from the meeting
                              informed the project design.

                              In line with national and World Bank safeguards policies, the safeguards instruments (ESMF and
                              RPF) were prepared following a broad consultation approach, involving all relevant stakeholder
                              group listed above. Consultations on the ESMF and the RPF were held in March 2013 at the
                              national level in Nouakchott as well as in 6 LGs and both documents were publicly disclosed
                              through the project unit and the World Bank prior to appraisal.
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                      27-Mar-2013
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                   16-Apr-2013
                              For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                              Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                            "In country" Disclosure
                              Mauritania                                                       16-Apr-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Comments:
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)         Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                             report?
                                                                                               Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]

                                                                                               Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [     ]

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:        Brahim Ould Abdelwedoud
                            Approved By

                                                                        Page 10 of 11
                         Regional Safeguards Name:                   Date: 05-May-2013
                         Advisor:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sector Manager:     Name:                   Date:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                     Page 11 of 11
