                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                  Report No.: ISDSC14707

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Oct-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            China                            Project ID:      P129563
                            Project Name:       Anhui Yellow Mountain New Countryisde Demonstration Project (P129563)
                            Task Team           Rabih H. Karaky
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           00-undefined-0000                Estimated        27-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      EASCS                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector:             General transportation sector (25%), General water, sanitation and flood
                                                protection sector (25%), Other industry (25%), General agri culture, fishing and
                                                forestry sector (15%), Sub-national government administration (10%)
                            Theme:              Rural services and infrastructure (58%), Cultural Heritage (21%), Rural non-
                                                farm income generation (10%), Other rural development (6 %), Municipal
                                                governance and institution building (5%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                       67.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                         100.00
                              Local Govts. (Prov., District, City) of Borrowing Country                       0.00
                              Sub-borrower(s)                                                                 0.00
                              Total                                                                         167.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The higher level objective of the project is to raise the standards of living for rural households in
                           Huangshan municipality. The proposed project development objective (PDO) is to improve the
                           quality of services and income generating opportunities available to rural households in selected
                           villages of Huangshan municipality through: (i) upgrading infrastructure services, (ii) restoring and
                         preserving the existing cultural heritage assets, and (iii) promoting high value-added agriculture and
                         countryside tourism.
                         C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Anhui Yellow Mountain Countryside Demonstration Project would finance investments in 68
                         villages across four counties and three districts of Huangshan municipality. An asset based approach
                         that builds on public sector investment, and mobilizes local villages and private sector potential to
                         promote local economic development, is contemplated. It combines the conservation of cultural
                         heritage sites with the upgrading of rural infrastructure, and the promotion of income generating
                         opportunities from high value agriculture and countryside tourism. Interventions will be tailored to
                         local conditions and will be determined in consultation with line bureau staff, villagers groups,
                         private sector representatives and local government. Women are expected to constitute a large share
                         of project beneficiaries given the high rate of rural-urban migration among men in search for
                         employment in the cities. The project areas are selected based on criteria that aim at reducing the
                         existing development and income gaps among different villages on one hand, and at maximizing the
                         potential benefits from the existing cultural and natural heritage assets on the other hand. Sub-
                         projects are identified in consistency with the relevant sectoral/regional development plans and
                         strategies. The project will be financed by an IBRD loan of $100 million representing 60 percent of
                         total project cost. The rest will be financed by counterpart funds comprising allocations from the
                         seven project counties/districts and the municipality. The Bank loan will be passed on as grants to the
                         participating villages. The project would have four components.

                         Component A: Infrastructure Improvement
                         This component aims at improving village-level infrastructure and public services by financing
                         sustainable priority investments in rehabilitating and expanding service facilities while preserving
                         and enhancing the traditional and historic character of project villages. Based on village needs,
                         investments may include one or more of the following activities: i) village roads upgrading/
                         constructions, bridges, sidewalks, domestic and tourism pathways, car parks, street lightings and
                         associated sub-surface infrastructure services; ii) safe and reliable piped water supply either from
Public Disclosure Copy




                         mountain springs or municipal water supply systems with appropriate treatment technologies; iii)
                         storm water and waste water management through construction of drainage systems, sewer networks,
                         low cost and environmentally appropriate treatment and disposal facilities; iv) public toilets, garbage
                         bins and drop-off points. Garbage would be compressed at nearby solid waste transfer stations, and
                         disposed in existing sanitary landfills; v) river enhancements for flood control, environmental and
                         recreational uses, and vi) rehabilitation of minor irrigation and drainage canals.

                         Component B: Cultural Heritage Conservation & Preservation
                         This component aims at restoring, preserving, protecting and, where practicable, adaptively reusing
                         historic Huixhou style buildings for social, cultural, village environment, economic and tourism
                         development purposes. Investments would include interventions to: i) arrest physical deterioration;
                         improve structural integrity, physical safety and functionality; restore cultural and historic
                         authenticity; ii) improve presentation and signage, and enhance the core surrounding environment by
                         putting Hui-style façade onto non-traditional buildings [whitewashed walls and dark tiles, and fire-
                         proof walls (“Horse-head walls”)] to promote the visibility and positive image of the villages; iii)
                         promote and facilitate the adaptive reuse of local cultural heritage sites for social, cultural, and
                         economic development purposes; iv) document and disseminate information on important tangible
                         and intangible cultural heritage assets (buildings, particular social histories and practices, traditional
                         stories, music, dress and dance); v) strengthen cultural heritage preservation and promotion
                         institutions at the municipal and district/county levels and build their capacity to operate and
                         maintain these sites, promote them within the overall Huangshan tourism development plan, and
                         increase the level of communities’ involvement and appreciation for them to support of their
                         sustainability.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component C: Enhanced Economic Opportunities
                         This component aims at generating direct employment opportunities, increasing local household
                         incomes, and stimulating village economies by building on the above improvements of the
                         infrastructural services and cultural heritage, to promote the development of high-value agriculture
                         and countryside tourism. Investments would include support for: i) tourism-related conversion and
                         adaptation of farmhouses into countryside motels in partnership between farmers, village/community
                         management organizations and private companies; ii) training of villagers to develop their skills in
                         tourism promotion, management and service provision, communication, marketing and accountin g;
                         iv) improvement in the production and marketing of high-value local products such as tea, mulberry,
                         flowers, herb and grapes, and aquaculture; v) development of new production cooperatives and the
                         training of farmers in application of new “green” and organic agricultural technologies--including
                         initiatives to obtain green and organic certification; and vi) construction of markets for farmers to sell
                         their agricultural products and handicrafts; establishment of culture exhibition center for signature
                         products.

                         Component D. Project Management Support
                         This component aims at strengthening the capacity of PMOs at the municipal and district/county
                         levels to effectively implement, manage, monitor and report on project activities and progress. The
                         component will support: i) the establishment of effective financial and project management
                         information systems and project monitoring and evaluation system; ii) the purchase of necessary
                         systems hardware and software; iii) training of PMO staff to effectively utilize the systems; and iv)
                         other related consultancies and studies.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the               safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project is located in Huangshan Municipality at the far southern end of Anhui province.
                         Huangshan Municipality has 101 towns and townships, and around 900 villages with a land area of
                         9,807km2 and a total population 1.5 million. Huangshan is endowed with a rich natural environment,
                         and is the home-town of Huizhou Culture with abundant physical cultural resources, and is a leading
                         tourism destination in China.

                         The project covers 68 villages of Huangshan Municipality spread across 7 counties/districts, as
                         follows: Tunxi District (3 villages): Waibianxicun, Xinjiangcun, liucun; Huangshan District (12
                         villages): Xingcun, Raocun, Sanhecun, Chaoyangcun, Longshancun, Longyuancun, Baiguocun,
                         Zhongduncun, Yongfengcun, Guocun, Shuxicun, Xinfengcun; Huizhou District (8 villages):
                         Xixiancun, Lingshancun, Yangcun, Shuyuancun, Kunshacun, Qiankoucun, Fuxicun, Qiashecun; She
                         County (20 villages): Xucun, Tangyuecun, Zhengcun, Xiongcun, Maihuayucun, Shitancun,
                         Zhanqicun, Changxicun, Shenducun, Yuliangcun, Futacun, Baojiacun, Wengzhengshancun,
                         Hongqingcun, Hongfeicun, Zhangtancun, Miantancun, Jiekoucun, Sucun, Beiancun; Xiuning County
                         (7 villages): Yanpucun, Yanjiaocun, Tianlicun, Wanxincun, Lanshicun, Huaqiaocun, Huangcun; Yi
                         County (6 villages): Pingshancun, Guhuangcun, Shenchongcun, Bishancun, Tuanjiecun, Miaolincun;
                         Qimen County (12 villages): Taoyuangcun, Zhukoucun, Lixicun, Lunkengcun, Penglongcun,
                         Huanglongcun, Liuducun, Xiangtancun, Huanshacun, Luxicun, Mashancun, Kengkoucun.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           A project leading group has been established under the leadership of the vice mayor and with
                           members of DRC, Finance Bureau, Culture commission, Tourism Commission, Environmental
                           protection Agency, Housing Construction Committee, Planning Bureau, Department of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Transportation, Agriculture Committee, Water Conservation Bureau, Health Bureau. A central PMO
                           has also been established at Huangshan Municipality with 5 professionals and technical positions.
                           County/District level PMOs have been established, which will include designated and full time staff
                           in project preparation and implementation. Though Huangshan Municipality had previous experience
                           working with the Bank, it is the first time for the central PMO to independently work on Bank
                           financed project. The Bank team will provide PMOs staff with safeguards trainings to improve their
                           capacity to the satisfactory level.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Zhefu Liu (EASCS)
                           Feng Ji (EASCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             The impacts of the proposed project on the
                           BP 4.01                                            environment are expected to be overall positive.
                                                                              The project, by design, puts strong emphasis on
                                                                              the conservation of environmental and PCRs
                                                                              resources. Potential adverse environmental
                                                                              impacts are mainly related to small scale
                                                                              infrastructure construction, including soil
                                                                              erosion, spoil disposal, noise, dust and
                                                                              disturbance to local communities which could
                                                                              be readily mitigated. The increased number of
                                                                              tourists in the villages may also have some
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              adverse impacts (e.g. wastewater, waste), for
                                                                              which mitigation measures will be proposed in
                                                                              the EMP.
                                                                              The diversification of crop system (e.g. tea,
                                                                              rose) potentially involve pest management
                                                                              which will be addressed in a Pest Management
                                                                              Plan.
                                                                              Based on the available information and the field
                                                                              visits, it is proposed that the project is classified
                                                                              as category B project after considering the type,
                                                                              location, sensitivity, and scale of the project,
                                                                              and the nature and magnitude of the potential
                                                                              environmental impacts due to the following: (i)
                                                                              the project mainly includes improvement of the
                                                                              existing infrastructure such as alleys
                                                                              improvement and pavement within villages,
                                                                              improvement of existing roads, and small scale
                                                                              new infrastructure at village level, including
                                                                              piped water supply system, public toilets,
                         sewers, and small scale sewage treatment
                         facilities), rehabilitation of existing village
                         irrigation and drainage canals where hazardous
Public Disclosure Copy




                         chemicals in the silt are not a concern; (ii) the
                         project is located in areas (e.g. villages) that
                         have been heavily influenced by human
                         activities and not in protected areas; (iii) the
                         project does not have any significant adverse
                         environmental impacts that are sensitive,
                         diverse or unprecedented. The mitigation
                         measures for these adverse impacts can be
                         readily designed.

                         The borrower will prepare an EA which will
                         involve two stages of public consultations, the
                         first stage once the ToR of the EA has been
                         prepared, and the second stage when the draft
                         EA Report has been prepared. The EA Report
                         will be reviewed and cleared by the Bank and
                         disclosed at the project areas in the local
                         language (accessible to the locally affected
                         people) and at the Bank's Infoshop in the
                         English language prior to appraisal. The EA
                         will describe in detail:

                         (i)      The project activities;
                         (ii)     The project geographical settings,
                         including its area of influence considering each
Public Disclosure Copy




                         type of project activities (e.g. road construction,
                         water supply, wastewater and solid waste
                         management);
                         (iii)    The legal framework and World Bank
                         requirements;
                         (iv)     The institutional framework for project
                         preparation and implementation for each type of
                         project activities;
                         (v)      Potential adverse environmental
                         impacts for each type of project activities;
                         (vi)     An EMP/ Environmental Code of
                         Practice (ECOP) (implementable and
                         monitorable), including for each type of
                         construction activities to be financed under all
                         three components. This will also include
                         measures to enhance positive impacts when
                         applicable;
                         (viii) An institutional strengthening plan; and
                         (ix)     Results of the consultations with project
                                                                 stakeholders.
                                                                  An EMF will also be prepared prior to appraisal
                                                                 to identify any additional site specific impacts
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 that are not likely to be covered by the EMP/
                                                                 ECOP (see vi above) to develop additional site
                                                                 specific measures, if any needed. This EMF will
                                                                 also include screening procedures to identify
                                                                 and mitigate potential impacts (including those
                                                                 impacts on PCRs) from activities that are likely
                                                                 to be identified during project implementation,
                                                                 if any.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       TBD   Based on the available information, the project
                                                                 activities are not likely to affect protected
                                                                 reserves, known as natural habitats, or
                                                                 established or proposed critical natural habitats.
                                                                 Further assessment will be done during project
                                                                 preparation.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    The project will not finance activities that would
                                                                 involve any conversion or degradation of
                                                                 critical forest areas or related critical natural
                                                                 habitats as defined under the policy.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes   A Pest Management Plan will be prepared for
                                                                 subprojects that involve agricultural activities
                                                                 under Components A and C of this project
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   A Physical Cultural Resources (PCR)
                         BP 4.11                                 Management Plan will be prepared for
                                                                 Component B of the project (incorporated in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 EA/EMP) and the TT will ensure that :
                                                                 (i)       A PCR assessment is conducted by a
                                                                 nationally recognized institution, experienced
                                                                 PCR consultants together with the EA
                                                                 consulting team
                                                                 (ii)      PCR inventories are developed and
                                                                 mapped through information obtained from
                                                                 literature sources, consultation with authorities,
                                                                 communities etc.
                                                                 (iii)     A PCR Management Plan covering all
                                                                 PCR subprojects will be developed
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No    The task team visited many of the villages in the
                                                                 project area and had meetings with the
                                                                 municipal department in charge of the minority
                                                                 affairs. The team concluded there are no ethnic
                                                                 minorities in the project area. Thus, OP 4.10 is
                                                                 not triggered.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be
                         4.12                                    prepared prior to appraisal to cover all project
                                                                                                                                 activities triggering OP 4.12. Since there is a
                                                                                                                                 possibility that sub-projects maybe dropped or
                                                                                                                                 replaced after project appraisal, a Resettlement
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared and
                                                                                                                                 disclosed prior to appraisal.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         TBD                           Based on the available information, this policy
                                                                                                                                 is not likely to be triggered. Proposed water
                                                                                                                                 supply schemes will use mountain springs or
                                                                                                                                 urban water supply systems. Accounting for the
                                                                                                                                 possibility that water supply schemes may draw
                                                                                                                                 water from reservoirs controlled by existing
                                                                                                                                 small dams, the policy is considered TBD at this
                                                                                                                                 stage. Further assessment will be conducted
                                                                                                                                 during project preparation.
                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Jul-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Next preparation mission will review the EA safeguards documents prepared by the consultants
                                      based on the recommendations made by the ID mission and the TORs reviewed by the Bank team.
                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Rabih H. Karaky

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan (RSA) Date: 15-Oct-2012
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Mark R. Lundell (SM)                  Date: 12-Oct-2012




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
