                                                                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                            CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC156
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Nov-2011

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                       Nicaragua                                Project ID:                      P127088
                              Project Name:                  Adaptation of Nicaraguas Water Supplies to Climate Change (P127088)
                              Task Team Leader:              Irina I. Klytchnikova
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 08-Mar-2012                                   Estimated Board Date:            04-Sep-2012
                              Managing Unit:                 LCSEN                                    Lending Instrument:              Technical Assistance Loan
                              Focal Area:                    Climate change
                              Sector:                        General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%)
                              Theme:                         Climate change (100%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                       Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                         0.00
                                   Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                                                          0.00
                                   Special Climate Change Fund                                                                                                6.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                      6.00
                              Environmental Category:        B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              B. Global Environmental Objective(s)

                              10.       The PDO is to enhance Nicaragua's adaptive capacity to the impacts of climate change in the water supply sector through strengthening
                              water resources management, which ultimately would contribute to guarantee a sustainable water supply for the population of Nicaragua.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              C. Project Description

                              The proposed project will be designed and implemented in close coordination with the World Bank#s investments in Nicaragua#s water supply
                              sector: PRASNICA. Close coordination will also be ensured with the recently approved #Environmental Program for Disaster and Climate Change
                              Risk Management# supported by the IADB (US$ 10 mln), the Nordic Development Fund (US$3 mln) and the GoN (US$ 0.5 mln).
                              The proposed operation will finance five components: (i) institutional strengthening for integration of climate impacts in water resources
                              management, (ii) protection of micro-watersheds and water supply sources from climate-induced vulnerabilities (droughts and floods), (iii)
                              investment in supply- and demand-side measures to increase drinking water availability in vulnerable areas through supply-augmenting and
                              efficiency measures, (iv) coastal wetland protection and reduction of vulnerability in Corn Island to sea level rise in order to reduce climate-induced
                              impacts on drinking water supplies in vulnerable areas, and (v) project management and monitoring. All of the activities proposed will be additional
                              to the ongoing and planned investments by the GoN and by the World Bank ($60 mln from PRASNICA and PRASMA projects) and will finance
                              actions that will contribute to the strengthening of the resilience of Nicaragua#s critical water supplies to climate change. The Project will be
                              implemented by the Emergency Social Investment Fund (FISE) and the Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources (MARENA) in coordination
                              with other relevant government agencies and stakeholders.
                              The proposed SCCF-GEF Project will support the following specific components:
                              Component 1. Institutional strengthening for integration of climate impacts in water resources management (Cost: SCCF-GEF US$1.0 million).
                              This component will support the institutional strengthening to facilitate the mainstreaming of climate change in Nicaragua's water supply sector.
                              Given the uncertainty and evolving nature of climate impacts there is a need to promote flexible and adaptive management and planning regimes.
                              For this to occur, the project will support (i) implementation of a climate change education and training program for municipal and national level
                              technical experts and decision makers, (ii) systems to strengthen and regularize the monitoring of climatic changes, of water quality, disaster and
                              early warning systems and other critical parameters, and (iii) the strengthening of the institutional capacity of FISE and MARENA for addressing
                              climate change impacts on water resources.
                              Component 2. Protection of water sources and the use of economic instruments to strengthen water supplies# resilience to climate change (Cost:
                              SCCF-GEF US$2 million). This component will help strengthen the implementation of watershed and water source protection measures through
                              enhancing the resilience of water sources to climate change. This will include the implementation of pilot programs to protect micro-watersheds
                              using a combination of institutional and economic incentives to convert to sustainable land uses. The specific criteria for the selection of the pilot
                              sites and the pilot areas will be defined during project preparation. The proposed actions to protect micro-watersheds and wetlands under this
                              component and Component 4 will not involve the restriction of access of local communities to natural resources in legally designated parks and
                              protected areas.

                              Component 3. Demand and supply side measures to protect water sources and improve the efficiency of water use (Cost: SCCF-GEF US$1.6
                              million). This component will support: (i) water harvesting, water storage, rehabilitation and construction of additional wells and development of
                           alternative water sources in drought prone areas, and (ii) introduction of approaches to strengthen the efficiency of water use and reduce climate
                           vulnerability of drinking water supplies (e.g., introduction of water saving technologies and metering). This component will also enhance life quality
                           of women and children, who regularly spend several hours a day collecting water from distant, often polluted sources. As in Component 2, the
                           specific criteria for the selection of the pilot sites will also be defined during project preparation.
                           Component 4. Coastal wetland protection and reduction of vulnerability to sea level rise to reduce climate-induced impacts on drinking water
                           supplies (Corn Islands) (Cost: SCCF-GEF US$1.0 million). This component will support: (i) implementation of a wetland protection and restoration
                           program to reduce vulnerability to sea level rise, (ii) implementation of a groundwater management program, (iii) institutional strengthening of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           water utility and the municipality of Corn Islands to address the effects of climate change on water availability, (iv) establishment of a groundwater
                           monitoring system.
                           Component 5. Project Management and Monitoring (Cost: SCCF-GEF US$0.4 million). This component will provide support for project
                           implementation management, monitoring and evaluation and coordination.

                            D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                           The activities of the project (Component 1) will be implemented nationwide. The location of the activities of Components 2 and 3 have not been
                           defined. Activities of Component 4 will focus in Corn Island located in the Atlantic coast of Nicaragua within the #Regi Automa del Atltico Sur#
                           (RAAS). The general location of activities supported by Components 2 and 3 (pilot programs to protect micro-watersheds and investment in
                           climate adaptation by improving water demand and supply conditions) will be defined during project preparation, without specifying specific
                           locations in order to allow flexibility in the project#s implementation.

                            E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

                           The project will have two implementing agencies: FISE and MARENA. Both agencies have adequate capacity to comply with the World Bank#s
                           safeguard policies. FISE has a core group of experts in Managua which coordinates with at least 20 technical specialists (architects and
                           engineers) in FISE#s 17 regional offices throughout Nicaragua. FISE has developed best practice environmental procedures.
                           MARENA also has sufficient capacity to comply with World Bank Safeguard Policies. MARENA is the National Environmental Authority of
                           Nicaragua, which formulates, proposes, manages, and supervises compliance of national environmental policies, such as environmental quality
                           norms and management and sustainable use of natural resources. MARENA also manages the national Environmental Impact Assessment
                           System and facilitates the incorporation of environmental analyses in the plans and programs of municipal and sector development, such as the
                           activities specified by the National Development Plan.
                           This SCCF project complements the PRASNICA project for which FISE is the implementing agency. An Environmental Performance review will be
                           carried out in the process of SCCF project preparation to identify current environmental management procedures, monitoring, and stakeholder
                           participation and grievance mechanisms in place. This information will be used to define the appropriate environmental safeguards instruments
                           (Environmental Management Framework or an Environmental Impact Assessment with and Environmental Management Plan) for the SCCF
                           project.

                            F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

                           Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo (LCSHS)
                           Ruth Tiffer-Sotomayor (LCSEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Public Disclosure Copy
                         Safeguard Policies Triggered                                      Yes           No           TBD                                             Explanation
                         Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                                 ✖                                   A team consisting of the environmental specialist, specialists from
                                                                                                                                 FISE and consultants will carry out an environmental review of the
                                                                                                                                 performance of FISE safeguards instruments under the PRASNICA
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 project. The review will show whether safeguards procedures of
                                                                                                                                 thePRASNICA project are adequate for the activities proposed by
                                                                                                                                 the SCCF project, what adjustments are needed, and will draw
                                                                                                                                 lessons learned that can improve the overall implementation of the
                                                                                                                                 safeguards policies by the proposed project. The results of the
                                                                                                                                 environmental review will define the scope of the EA required for the
                                                                                                                                 project#s activities (EIA, EMP or EMF). The environmental
                                                                                                                                 safeguards instruments prepared will apply to all of the project#s
                                                                                                                                 activities including those to be implemented by FISE and by
                                                                                                                                 MARENA.
                                                                                                                                 The Environmental Management Framework (EMF) will define the
                                                                                                                                 principles and criteria for carrying out a screening of subprojects and
                                                                                                                                 if needed, an environmental assessment and mitigation plans as
                                                                                                                                 needed. Specifically, the EMF will incorporate the screening,
                                                                                                                                 implementing and monitoring procedures agreed with FISE and
                                                                                                                                 MARENA and based on the results of the environmental review.
                                                                                                                                 Overall, the project is expected to have positive environmental
                                                                                                                                 impact as its objective is to strengthen the resilience of water
                                                                                                                                 resources to climate change, population and pollution pressures.
                                                                                                                                 However, some of the project#s activities may have unintended
                                                                                                                                 adverse impacts which are expected to be localized and of low
                                                                                                                                 impact.

                                                                                                                                 The positive environmental impacts may include the following: (i)
                                                                                                                                 collaborating with PRASNICA in bringing water to poor local
                                                                                                                                 communities, (ii) preparation of studies that will provide state of the
                                                                                                                                 art information on vulnerability of water resources to climate change
                                                                                                                                 and adaptation in the selected sites (including determination of
                                                                                                                                 water balances, water quality, groundwater aquifer surveys and
                                                                                                                                 modeling), (iii) implementation of restoration actions to prevent
                                                                                                                                 deterioration of critical coastal water supplies, (iv) implementation of
                                                                                                                                 a PES program to enhance conservation of water resources in
                                                                                                                                 critical areas, (v) improvement in the management of water
                                                                                                                                 resources in critical areas which will potentially be affected by
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 climate change, (vi) enhancing the participatory process in the
                                                                                                                                 selection of appropriate climate change measures in selected
                                                                                                                                 communities, and the definition of environmental educational
                                                                                                                                 programs.
                                                                                                                                 The potential adverse environmental impacts of the project activities
                                                                                                                                 may include: (i) capture of springs and other surface water for
                                                                                                                                 drinking water supplies systems which might affect aquatic
                                                                                                                                 ecosystems,(ii) capture of groundwater drinking water supplies
                                                                                                                                 which might affect local aquifers, (iii) typical effects of construction of
                                                                                                                                 water systems related to noise, dust, clearing of some vegetation,
                                                                                                                                 cement and solid wastes, (iv) potential accidents during excavations
                                                                                                                                 of wells (e.g. hand excavated wells).
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                         ✖                                   Some project activities may include management and conservation
                                                                                                                                 activities in coastal wetlands and inland forested ecosystems. A
                                                                                                                                 biodiversity and water resources assessment will be performed in
                                                                                                                                 the areas prior to the implementation of any of the project#s
                                                                                                                                 restoration activities. This assessment will create the baseline data
                                                                                                                                 on the conditions of the selected sites in terms of water quality and
                                                                                                                                 quantity, presence of endangered species and the overall
                                                                                                                                 environmental conditions of the area, as well as its current
                                                                                                                                 vulnerability to climate change.
                                                                                                                                 The type of management and restoration activities supported by the
                                                                                                                                 project to be agreed upon with the GoN may include: (i)
                                                                                                                                 environmental regulatory coastal plans, (ii) restoration of riparian
                                                                                                                                 corridors, (iii) community monitoring plans, (iv) and any other
                                                                                                                                 measure defined in the EMP or EMF.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                  ✖                                   Component 4. Coastal ecosystems:
                                                                                                                                 The project may implement riparian restoration activities of costal
                                                                                                                                 ecosystems. These activities , to be defined in a participatory
                                                                                                                                 process during project preparation and implementation, may support
                                                                                                                                 the restoration of degraded and vulnerable coastal habitats using



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Safeguard Policies Triggered                                      Yes           No           TBD                                             Explanation
                                                                                                                                 native costal species such as of mangroves, among others. The
                                                                                                                                 expected benefits of these activities include contributing to the
                                                                                                                                 restoration of ecosystems functions and services especially in critical
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 areas currently used as water sources for drinking water systems.
                                                                                                                                 Component 2. Inland ecosystems:
                                                                                                                                 Though the implementation of a PES program, the project will seek
                                                                                                                                 to conserve forest land and other sustainable land uses, ultimately
                                                                                                                                 conserving water resources (by enhancing infiltration, reducing
                                                                                                                                 sediment runoff) in critical micro-watershed of selected sites.
                                                                                                                                 Reforestation programs might be supported in these sites and native
                                                                                                                                 species will be recommended to plant, but due to high poverty in
                                                                                                                                 some of these areas and their productive potential, fruit trees and
                                                                                                                                 other type of species could also be used.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09                                                          ✖
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                              ✖                                   The EMF/EMP will contain measures and guidelines in the case of
                                                                                                                                 any chance finds of archeological materials. The EMF/EMP will
                                                                                                                                 include an archeological diagnostic of the project sites. The EMF
                                                                                                                                 will incorporate procedures for screening out potential project sites
                                                                                                                                 with known examples of archaeological, paleontological, historical,
                                                                                                                                 or other culturally significant remains.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                       ✖                                   Consistent with the OP/BP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples, the
                                                                                                                                 borrower will carry out consultations in a purposeful sample of
                                                                                                                                 communities (indigenous and non-indigenous) in representative
                                                                                                                                 areas likely to be affected/benefit from each project component, and
                                                                                                                                 specifically in Corn Island under component 4. The social
                                                                                                                                 assessment will build on the experience of the Bank-financed rural
                                                                                                                                 water and sanitation project PRASNICA presently being
                                                                                                                                 implemented by the Social Investment Fund (FISE). As the precise
                                                                                                                                 areas of intervention are not known during preparation, an
                                                                                                                                 Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) will be formulated
                                                                                                                                 and approved by the borrower (MARENA and FISE) and the
                                                                                                                                 Indigenous organizations involved, to ensure (a) Indigenous and
                                                                                                                                 Afro-Nicaraguan peoples in the Caribbean Coast as well as the
                                                                                                                                 Pacific region are not affected negatively by the project, and in the
                                                                                                                                 event of any negative impact, mitigation measures are taken in
                                                                                                                                 consultation with the affected communities; (b) Wide support by the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 Indigenous and Afro-Caribbean peoples of the project; (c) Access
                                                                                                                                 and participation of indigenous peoples in the project design,
                                                                                                                                 implementation and ex-post sustainability phases; and (d) culturally-
                                                                                                                                 adequate planning and delivery of project results. The IPPF will
                                                                                                                                 ensure a process of permanent consultations throughout the life of
                                                                                                                                 the project and the installation of a local/regional/national grievance
                                                                                                                                 redress mechanism. The framework will include the procedure to
                                                                                                                                 prepare and submit an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) agreed on by
                                                                                                                                 the borrower with those affected/benefitted, for each case where the
                                                                                                                                 policy is triggered. Each IPP will need to be approved by the Bank
                                                                                                                                 prior to subproject implementation. Prior to project appraisal, the
                                                                                                                                 IPPF will be submitted by the GON to the Bank for approval. It will
                                                                                                                                 also need to be published in the Infoshop of the Bank, and on the
                                                                                                                                 web pages of MARENA, FISE and other institutions involved, prior
                                                                                                                                 to project appraisal. Finally, the IPPF will be included in the
                                                                                                                                 Operational Manual of the project.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                                              ✖                      None of the proposed actions under the project, such as activities to
                                                                                                                                 protect micro-watersheds in Component 2 and wetlands in
                                                                                                                                 Component 4 will involve the restriction of access of local
                                                                                                                                 communities to natural resources in legally designated parks and
                                                                                                                                 protected areas.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                                        ✖
                         Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                                                      ✖        Some of the proposed project activities might be located in the
                         7.50                                                                                                    Greater San Juan River basin, which is a transboundary basin
                                                                                                                                 shared with Costa Rica. During preparation, the possible impacts of
                                                                                                                                 project activities on the San Juan River will be assessed with the
                                                                                                                                 GoN, the Bank Lawyer and other specialists. Given the nature of the
                                                                                                                                 proposed activities, the team expects the impacts to be negligible,
                                                                                                                                 so exception to notifying Costa Rica will be sought.
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                                            ✖                      At present, some transboundary areas around the River San Juan
                                                                                                                                 are subject to disputes between Nicaragua and Costa Rica. The


                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                                                                                                                                    project will not support any activities in disputed areas or in areas
                                                                                                                                    with direct discharge into San Juan River.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
Public Disclosure Copy




                           A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Dec-2011
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
                              should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                The studies are expected to be completed by February 1, 2012, before the Decision Meeting on the Project.

                         IV. APPROVALS
                            Signed and submitted by:
                            Task Team Leader:                                Name: Enos E. Esikuri                                                                                 Date: 18-Oct-2011
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                 Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                                                                        Date: 20-Oct-2011
                            Comments:
                            Sector Manager:                                  Name: Karin Erika Kemper (SM)                                                                         Date: 09-Nov-2011
                            Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                             form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
