                                                                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                            CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSC361
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Apr-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                       China                                   Project ID:                       P126856
                              Project Name:                  CN-Jiangxi Poyang Lake Basin and Ecological Economic Zone Small Town Development Demonstration Project
                                                             (P126856)
                              Task Team Leader:              Ximing Zhang
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 20-Nov-2012                                  Estimated Board Date:             16-May-2013
                              Managing Unit:                 EASCS                                   Lending Instrument:               Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                        Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (30%), Agricultural extension and research (20%), General water,
                                                             sanitation and flood prote ction sector (20%), Irrigation and drainage (20%), Public administration- Health (10%)
                              Theme:                         Rural services and infrastructure (60%), Other environment and natural resources management (20%), Water
                                                             resource management (20%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                      Amount
                                   Borrower                                                                                                                179.21
                                   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                                   150.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                   329.21
                              Environmental Category:        B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              B. Project Objectives

                              The development objective of the project would be to improve the public services for the beneficiaries through improvement of prioritized
                              infrastructure in selected small towns of Jiangxi Province.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              C. Project Description

                              Tentatively, total project cost is estimated US$ 329.21 million. The project would comprise the following three components and main activities:

                              Component A: Small Town Infrastructure (indicative US$ 317.4 million). This would be the main investment component of the project. This
                              component would construct/improve varies public infrastructures to improve people’s accessibility to the infrastructures/facilities. The component
                              would fund priority infrastructure investment in 4 sub-activity areas:

                              A1. Road Construction and Improvement. (US$ 167.98 million) Construction and improvement of artery roads in urban areas, construction of link
                              roads between towns and outside trunk roads and between towns and main townships;

                              A2. Flood Protection and Drainage Infrastructure. (US$ 72.22 million) Dike strengthening and pump station modernization for greater flood
                              protection;

                              A3. Water Supply and Wastewater Infrastructure. (US$ 10.75 million) Construction of new water supply distribution and treatment, and wastewater
                              collection facilities;

                              A4. Other Urban Services Infrastructure. (US$ 66.47 million) The construction of other essential urban infrastructure – school, hospital and medical
                              facilities, wetland and river restoration and Public Bus Center;

                              Component B: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building (indicative US$ 6.6 million). This component would fund activities associated with
                              institutional strengthening such as workshops, staff training, study tours, technical assistance for research and development, policy studies. This
                              component will be designed to support enhanced institutional capacity to plan, design, construct and sustainably manage modern, high quality
                              infrastructure for the delivery of improved services particularly in the areas of transport systems, water and waste water services and flood
                              protection systems. In particular, the component will fund activities such as: (i) technical, managerial and financial skills training for government
                              staff at provincial and county/city levels; (ii) research and development; (iii) office furniture, and computer hardware and software; and (iv)
                              international and domestic study and training tours.

                              Component C: Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) (indicative US$ 5.4 million). This component would support the PMOs
                              at the various jurisdictional levels responsible for the implementation management of the project to ensure effective and efficient management of
                              implementation performance, outputs and outcomes. It would fund the introduction of modern, computer based management information systems
                           (MIS), develop and conduct project M&E systems to enhance project implementation, management capability at each level and improve
                           coordination of the PMO structures; and human resources development.

                            D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                           Jiangxi consists of 100 counties (county level cities and districts), and over 96% of them are located in the Poyang Lake Basin and eco-economic
                           area. After discussions with Jiangxi PDRC, PFB, PPMO and relevant county governments, it was agreed that the project location selection should
                           be in line with the following criteria: (1) located in the Poyang Lake Ecological Economic Area or Poyang Basin Area; and (2) have relevant
Public Disclosure Copy




                           industry development basis for development.
                           The project will be located in Poyang lake basin and Poyang Lake Ecological Economic Area in Jiangxi Province, which includes 11 counties (or
                           county level cities): Jinxian County of Nanchang Municipality, Luxi County of Pingxiang City (prefecture level), Gan County, and Ruijin City (county
                           level) of Ganzhou City (prefecture level), Jingangshan City (County level) of Jian City (prefecture level); Yifeng County of Yichan City, Nanfeng
                           County of Fuzhou City, Dexing City (County level) of Shangrao City (Prefecture level), Hengfeng County of Shangrao City and Gongqingcheng city
                           (County level) of Jiujaing City (prefecture level).

                            E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

                           The implementing entity is the Jiangxi Provincial Development and Reform Commission (PDRC), which is a strong government agency with the
                           capacity to coordinate with different parties. The Project Management Office (PPMO) is located within this organization. The provincial and county
                           level PMO structure has already been established at all levels. The PMOs will be responsible for all tasks associated with project preparation and
                           implementation. The PPMO and 4 of the 11 counties have had recent experience with the World Bank funded Jiangxi Integrated Agricultural
                           Modernization Project (P065463), which was completed satisfactorily in 2010. The key staff on Safeguards involved in that project at provincial
                           and county levels will continue on in the respective PMOs set up for this project. For the other seven counties that have no experience with Bank
                           funded projects, the Bank will further assess their capability during project preparation. The PMOs will work under the guidance of the Finance
                           Bureau and Leading Groups established at Provincial and County levels.

                           It was agreed that PPMO would select and contract properly qualified and experienced institutes for the preparation of safeguard documents. Such
                           Institutes should have ample experience with preparing these documents

                            F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

                           Zong-Cheng Lin (EASCS)
                           Yiren Feng (EASCS)
                           Yan Sun (EASCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

                            Safeguard Policies                              Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01             Yes                The proposed project includes the construction of new roads and improvement
                                                                                             and upgrading existing roads, construction one new water supply plant, and
                                                                                             expansion of one water supply plant, improvement and enhancement education
                                                                                             facilities to bridge the rural-urban gap, provide increase flood protection, reduce
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             pollutants discharge to water bodies, and improve the river environment, and
                                                                                             improve accesses to and provision of health services and facilities.

                                                                                             Based on the full list of the proposed subprojects from towns of 11 Counties,
                                                                                             there will be small size town-level and urban-rural infrastructure and facilities,
                                                                                             including:
                                                                                             (a) Transport infrastructure (total13 roads and its associated facilities such as
                                                                                             waste water collection pipelines). Construction and improvement of artery roads
                                                                                             in urban areas, construction of link roads to the outside and link roads between
                                                                                             main towns and townships;
                                                                                             (b) Existing dikes strengthening (total 5);
                                                                                             (c) Water Supply Infrastructure. Construction of one new water supply plant
                                                                                             (20,000t/d) and main pipe (total 20km) in Gongqincheng, and expansion of one
                                                                                             existing water supply plant (from 20,000 t/d to 30,000t/d)and main pipe (5.9km
                                                                                             main pipe) in Luxi County;
                                                                                             (d) Other urban service infrastructure (small civil works). Construction of public
                                                                                             bus station and expansion of hospital in Gongqincheng, construction of Chinese
                                                                                             medicine hospital in Gan County, and middle school in Yifeng County ;
                                                                                             (e) Wetlands protection in Ruijin County.
                                                                                             The proposed investments are small scale in nature and are a combination of a
                                                                                             few new and rehabilitation of several existing facilities. Based on the initial
                                                                                             environmental screening of the all subprojects, the project is classified as
                                                                                             Category B project due to its type, location and scale, natural and magnitude of
                                                                                             the potential impacts during the construction and operation.
                                                                                             Instruments to be prepared prior to appraisal:
                                                                                             ? Individual ECOPs for rehabilitation of existing dykes and roads, new septic
                                                                                             tank, new water supply network, sewerage interceptor, plantation and any other
                                                                                             small scale civil works.
                                                                                             ?For new roads especially that are more than 24 meters wide ECOPs will be
                                                                                             supplemented by site specific EMPs
                                                                        ? Health care management plan for the two hospitals
                                                                        ?For school standard design with sanitation, water supply, and drainage
                                                                        (including solid and liquid waste)
                                                                        ? ECOPs for the construction of wet lands designed to treat water
                                                                        ?Environment Analysis with EMP for the three investments: (i) Xianghuyao front
                                                                        dam wetland restoration and protection area, (ii) forest-swamp protection area,
                                                                        and (iii) construct 90 ha of ecological wetland in Lucao Lake.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        ?EMP for two water supply plants (one new and one expansion) .
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04              Yes    Dike strengthening subproject of Qinglan Lake in Jinxian County:

                                                                        Qinlan lake is a provincial wetland natural reserve in Jinxian County, which was
                                                                        established in 1997, and located 2km away from the western part of the county
                                                                        town, the protection target of the natural reserve is mainly the migratory birds
                                                                        and its natural habitats. The area of the natural reserve is 1000ha, with 850 ha
                                                                        core zone and 150 ha buffering zone. Qinlan lake is undergoing wetland
                                                                        degradation partly due to some aquaculture, livestock breeding activities around
                                                                        and within the natural reserve, soil erosion and weak management. The project
                                                                        will strengthen 21 km long dike along the Qinglan lake for flood control.

                                                                        The proposed flooding protection project may have potential adverse impacts,
                                                                        such as noise, flying dust, waste water and solid wastes (if not well managed
                                                                        and discharged into the lake) during construction, and mainly noise impact by
                                                                        the two pumping stations during operational phase. However, these impacts
                                                                        during construction phase are expected to be localized, temporary, and limited,
                                                                        with appropriate mitigation measures in place, these impacts can be avoided or
                                                                        mitigated to acceptable level. For the noise impact during operational phase,
                                                                        the project would adopt advanced low noise equipment and mitigation measures
                                                                        including sound barriers to ensure the noise level around the pumping stations
                                                                        comply with national noise standards.



                                                                        Mian river wetland protection subproject in Ruijin City:

                                                                        Mian River, located at the source of Gan river which is the main inflow of Poyang
                                                                        Lake, is an important tributary of the Gan River upstream. Mian river is also the
                                                                        important drinking water sources for the towns and villages it pass by. The
                                                                        untreated sewage, domestic wastes, and agricultural non point sources pollution
                                                                        in recent years leads to gradual deterioration of water quality, water ecology
                                                                        function damage, ecological function degradation of riparian wetlands and many
                                                                        other environmental and ecological problems. The water quality decreased from
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        Class!`-!a in the upstream to Class !b-!c in the downstream of Mian River.

                                                                        To cope with the environmental challenges of the Mian River, Ruijin City
                                                                        proposes to establish Mian River provincial level wetland park, by protection of
                                                                        waterfowl habitats, protection of drinking water sources, clean up and collection
                                                                        of solid wastes, interception of sewage, increase of self purification capacity of
                                                                        water body, monitoring and education etc.

                                                                        The proposed wetland component may have potential adverse impacts such as
                                                                        noise, flying dust, waste water, solid wastes mainly during the construction
                                                                        phase, these impacts are localized, temporary and limited, with appropriate
                                                                        mitigation measures in place, the impacts can be avoided or mitigated to
                                                                        acceptable level. During the operation, the proposed project is of great
                                                                        importance for the protection of Gan River Basin water quality and ecological
                                                                        environment of the Poyang Lake basin.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                       No     Project activities will not affect forest areas, the project includes small size
                                                                        plantation with 140ha. However, the purpose of plantation in this project is to
                                                                        control soil erosion, the project will not commercially harvest the plantation;
                                                                        ECOP for plantation will be prepared for the project as part of EA. The project
                                                                        will not trigger the forests Policy.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09                  No     The project will not procure pesticides or increase use of pesticides.

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   TBD     Based on current information available, there are no any physical cultural relics
                                                                        found in project areas. In the EA process, related information will be checked
                                                                        and confirmed by relevant authorities. Chance finds during construction may
                                                                        occur and relevant clauses will be included in all bidding documents and
                                                                        construction contracts. If the sub-projects will affect household graves, the policy
                                                                        will need to be triggered as per OP4.11.
                                Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                      No                     The mission conducted a screening for Indigenous Peoples through meeting
                                                                                                                        and communication with PMO/design institute staff and local township
                                                                                                                        authorities, and visits to the proposed project sites and villages. The screening
                                                                                                                        concluded that that there are no ethnic minority communities in the project’s
                                                                                                                        area of influence. Upon request from the mission, the Civil Affairs Bureau of
                                                                                                                        Jiangxi Province also confirmed that these proposed project cities/counties and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        townships were not traditionally ethnic minority concentrated areas, and that
                                                                                                                        there were no ethnic minority groups in these areas, as defined in OP 4.10.
                                                                                                                        Therefore, the mission concluded that OP4.10 does not apply to this project.
                                Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                                Yes                    Through field visits and meeting discussions with local authorities, the project
                                                                                                                        identification mission conducted a preliminary screening of subprojects and
                                                                                                                        concluded that all subprojects of 11 counties may involve land acquisition and
                                                                                                                        resettlement. Thus, the OP4.12 Involuntary Resettlement will be triggered.
                                                                                                                        During project preparation, a Resettlement Plan (RP) for each county will be
                                                                                                                        prepared by County PMOs and a consolidated RP to summarize the overall
                                                                                                                        resettlement at the provincial level will be prepared by the PPMO in accordance
                                                                                                                        with the policy requirements. Meanwhile, since some components such as water
                                                                                                                        supply pipeline network alignments may not be clearly identified during the
                                                                                                                        Feasibility Study stage, a resettlement Policy framework (RPF) for the entire
                                                                                                                        Project Implementation Period prepared by PPMO will also be required. In
                                                                                                                        addition, there is a linked project identified in one of the project county, Luxi, that
                                                                                                                        is the Shankouyan reservoir construction. This reservoir construction was
                                                                                                                        recently completed and it will become the water resources for a water supply
                                                                                                                        plant to be extended under this project. Therefore, this project will require due
                                                                                                                        diligence review on the reservoir construction in accordance with the policy.
                                Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                          Yes                    Although the project does not finance the construction of any new dams but it
                                                                                                                        will withdraw water from a dam under construction. The Longjiang River
                                                                                                                        Integrated Management Subproject in Longshi Township of Jingganshan City
                                                                                                                        will rely on the performance of the existing dam, whose failure could cause
                                                                                                                        extensive to or failure of the Bank-funded sub-project.

                                                                                                                        The dam safety in the task team expert will (a) inspect and evaluate the safety
                                                                                                                        status of existing dams, their appurtenance, and performance history; (b) review
                                                                                                                        and evaluate the owner’s operation and maintenance procedures; and (c)
                                                                                                                        provide written reports of findings and recommendations for any remedial work
                                                                                                                        or safety-related measures necessary to upgrade the existing dams to an
                                                                                                                        acceptable standard of safety. The PPMO and relevant county PMOs would also
                                                                                                                        assign special staff to assist the Bank team to ensure the project is implemented
                                                                                                                        in line with the OP4.37.
                                Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                          No                     No sub-project will be located in international waterways. The policy is not
Public Disclosure Copy




                                7.50                                                                                    triggered and no actions are required.
                                Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                              No                    No project area will be located in disputed areas. The policy is not triggered
                                                                                                                        and no actions are required.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 26-Sep-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
                                  should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                    A.            Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS would be prepared:

                                    B.            For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:

                                    C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing should
                                    be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.

                         IV. APPROVALS
                                Task Team Leader:                                Name: Ximing Zhang
                                Approved By:
                                Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                 Name: Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan (RSA)                                                           Date: 24-Apr-2012
                                Sector Manager:                                  Name: Paul Kriss (SM)                                                                                 Date: 18-Jan-2012




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
