                                                                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                             APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSA1193
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Aug-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                       China                                   Project ID:                      P127036
                              Project Name:                  China GEF Large-City Congestion and Carbon Reduction Project (P127036)
                              Task Team Leader:              Zhi Liu
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 17-Sep-2012                                  Estimated Board Date:            08-Jan-2013
                              Managing Unit:                 EASCS                                   Lending Instrument:              Specific Investment Loan
                              Focal Area:                    Climate change
                              Sector:                        General transportation sector (100%)
                              Theme:                         Climate change (50%), Other urban development (25%), Pollution management and environmental health (25%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                      Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                       86.33
                                   Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                                                        18.18
                                   Total                                                                                                                   104.51
                              Environmental Category:        B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Global Environmental Objective(s)

                              The development objective of the project is to help establish a policy framework to alleviate traffic congestion and reduce GHG emissions in large
                              cities in China primarily through public transport development and travel demand management, and demonstration of local and global benefits of
                              such policy framework in pilot cities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              3. Project Description

                              Component 1: Technical Assistance at the National Level. It would include the following 3 sub-components.

                              1.1. Development of TDM policies and guidelines, which includes: (i) Synergy Policy for Transport Planning and Urban Master Planning; (ii) Case
                              Study on International and Domestic TDM; (iii) Performance Evaluation Method for TDM; (iv) Manual for China Urban Transport TDM; and (v)
                              Policy Framework for TOD Implementation in China.

                              1.2. Development of the Public Transit Metropolis Action Plan, which includes: (i) Evaluation System and Policy Framework for PTM; (ii)
                              Distribution and Function Rationalization of Urban Transport Hubs; (iii) Guideline for the Development and Application of Advanced Public
                              Transport Systems; and (iv) Data Exchange Mechanism and Specification for Urban Integrated Passenger Transport Hubs.

                              1.3. Establishment of the Urban Transport Energy and Emission M&E System, which includes: (i) urban transport energy statistical system; and (ii)
                              urban transport GHG emission monitoring and evaluation system.

                              Component 2: Pilot Demonstration in three large cities, i.e., Suzhou, Chengdu, and Harbin.

                              2.1. Pilot Demonstration in Suzhou

                              Public Transport Improvement. This would include: (i) optimization of Suzhou's public transport information service system, including procurement
                              of on-board devices and technical assistance on travel information service system; (ii) planning of 2 bus dedicated lanes, including alignment
                              planning and design and procurement of 50 buses; and (iii) clean energy bus procurement.

                              Travel Demand Management. This would include: (i) a Suzhou urban TDM study and parking planning; (ii) formulation and pilot implementation of
                              differential parking policy; and (iii) an implementation plan for congestion pricing in Suzhou's Old Town.

                              Capacity Building. This would include: (i) an urban transport M&E system based on real-time data, including technical assistance on urban
                              transport evaluation and indicator system and provision of traffic data collection equipment; (ii) a TOD study in Suzhou; (iii) an urban transport CO2
                              emission database for Suzhou; and (iv) a project website.

                              Project Management.

                              2.2. Pilot Demonstration in Chengdu
                                                                                                                                                                        Page 1 of 4
                         Public Transport Improvement. This would include: (i) bus priority, including technical assistance on bus priority schemes, provision of on-board
                         enforcement cameras; and pilot junction channelization; (ii) Area Traffic Control System upgrade; (iii) bus stop improvement, including design and
                         pilot implementation of accessibility zones, and provision of electronic information signs; and (iv) technical assistance on public transport network
                         optimization and BRT system study.

                         Travel Demand Management. This would include: (i) design and provision of traffic information dissemination and guidance system; (ii)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         development and implementation of parking management measures utilizing differential pricing mechanisms; and (iii) technical assistance on
                         congestion alleviation policies.

                         Capacity Building. This would include: (i) development of an integrated urban transport database and model; and (ii) establishment of an urban
                         transport CO2 emission database for Chengdu.

                         Project Management.

                         2.3. Pilot Demonstration in Harbin

                         Public Transport Improvement. This would include: (i) construction of 6km bus dedicated lanes and procurement of clean energy buses; (ii) a
                         number of planning study for public transport; and (iii) public transport dispatch center upgrading, including hardware procurement and software
                         development.

                         Travel Demand Management. This would include junction channelization and traffic management in selected areas.

                         Capacity Building. This would include: (i) hardware procurement and software development for the taxi management system; (ii) data center for
                         transport data integration, (iii) domestic and international training; (iv) an urban transport CO2 emission database for Harbin; and (v) traffic impact
                         analysis.

                         Project Management.

                         Component 3: Capacity Building. This would include: (i) establishment of a national public transport database; (ii) development of a web-based
                         project website; (iii) technical assistance on TDM, parking management, congestion pricing and public transport service improvement and transport
                         CO2 emission M&E; and (iv) workshops and knowledge dissemination; and (v) training for national and local officials and technical staff.

                         Component 4: Monitoring & Evaluation. This would include: (i) M&E of project progress; (ii) M&E of urban transport CO2 emission reduction from
                         3 pilot cities; and (iii) regular review and dissemination of project intermediate outcomes.

                         Component 5: Project Management. This would include staffing for National PMO, project management, project website maintenance,
                         implementation advisory to pilot cities, organization of workshops and conferences, etc.

                         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         The proposed project will support above-mentioned components activities in three cities in China, i.e. Suzhou, Chengdu and Harbin. Physical
Public Disclosure Copy




                         activities are limited to marking of bus lanes, renovation of a few bus stops, junction channelization for a few intersections.

                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                         Zhefu Liu (EASCS)
                         Peishen Wang (EASTS)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                            Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01              Yes              Given the limited civil works under the proposed project (i.e. junction
                                                                                           channelization, bus stop improvement, marking of bus lanes), the project has little
                                                                                           environmental impacts, which mainly related to the construction activities, such as
                                                                                           traffic and accessibility disturbance, nuisance of dust and noise, waste
                                                                                           management and safety issues. Such impacts are of small scale and site-specific,
                                                                                           and can be readily avoided/mitigated with good management practices for
                                                                                           construction and operation. Therefore, the proposed project is Category B as per
                                                                                           OP4.01.

                                                                                           Two EMPs are prepared for the Chengdu and Harbin project cities respectively
                                                                                           where there will be certain civil works. The EMPs include the screening of potential
                                                                                           environmental impacts and include a set of standard Environmental Code of
                                                                                           Practices (ECOP) to be followed during project implementation to mitigate the
                                                                                           potential environmental and social impacts. The EMP mitigation measures are also
                                                                                           in line with the general principle requirements of IFC's EHS General Guidelines.

                                                                                           One Environmental Management Framework is prepared for Suzhou where only a
                                                                                           bus-lane feasibility is to be conducted in the project. The EMF specifies EA
                                                                                           requirement to be followed as part of the feasibility study.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                      No               The project is mainly in the central urban areas, and there are no natural habitats
                                                                                           involved. This policy is not triggered.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                               No               This policy is not triggered. The project will not involve any forests.


                                                                                                                                                                      Page 2 of 4
                               Pest Management OP 4.09                        No               This policy is not triggered. The project is not expected to procure pesticides or
                                                                                               impact on pest management practice.
                               Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11         No               Little physical activities are all limited to the ROW of the existing urban streets and
                                                                                               intersections. There is no physical cultural resource to be affected. This policy is
                                                                                               not triggered. However, chance-find procedures is included in the ECOP of the
                                                                                               EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                               Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                  No               The Bank's Social Safeguards Specialist has already screened the project areas in
                                                                                               the three engaged cities and determined that no minority communities defined by
                                                                                               the Bank OP 4.10 are found in the project areas and therefore, OP 4.10 will not be
                                                                                               triggered.
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12            No               It's confirmed during preparation that no land acquisition and resettlement are
                                                                                               required under the project. All civil works defined under the project will be carried
                                                                                               out within the existing right-of-way or on public land.
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                      No               The project will not involve any dams.
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP      No               The project will not involve any international waterways.
                               7.50
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60          No               The project will not involve any disputed areas.


                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any potential l arge scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                  Environment.
                                 The physical works of the project include marking of bus lanes, channelization improvement of selected intersections and improvement of some
                                 bus stops. The potential impacts of the proposed project are mainly construction related impacts, i.e. traffic and accessibility disturbance,
                                 nuisance of dust and noise, waste management and safety issues, as well as proper design for safety during operation. Such impacts are of
                                 small scale and site-specific, and can be readily avoided/mitigated with good management practices for construction and operation.. There are
                                 no large-scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts envisaged in the project.

                                 Social Impacts
                                 The proposed civil works, including dedicated bus lanes, junction improvement, bus rapid transit lines, public transport integration, bus platform
                                 improvement, and pedestrian access improvement, will be carried out on existing right-of-ways or available public land. All project activities will
                                 be limited to the ROW of existing urban street, no land acquisition and resettlement are expected for the three cities under the project. The
                                 Bank safeguards policy OP/BP 4.12 is not triggered.
                               2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                                  There is no anticipated future activities associated with/or induced from the project in the project area.
Public Disclosure Copy




                               3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                                  The proposed activities (dedicated bus lane, intersection channelization, bus top improvements) are inherently alternatives for the existing
                                 situation, and will positively contribute to the alleviation of traffic congestion, improvement of safety for traffic and pedestrians.
                               4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                                  and implement the measures described.
                                  Environment

                                 Due to the little environmental impacts which can be readily avoided, minimized and mitigated with good design and construction management,
                                 an EMP has been developed by each the of project city. The EMPs include screening of potential environmental impacts, and a set of standard
                                 Environmental Code of Practices (ECOP) that will be included in the contract during project implementation to mitigate the potential
                                 environmental and social impacts. The ECOP addresses traffic and social disturbance, construction nuisance of dust and noise, waste
                                 management, safety issues and chance-find procedures for physical cultural resources.
                                 The envisaged environmental impacts are well known to the urban infrastructure projects, and are of little scale due to very limited physical
                                 works. The project cities are all with advanced social and economic development in China, there exists established legal procedures and
                                 institutional capacity to manage such impacts related to urban construction activities. Furthermore, the Bank task team's engagement will
                                 further enhance the implementation of environmental safeguards measures.
                               5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                                  on potentially affected people.
                                   Since the specific bus stations, intersections or bus-lane road sections to be improved are not known at this stage, targeted and meaningful
                                 public consultation could not be conducted at this moment. However, the public consultation procedure is built into the EMPs and EMF, and will
                                 be conducted once specific project location is identified and prior to start of civil works. The EMPs and EMF have been disclosed in the public
                                 internet websites of the project cities, and Infoshop.

                               B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                               Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                                 Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                   31-May-2012
                                 Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                               08-Jun-2012

                                                                                                                                                                           Page 3 of 4
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                           05-Jun-2012
                              For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                              Directors
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                            disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                            C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                              Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?               Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?               Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language       Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for    Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?               Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard     Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same         Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Task Team Leader:                    Zhi Liu
                            Approved By:
                            Sector Manager:                      Name Mark R. Lundell (SM)                                                   Date: 21-Aug-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                                                  Page 4 of 4
