                                              INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC4310

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Jun-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 21-Jul-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            China                            Project ID:     P145533
                            Project Name:       China Contaminated Site Cleanup Project (P145533)
                            Task Team           Qing Wang
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           12-Jun-2014                      Estimated       18-Dec-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      EASCS                            Lending         Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            GEF Focal Area:     Persistent Organic Pollutants

                            Sector(s):          Other industry (90%), Public administration- Industry and trade (10%)
                            Theme(s):           Pollution management and environmental health (94%), Environmental policies
                                                and institutions (6%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     75.00                       Total Bank Financing:       0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                                  Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          60.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                           15.00
                              Total                                                                       75.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective (also the global environmental objective) is to support the
                           Chinese government to establish the policy and regulatory framework for contaminated sites, and
                           pilot the identification and remediation of sites contaminated with POPs and other hazardous
                           chemicals.
                           C. Project Description
                         The Government of China is showing keen interest in the Project that would support its investment
                         programs to address the above-mentioned issues of contaminated site cleanup and redevelopment at
                         both the national and the provincial levels. At the national level, the project will focus on technical
Public Disclosure Copy




                         support to the development of the national-level legal and regulatory framework for contaminated
                         sites in general, POPs contaminated site inventory, and international and national knowledge sharing.
                         At the provincial level, two provinces as pioneers with strong commitment, ownership, willingness to
                         control and cleanup of contaminated sites will be selected during the project preparation stage as the
                         demonstration provinces. FECO will rapidly initiate discussions during project preparation with
                         potential provinces and municipalities including Hunan, Shandong, Jiangsu, Guangdong, Liaoning,
                         Hubei, Beijing, and Chongqing regarding their interest to participate to the project as these provinces
                         and cities have been at the forefront of efforts on contaminated sites management. Other provinces
                         will also benefit from targeted knowledge sharing and training activities and events on contaminated
                         site cleanup under the Project. The provincial approach will allow combination of policy actions,
                         technical assistance and cleanup investments to address systematically site contamination issues in
                         China, which also ensures sustainability of the project outcomes.

                         The project will include the following three components to achieve the PDO.

                         a)        Component 1: Support to the development of the regulatory framework and capacity
                         building for management of contaminated sites and development of a national priority list of POPs
                         contaminated sites. This component will cover three sets of activities. First, this component will
                         establish a set of policies, regulations and technical guidelines at the national level and in the two
                         demonstration provinces for addressing contaminated sites in general (not only POPs sites). The
                         preparation, introduction and application of technical guidelines and standards will cover the entire
                         cleanup process, including preliminary site assessment, site inspection, priorities listing based on risk
                         assessment, site investigation, cleanup design - cleanup objectives and technology selection based on
                         risk mitigation and cost-effectiveness, and detailed analysis against established evaluation criteria,
                         review of site cleanup proposals, cleanup implementation (including dismantling of buildings on the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         site), cleanup completion with verification, and site redevelopment. These policies and guidelines
                         will also include requirements related to community involvement, enforcement, emergency response,
                         certification of qualified site-cleanup service providers, and a wide variety of characterization,
                         monitoring, and remediation technologies throughout the cleanup process.

                         Secondly, this component will provide training programs for different target audiences on laws,
                         policies, guidelines, standards, the site cleanup process and reporting requirements, and conduct
                         public awareness-raising activities and knowledge sharing workshops on cost-effective containment
                         and cleanup technologies. Outreach will be organized for stakeholders to see the cleanup process and
                         results under Component 2.

                         Thirdly, this component will carry out the preliminary assessment and site inspection to evaluate the
                         risks at POPs sites: mainly POPs pesticides, e-waste (including PBDEs- polybrominated diphenyl
                         ether and other POPs if any) and PFOS contaminated sites, as well as mercury contaminated sites (as
                         relevant) and to produce a national priorities list stored in a management information system (MIS).
                         The list is intended primarily to guide the country in determining which sites warrant further
                         investigation and cleanup.

                         b)      Component 2: Cleanup or contamination control of sites contaminated with POPs (may
                         contain other hazardous chemicals). This component will finance site cleanup and/or contamination
                         control. Different site-specific cleanup financing mechanisms, cleanup technologies and
                         contamination control measures are expected in order to diversify the demonstration results. The
                         project might target the cleanup and/or contamination control of five to eight sites.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sites are expected to be selected from the two demonstration provinces. Sites will be selected
                         considering the following factors: sites are found that can be cleaned up readily and profitably
                         because of high redevelopment potential or where health risks are so urgent that immediate action is
                         needed; sites which are exposing high risks but cleanup is not feasible in short term need
                         contamination control measures; cost-effectiveness of cleanup technologies; financial mechanisms;
                         and the total number of sites to be included in the project will depend on mostly and the project
                         budget and the availability of co-financing. Detailed site selection criteria will be determined and
                         agreed with the project counterparts at the early stage of project preparation.

                         As the final cleanup approach and budget of a site can only be determined following detailed site
                         investigations, technical cleanup design and environment management plans (EMPs), it is not
                         possible to confirm and prepare all sites during project preparation for direct implementation of
                         remediation works. Therefore, it is proposed that a list of candidate sites with diversified situations
                         will be prepared during project preparation based on available information. It is expected that
                         preparation work (site investigation, technical cleanup design and EMPs) for the first one or two sites
                         will be completed during project preparation so that cleanup works could start for these sites in the
                         first year of project implementation. Cleanup works for the other demonstration sites will be
                         prepared during project implementation. This approach allows a certain staging of remediation works
                         under this component for the various sites, which will be beneficial to support Component 1 and the
                         preparation of other demonstration sites will follow the sites that started earliest. The lessons learned
                         from all the demonstration sites will feed the process of policy development under the Component 1.

                         c)       Component 3: Project management, monitoring and evaluation. This component will support
                         monitoring and evaluation of the project outcome indicators and results, administration of project
                         activities, and the project launch and completion workshops.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Project Cost and Duration. The total project budget will be determined during project preparation;
                         however, it is currently estimated about US$75 million with the main sources of financing to be
                         provided by the government and/or site owners/users (US$ 60 million) and the GEF grant (US$ 15
                         million). See an estimated cost breakdown in the Bank PCN stage/GEF datasheet. The GEF project
                         preparation is expected to begin in July 2013 with GEF and the Bank’s approval envisaged for 2014
                         and an implementation period of six years (2015-2020).

                         Project Preparation Grant. A GEF project preparation grant (PPG) of US$ 300,000 requested for
                         project preparation will support the following activities: (1) design of component 1: hold stakeholder
                         meetings, carry out relevant studies needed for fine-tune the project activities at the national and
                         provincial levels; (2) preparation of the site cleanup activities through identifying two demonstration
                         provinces and candidate sites, including holding stakeholder meetings, collecting and studying site
                         baselines, and developing a list of candidate sites. One or two sites will undergo comprehensive site
                         investigation, risk assessment, cleanup technology evaluation, and environmental and social
                         assessment as basis for these sites to be remediated early during project implementation, and (3)
                         establishment of project management teams at the national and provincial levels, hiring technical
                         consultants for project preparation activities and project preparation management.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The regulatory framework establishment, institutional capacity building and development of national
Public Disclosure Copy




                           priority list of POPs contaminated sites will be policy and institutional strengthening activities at
                           national level. Cleanup of selected sites in demonstration provinces will be identified during project
                           preparation stage. The selected sites will be locations where POPs will be stored, buried or where
                           materials can be found that are contaminated with POPs such as soil or structures. Typically, these
                           sites would be former chemicals (pesticides) production locations and industrial waste disposal sites.
                           The selection of a limited number of sites for remediation under the project will be done during the
                           project preparation. The project program will also allow for additional site selection for remediation
                           during project implementation under selection criteria to be detailed during project preparation.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The project national implementing agency will be the Foreign Economic Cooperation Office (FECO)
                           of the Ministry of Environmental Protection (MEP). FECO has been designated as the national lead
                           implementing agency for all POPs activities for implementation of the POPs Convention since 2002.
                           It has prepared and implemented 12 POPs projects financed by the GEF, five of them are supervised
                           by the World Bank and three of the five have been completed. FECO has accumulated experiences
                           and capacity of managing POPs projects according to the Bank’s safeguard and fiduciary
                           requirements. The project will also involve provincial governments and the project-implementing
                           units (PIUs) at the provincial level will be established. When selecting demonstration provinces, the
                           capacity of local governments will be evaluated based on the past working experiences.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Peishen Wang (EASIN)
                           Ning Yang (EASCS)
                           Meixiang Zhou (EASCS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The proposed project will support cleanup of a
                           BP 4.01                                              few POPs contaminated sites in demonstration
                                                                                provinces. Given the significant potential
                                                                                environmental and health risks of POPs
                                                                                contamination and the possibility that hazardous
                                                                                materials may need to be managed (excavated,
                                                                                repackaged, transport for ex-situ treatment) as
                                                                                part of remediation works, the project is
                                                                                proposed to be a Category A project as per
                                                                                OP4.01. But the category will be revisited at the
                                                                                QER stage when site information are available.

                                                                                It is planned that two demonstration sites will be
                                                                                identified during project preparation stage and
                                                                                cleaned during the first year of project
                                                                                implementation, and a few other sites will be
                                                                                identified and cleaned-up during the
                                                                 implementation stage. For the first two sites
                                                                 identified during project preparation, specific
                                                                 EA documents will be prepared including
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 Environmental Site Assessment and
                                                                 Environmental Management Plan (cleanup
                                                                 plan). For other sites to be identified during
                                                                 project implementation stage, an Environmental
                                                                 and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
                                                                 will be prepared.

                                                                 Policy formulation under the project Component
                                                                 1 will also be in line with the Bank’s safeguard
                                                                 requirements.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No    The contaminated sites are brown-field
                                                                 locations and unlikely to be located in any
                                                                 natural habitats, therefore the policy is not
                                                                 triggered.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    The project is very unlikely to affect any forests.
                                                                 The policy is not triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The project does not involve the procurement or
                                                                 use of pesticides. The policy is not triggered.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   The site cleanup will likely involve significant
                         BP 4.11                                 earth moving. Screening of presence of Physical
                                                                 Cultural Resources will be conducted during
                                                                 site investigation, and chance-find procedures
                                                                 will be included in the EMP.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     TBD   The cleanup of POPs contaminated sites is not
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 decided at this stage. It is very unlikely expected
                                                                 to have adverse impact on indigenous people
                                                                 community in selected sites, but this can only be
                                                                 determined after the specific demonstration sites
                                                                 are selected. Whether Tthe IP policy is triggered
                                                                 or not is to be determined.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   The site cleanup is likely to involve land
                         4.12                                    acquisition, house demolition and involuntary
                                                                 resettlement; therefore the policy is triggered
                                                                 based on a precautionary consideration. A
                                                                 resettlement policy framework and/or action
                                                                 plan will be prepared.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No    The project doesn’t involve any dams. The
                                                                 policy is not triggered.
                         Projects on International        No     The project doesn’t involve any international
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                    waterways. The policy is note triggered.
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No     The project is not located in any disputed area.
                         7.60                                    The policy is not triggered
                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-May-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      After the two demonstration provinces are identified in September 2013, the safeguard-related
                                      studies will be initiated.

                                      In addition, at the QER stage when a list of potential sites for Component 2 is available, a separate
                                      safeguard meeting will be organized to discuss these sites and the criteria that will be used for
                                      final site selection. Moreover, the safeguard categorization will be revisited by then.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Qing Wang

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name:                                                                                                                      Date:
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Mark R. Lundell (SM)                                                                                                 Date: 21-Jul-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
