INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA499
b  Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Jan-2012
0
1 1. BASIC INFORMATION
U)     1. Basic Project Data
0
0
.U,
Q      Country:                Uzbekistan                   Project ID:              P122773
.      Project Name:          Advanced Electricity Metering Project (P122773)
Task Team Leader:      Leiping Wang
Estimated Appraisal Date: 09-Feb-2012                Estimated Board Date:    27-Mar-2012
Managing Unit:         ECSS2                         Lending Instrument:      Specific Investment Loan
Sector:                General energy sector (100%)
Theme:                 State-owned enterprise restructuring and privatization (80%), Climate change (10%), Regulation and competition
policy (10%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Financing Source                                                                        Amount
Borrower                                                                                   38.10
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                     180.00
Total                                                                                     218.10
Environmental Category: C - Not Required
Is this a Repeater project? No
2. Project Objectives
The project development objective is to reduce commercial losses of UE's three regional power distribution companies in Tashkent City, and the
Oblasts of Tashkent and Syrdarya by improving their metering and billing infrastructure, and the commercial management system.
3. Project Description
The Project has three components. Each component is described below:
a)    Component 1: Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI). This component includes supply, installation, and commissioning of (i) advanced electricity
M     meters (AEMs) for around 1.2 million low voltage consumers and at low voltage sections of relevant distribution transformers of the three PESs; (ii)
o     data concentrators, and communication systems among various sub-systems, the centralized management system in Tashkent and AEMs of both
low voltage and, medium and high voltage customers of the three regional distribution companies; and (iii) hardware and software of the metering
data management (MDM) systems, each for one of the three regional distribution companies.
Component 2: Centralized Energy Data management (EDM) /Billing/Archive System. This component includes (i) design, supply, installation,
customization and commissioning of the hardware and software, as well as training and after-sale services of a centralized EDM/billing/archiving
center in Tashkent and its applications for the three PESs; and (ii) migration of all the existing billing data to the databases of the new EDM/billing
system.
Component 3. Management Efficiency Improvements and Project Implementation Support. This component includes: (i) assessment of electricity
consumption patterns and physical connection conditions of various customers to identify opportunities for reducing commercial losses, starting
from large consumers and to develop and implement a loss reduction strategy; (ii) business process re-engineering and institutional capacity
strengthening for the operation of the new AMI and better utilization of rich information collected by the AMI to reduce commercial losses; (iii)
project communication program to educate consumers of the benefits of the new system, how it works and the responsibility of the consumers to
pay the electricity bills on time; (iv) project implementation supervision and administration; and (v) financial audits and possible technical
assistance for further customization of the EDM system.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)
Tashkent City, the Oblasts of Tashkent and Syr Darya
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Agnes 1. Kiss (ECSOQ)
6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered?  Explanation (Optional)
Page 1 of 3


﻿Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01  No
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No
Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No
Pest Management OP 4.09             No
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11  No
0
O       Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12  No
0      Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No
.Ln     Projects on International Waterways OP/BP  No
Q      7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60  No
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant andlor irreversible impacts:
The project is likely to have minimal or no adverse environmental impacts. In fact, the project is expected to reduce the technical and none
technical losses in the distribution networks and in this way will reduce the mainly thermal power generation in the country, resulting in a
potential reduction of C02 emissions.
On the social side, a social assessment was conducted which found that overall the project will have positive impacts for the poor and
vulnerable. Customers' major concern of electricity supply is the low supply reliability; most people believe that paying electricity bill is an
important duty and are indignant at those who engage in electricity theft. Electricity is not used for heating or cooking and the cost of lifeline
electricity consumption is US$ 2 to 3/month. Therefore the proposed project is not expected to significantly increase the financial burdens to the
poor. The project will improve customer services by (a) improving the efficiency of the existing service centers of the three distribution
companies in the project areas; (b) introducing 24-hour customer service hotline with emergency response services for customers; (c)
establishing a complaint-redress mechanism; and (d) developing a participatory public information program. In addition, the project will
significantly improve the transparency and fairness of the metering reading, billing and fee collection of the three power distribution companies.
These will be socially beneficial to all the electricity consumers in the project areas.
2. Describe any potential indirect andlor long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
N/A
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
N/A
0
0      4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
a)       and implement the measures described.
On environmental side, new meters provided under the project are specified considering environmental compatibility with regard to:
0
*       Critical materials: No components with critical content materials (mercury, cadmium, cobalt etc.); and
Q        *       Manufacturer processes: The manufacturer shall have the manufacturer processes certified according ISO 14001.
-O       On social side, although the project triggers no social safeguard policies, it does raise two potential social risks: the risk of increased power
disconnection of the poor and vulnerable, and redundancies of staff controllers now reading old meters. The social assessment recommended
that procedures be developed to ensure that the customers are given sufficient notice to clear any outstanding bills before their power is
disconnected, and that opportunities for skills development training be offered to any affected employees, so that they could be absorbed in the
UE organization performing other tasks. Both recommendations are reflected in the project design. In addition, a project communications
program will be implemented to educate customers of how the system works and the benefits of the new system.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
on potentially affected people.
N/A
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
If the project triggers the Pest Management andlor Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Auditior EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
N/A
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [ X]
Page 2 of 3


﻿Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [ X]
that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [ X I
the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
o       Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [ X]
C-)
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard  Yes[  ]  No[  ]  NA X]
impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
0
Z)       Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [ X]
.L      been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?
Ill. APPROVALS
0-     Task Team Leader:           Leiping Wang
Approved By:
Sector Manager:            Name Ranjit J. Lamech (SM)                              Date: 11-Feb-2012
0
P                                                                                                               )
0
0
.U)
Q
Page 3 of 3


