                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC883

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Jul-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Indonesia                       Project ID:      P128832
                            Project Name:     NATIONAL PROGRAM FOR COMMUNITY EMPOWERMENT IN RURAL
                                              AREA (PNPM RURAL 2012-2014) (P128832)
                            Task Team         Susanne Holste
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       27-Aug-2012                       Estimated        27-Nov-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: EASID                              Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                              Instrument:
                            Sector:           Water supply (20%), Irrigation and drainage (20%), Rural and Inter-Urban
                                              Roads and Highways (20%), Pre-primary education (20%), Sub- national
                                              government administration (20%)
                            Theme:            Participation and civic engagement (45%), Rural services and infrastructure
                                              (35%), Social Inclusion (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                 3750.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                     750.00
                              Total                                                                    4500.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           As under the ongoing PNPM-Rural IV operation, the PDO would remain for villagers in PNPM-
                           Rural locations to benefit from improved socio-economic and local governance conditions.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed PNPM 2012-2014 project will channel additional resources to PNPM-Rural. Since
                           1998 and starting with the Kecamatan Development Project (KDP), the Bank has committed
                           financing totaling $2.8 billion to KDP/PNPM.
                         The objective of rural villagers benefiting from improved socio-economic and local governance
                         conditions will continue to be achieved through: (a) provision of direct grants to communities in a
                         transparent manner to finance an open menu of basic socio-economic infrastructure and revolving
Public Disclosure Copy




                         funds for women’s saving and loans groups; (b) support to communities participation in an open and
                         inclusive planning process; and (c) enhancing the capacity of central and local governments to
                         partner with community organizations in service provision.

                         The basic architecture of the program will remain the same but Government has indicated the need to
                         (a) customize PNPM-Rural to respond to the different needs and conditions across Indonesia's
                         diverse regions (e.g. technical facilitators supporting a cluster of kecamatan, meeting frequency
                         adjusted to remoteness, facilitator allowances adapted to remoteness, appropriate inclusion
                         mechanisms for Indigenous Peoples); (b) emphasize the empowerment and social accountability
                         aspects of the program (e.g. focus on governance and accountability mechanisms, knowledge sharing
                         between communities); and (c) rethink the Revolving Loans Fund (RLF) sub-component and prepare
                         a new design to better support rural livelihoods (e.g. strengthen governance and management
                         arrangements to reduce risk of corruption, focus on group solidarity and benefits, and design capacity
                         building for livelihoods).

                         PNPM 2012-2014 would also continue to provide for quick post-disaster response and crisis
                         recovery, utilizing PNPM’s existing financial and institutional platforms as a flexible and strategic
                         instrument for governmental response; and would maintain support to operational pilots and special
                         programs that build upon the main PNPM platforms, testing operational hypotheses for greater
                         impact and to inform longer-term policy and design questions.

                         Project components, with the exception of the RLF, will remain similar to the ongoing operation.
                         Financing amount for each component would be based on past experience and the Government’s
                         annual budget, and would be finalized during the preparation process:

                         Component 1: Kecamatan Grants. This component is providing direct grants to sub-districts for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         funding of investment proposals developed by the communities for social and economic
                         infrastructure. The activities including: (i) planning for and construction of basic infrastructure; (ii)
                         investment in activities using revolving loan funds (RLFs) for women’s savings and loan groups; (iii)
                         preparing for and responding to disaster, emergency or catastrophic events, as needed, through
                         subprojects; and (iv) grants to pilots and special programs.

                         Component 2: Community Empowerment and Facilitation. This component will have three sub-
                         components: (i) community empowerment and facilitation, (ii) strengthening the existing Revolving
                         Loan Funds scheme to reduce operational and fiduciary risks, and (iii) development of a viable
                         strategy and implementation arrangements for economic inclusion activities through participation in
                         private and institutional markets. This component aims to improve overall community participation
                         and skill levels, with the intention to strengthen the governance of the program. There will be a new
                         grant-funded addition of legal services available for both community and the Directorate General for
                         Community Empowerment’s (PMD) use. This component will also test the impact of increasing
                         facilitation support in various areas on overall community participation, including those groups who
                         are often excluded (including women), and the impact this would have on attendance.

                         Component 3: Implementation support and Technical Assistance. This component will provide
                         technical advisory services, training and other material support to strengthen PMD and the sub-
                         national levels. There will be strong focus on strengthening the delivery system, to ensure that it can
                           effectively respond to the demands of national delivery of the program, including monitoring and
                           evaluation, and enhanced financial audits.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the             safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                           analysis (if known)
                           PNPM-Rural 2012-2014 will continue financing a program that has national coverage and project
                           activities will take place in every rural kecamatan in the country and in over 60,000 villages across
                           Indonesia. The program covers a geographic area that encompasses great topographic, ecological,
                           biological, and social diversity. PNPM-Rural 2012-2014 would also draw over 14 years experience
                           to customize its approach to respond more effectively to different needs and conditions across
                           Indonesia.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           During preparation of PNPM-Rural IV the borrower adopted new Implementation Guidelines for
                           Social and Environmental Safeguards (IGSES) as a safeguards annex to the project’s operational
                           manual (OM). The IGSES was disseminated during the last year to all provinces of the country.
                           During the preparation of PNPM 2012-2014, this IGSES will be updated to include a code of
                           practice for indigenous people. The implementing agency, PMD, within the Ministry of Home
                           Affairs (MoHA) has more than fourteen years experience implementing the PNPM-Rural/KDP
                           series. MoHA is also supportive of partnerships with NGOs, particularly NGOs skilled in training,
                           facilitation, and community based monitoring, which will be prioritized to work with indigenous
                           people.

                           As with the ongoing PNPM-Rural project, each kecamatan is supported by a minimum of two
                           facilitators hired by PMD, of whom one is a civil engineer who assists the local communities on
                           subproject designs and implementation and the other a social mobilizer. These facilitators need
                           training to better assist the communities in the implementation of safeguards policies, i.e. screening
                           for possible environmental and social impacts of proposed subprojects, and providing guidance to the
                           communities for developing and implementing measures to address and mitigate the impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Juan Martinez (EASIS)
                           Catrini Pratihari Kubontubuh (EASID)
                           Dennie Stenly Mamonto (EASID)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             PNPM-Rural 2012-2014 promotes the
                           BP 4.01                                              environmental improvement of villages through
                                                                                the construction of key rural infrastructure such
                                                                                as concrete pathways, drainage, water supply,
                                                                                bridges, etc. This project will not create any
                                                                                large-scale, significant, or irreversible
                                                                                environmental or social impacts. Any impacts
                                                                                associated directly with the proposed project are
                                                                                judged to be insignificant, non-irreversible, and
                                                                                site-specific. Mitigation measures are achieved
                                                                                through community participation and
                                                            community-based subproject management. It
                                                            was noted the project has recently improved/
                                                            updated the OM, reflecting the most recent
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            lessons in experience, in particular those
                                                            relating to both environmental and social
                                                            safeguards and the set of environmental codes
                                                            of practice for rural infrastructure. Safeguards
                                                            policies in PNPM follow the guidance from
                                                            Implementation Guidelines for Social and
                                                            Environmental Safeguards (IGSES).

                                                            Further improvements to mitigate minor impacts
                                                            include better site management, more attention
                                                            to the placement of water facilities, and
                                                            continuous environmental awareness programs
                                                            for villagers. The most significant issues are to
                                                            ensure the high quality design implementation
                                                            of basic civil engineering procedures.
                                                            Mitigation measures for this potential impact, as
                                                            referred to in the Implementation Guidelines for
                                                            Social and Environmental Safeguards (IGSES),
                                                            includes training modules and procedures, the
                                                            dissemination of findings and discussions from
                                                            field supervision missions, and the development
                                                            of criteria for design evaluation by civil
                                                            engineering consultants.

                                                            The IGSES will be revised and improved based
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            on experience during the last year to improve its
                                                            applicability. A robust plan will be prepared for
                                                            capacity building and institutional strengthening
                                                            of the community facilitators.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No   The project will not finance sub-projects to be
                                                            undertaken in prohibited, critical natural
                                                            habitats (including critical forest, coastal and
                                                            marine habitats), nor will it result in the
                                                            significant conversion of natural habitats. This
                                                            is already clearly defined in the negative list of
                                                            the project. The OM also provides
                                                            specifications on the management of small
                                                            construction works to avoid any potential
                                                            degradation or conversion of natural habitats on
                                                            a small scale.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No   It is not foreseen that the project will affect
                                                            critical forest areas or related critical natural
                                                            habitats. Activities will not affect the health/
                                                                 quality of forest or involve any forest
                                                                 management.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    It is not foreseen that the project will procure
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 any pesticides, nor will an increased use of
                                                                 pesticides result from the project.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    It is expected that the proposed project will not
                         BP 4.11                                 adversely affect any sites with archeological,
                                                                 paleontological, historical, religious or of
                                                                 unique natural value as defined under the policy.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   Based on experiences from previous years,
                                                                 PNPM will follow best-practice principles for
                                                                 indigenous peoples’ involvement to ensure that
                                                                 the policy requirements of OP 4.10 are
                                                                 incorporated into the IGSES. Participation is
                                                                 entirely voluntary, and there are documented
                                                                 cases of very remote communities initially not
                                                                 preferring to participate in the PNPM program.
                                                                 To confirm this, a rapid social assessment will
                                                                 be conducted to review and identify any barriers
                                                                 or challenges to application of the IGSES in
                                                                 these areas, and confirm in which ways the
                                                                 guidelines should be updated to ensure that they
                                                                 incorporate the requirements of OP 4.10. Going
                                                                 forward, as under OP 4.01, emphasis on the
                                                                 associated capacity to support, monitor and
                                                                 report on implementation of these guidelines in
                                                                 practice and to improve quality of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 documentation should be a priority during
                                                                 implementation support to PNPM-Rural
                                                                 2012-2014 going forward. Based on the rapid
                                                                 social assessment conducted during project
                                                                 preparation, including consultation with
                                                                 communities and implementing agencies;
                                                                 recommendations have been made to ensure that
                                                                 indigenous peoples participate actively and will
                                                                 not suffer differentiated benefit or negative
                                                                 impact. These may include improvement of
                                                                 facilitation measures and capacity-building by
                                                                 enhancing training modules.

                                                                 The project preparation will include:
                                                                 a.      Consultation with communities and
                                                                 implementing agencies (govt. and NGOs) on the
                                                                 proposed approach, including arrangements to
                                                                 achieve inclusion and equity.
                                                                 b.      Early identification of community
                                                                 groups (direct beneficiaries) of how they are
                                                               organized and identification of how they would
                                                               like to participate during project
                                                               implementation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                               c.        Ensuring that vulnerable communities
                                                               (i.e. indigenous people with specific cultural
                                                               wisdom of living) will participate actively and
                                                               will not suffer differentiated benefits or negative
                                                               impact.
                                                               d.        Exploring how PNPM Peduli, a multi-
                                                               donor funded pilot project executed by national
                                                               organizations to reach the most vulnerable and
                                                               marginalized groups, can work more effectively
                                                               with local CSO/NGOs that support indigenous
                                                               peoples

                                                               To ensure indigenous people's participation, two
                                                               simple definitions will primarily be used to
                                                               fulfill the Bank's policy: (1) Masyarakat Adat /
                                                               Adat communities/Customary law communities;
                                                               and (2) Komunitas Adat Terpencil (KAT)/
                                                               Isolated and Vulnerable Peoples (IVPs)

                                                               As mentioned before the IGSES will be revised
                                                               and improved based on experiences learned
                                                               during the last year in order to ensure its
                                                               applicability. The final version of the IGSES
                                                               will be disclosed.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   No   There is no use of eminent domain or
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4.12                                  government land acquisition in any PNPM
                                                               project. Community contributions are voluntary
                                                               and frequent. PNPM’s OM includes a planning
                                                               and verification framework to ensure that any
                                                               land acquisition is well-documented both in
                                                               terms of its voluntary nature and the lack of any
                                                               significant economic impact on villagers.
                                                               Several approaches will be used to obtain
                                                               information:
                                                               a.       Information will be disseminated to
                                                               community members on applicable rules and
                                                               consultations will be conducted at key stages of
                                                               the sub-project planning process.
                                                               b.       Checking of willingness to donate and
                                                               to provide written documentation.
                                                               c.       Training of project staff on how to
                                                               conduct effective consultations during the sub-
                                                               project planning process.
                                                                                                                                 Trained project staff, informed community
                                                                                                                                 members, and consultations will help ensure
                                                                                                                                 that technical solutions minimize the need for
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 land; that land donations or sales are voluntary;
                                                                                                                                 and that community members know they have
                                                                                                                                 access to grievance redress mechanisms.
                                                                                                                                 The IGSES should be reviewed and updated to
                                                                                                                                 contain the best guidance possible on all
                                                                                                                                 voluntary land donations, and monitored for
                                                                                                                                 careful documentation to ensure that the policy
                                                                                                                                 is not triggered.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project will not finance dam construction or
                                                                                                                                 rehabilitation of any dams in large scale.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The project will not operate in or affect
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            international waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             None of the project components are located in
                                 7.60                                                                                            any known areas under territorial dispute as
                                                                                                                                 defined by the operational policy.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 03-Aug-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      A rapid social assessment was conducted during April-July 2012.
                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Susanne Holste

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan (RSA) Date: 26-Jul-2012
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Jan Weetjens (SM)                     Date: 20-Jul-2012




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
