                                                                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                                APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                                   Report No.: ISDSA766
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Jun-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                               Country:                          Uruguay                                   Project ID:                        P126408
                               Project Name:                     Full-Time School Expansion Project (P126408)
                               Task Team Leader:                 Diego Ambasz
                               Estimated Appraisal Date: 18-Jun-2012                                       Estimated Board Date:              25-Sep-2012
                               Managing Unit:                    LCSHE                                     Lending Instrument:                Specific Investment Loan
                               Sector:                           Primary education (85%), Pre-primary education (15%)
                               Theme:                            Education for all (100%)
                               Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                              Amount
                                   Borrower                                                                                                                         33.80
                                   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                                            40.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                            73.80
                               Environmental Category:           B - Partial Assessment
                               Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              The proposed Project Development Objective is to improve the quality, equity and internal efficiency of preschool and primary education, through
                              expanding the Full-Time School program.

                              3. Project Description

                              The Project would reach approximately 63,000 beneficiaries, primarily living in marginalized urban areas. Beneficiaries would be the students,
Public Disclosure Copy




                              teachers and school directors in existing FTS schools, schools to be converted to FTS, and students living in areas of high urbanization that would
                              benefit from new FTS school construction. Other beneficiaries would be those teachers and students in APRENDER schools that would benefit
                              from training programs.

                              The proposed loan instrument would be a Specific Investment Loan, in the amount of US$40 M. The Project consists of the following parts:

                              Component 1: Expanding and Modernizing School Infrastructure. This component consists of the following:

                              i.       Expansion of schools through: (a) the construction, transformation, and/or rehabilitation of approximately forty (40) schools primarily in
                              disadvantaged communities; (b) the provision of equipment and education material for Full-Time Schools converted and/or created under the
                              Project.

                              ii.       Carrying out of repair and/or maintenance activities of existing Full-time Schools by the PCU; and provision of grants from the PCU to
                              selected Full-Time Schools for carrying out maintenance activities.

                              This component would support the PDO through converting new schools to the FTS model, and expanding and improving preschool and primary
                              infrastructure. Converting schools to FTS would allow more time for classroom instruction, using a new pedagogical approach, which would likely
                              improve quality. New and expanded infrastructure, along with new equipment, would also likely improve quality, and the targeted nature of the
                              program would improve equity. Targeting would be an important factor in the selection of school construction and rehabilitation sites. For new
                              schools, sites would be selected according to: i) quickly growing urban areas, and ii) indicators of social and economic marginalization. It is
                              expected that at least 70 percent of the 40 schools would be located in areas serving the bottom two most socioeconomically disadvantaged
                              quintiles (currently, about 50 percent of FTS are located in these areas). For existing schools to be converted to FTS, selection would be done
                              using marginalization indicators.

                              Two new modalities would be developed to support repairs and maintenance. First, for large repairs requiring complex technical support (e.g. a
                              roof in disrepair), a central fund managed by the PCU would be created. Second, for preventive maintenance (e.g. replacing broken windows), all
                              schools more than 5 years old would receive a $4,000 maintenance fund. Overall, the component would result in 480 additional FTS classrooms
                              and 135 schools with maintenance funds that currently don’t have resources for maintaining school infrastructure.

                              Component 2: Strengthening Systems for Learning and Instruction. This component consists of the following:

                              i.           Provision of support for the institutionalization of in-service teacher training within the ANEP, including, inter alia: (i) supporting the

                                                                                                                                                                                 Page 1 of 6
                         establishment of a secretariat responsible for providing in-service teacher training; (ii) upgrading ANEP’s equipment and facilities; and (iii) provision
                         of technical assistance for the design and implementation of training activities.

                         ii.       Provision of in-service teacher training to pre-school and primary school teachers, principals and inspectors in administrative positions in
                         Full-Time Schools and schools benefiting from APRENDER in order to optimize the use of extra time in such schools, including, inter alia: (i)
                         improving classroom instruction; (ii) developing training programs and courses; and (iii) providing training to trainers carrying out the in-service
                         teacher training.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component would help achieve the PDO through strengthening systems for improved learning and instruction, in the classroom and beyond.
                         The establishment of a Secretariat within CEIP to provide systematic and permanent in-service teacher training to the entire teaching body in
                         preschool and primary grades, as well as school directors and inspectors, would lead to a more efficient operation of teacher training by ANEP.
                         The provision of in-service teacher training would equip teachers with better techniques for identifying and supporting students at risk of repetition,
                         and would improve the quality of instruction overall, hereby improving quality and equity.

                         The in-service training would consist of six courses. First, an introductory course on the pedagogical approach would strengthen FTS teachers’
                         skills in identification of students at risk of repetition, and to use extra time in FTS to intensify and tailor instruction to them. The second and third
                         course would foster effective instruction in i) math and ii) Spanish, social sciences and natural sciences, and would incorporate the use of laptops.
                         The fourth course would bring a sharper focus on supporting 6th grade teachers to better prepare students for transitioning to secondary school.
                         The fifth course would train preschool teachers and teachers in grades 1 and 2 in early grade reading and the introduction of basic mathematical
                         concepts. Finally, the sixth course would be targeted to school directors and inspectors on how to make the best use of extra time. These training
                         activities would be offered to existing and new FTS. APRENDER schools would also be invited to participate in some courses.

                         Component 3: Monitoring, Evaluation and Project Management. This component consists of the following:

                         i.        Provision of technical assistance to: (i) manage and coordinate the execution of the Project; and (ii) monitor and evaluate the Project.

                         ii.        Provision of technical assistance to carry out education policy studies and analyses on, inter alia: (i) impact evaluation of the improved
                         Full-Time School model; (ii) a tracer study of FTS graduates; (iii) causes of repetition and low school attendance among young students; and (iv)
                         exploitation of existing data from school-level administrative data, including an early warning system for students at risk of repetition.

                         This component would ensure the good management, monitoring and evaluation of the Project and the FTS program. It would develop the timely
                         knowledge and information for policymakers to make informed decisions about the day-to-day support to schools, and future expansion of the
                         program. This would be achieved through strengthening monitoring systems, including an early warning system for students at risk of repetition,
                         thus improving the effectiveness of component 2. It would also complement the government’s broader systems reform, including complementing
                         the further development of the on-line student assessment system, one of ANEP’s central priorities.

                         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         Project’s physical interventions are foreseen under Component 1. Specific sub-Project locations have not been confirmed; they will be selected
                         during Project implementation. However, 110 potential eligible sites have been identified around the country. Preliminary screening regarding
                         identified sites indicates that works would be conducted on disturbed land where sensitive natural habitats are not present and existence of cultural
                         resources is not known or suspected.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                         Ricardo Schusterman (LCSSO)
                         Elba Lydia Gaggero (LCSEN)

                          6. Safeguard Policies                            Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)




                                                                                                                                                                       Page 2 of 6
                         Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01      Yes   The physical interventions foreseen in the Project are included in Component 1
                                                                        and refer to i) construction of new schools; ii) the reconstruction and refurbishment
                                                                        of schools. Funds for maintenance of existent FTS are also envisioned.

                                                                        The rest of the Project’s components essentially involve institutional development,
                                                                        training, and capacity building activities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        No major adverse environmental impacts are anticipated with this Project.
                                                                        Expected potential negative impacts are primarily during the construction phase of
                                                                        civil works and they will be mitigated through specific measures included in the
                                                                        Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for the project. Based
                                                                        on the nature of the works, which are similar to the current loan Category B
                                                                        Project, this Project is classified as Category B requiring a partial environmental
                                                                        and social assessment in accordance with the World Bank's Environmental and
                                                                        Social Safeguards Policies.

                                                                        To comply with Bank policies, ANEP has developed an ESMF that, among other
                                                                        aspects: (i) ensures compliance with pertinent national laws and Bank policies for
                                                                        works of the type considered under the project; (ii) identifies potential
                                                                        environmental and social impacts based on the scope of physical interventions and
                                                                        site characteristics; (iii) establishes appropriate procedures for sub-project
                                                                        screening as well as mitigation, management, and monitoring measures; (iv)
                                                                        identifies and assesses specific strengthening needs for the environmental and
                                                                        social management of the Project. The ESMF preparation included the evaluation
                                                                        of the existing Environmental and Social Management Guidelines (Directrices de
                                                                        Ordenación Ambiental y Social), with specific recommendations and improvements
                                                                        to be considered in this operation. This also considers all specific safety and
                                                                        building standards needed for schools as well as any abatement work that might
                                                                        be necessary should asbestos removal be required during upgrading per Bank
                                                                        standards.

                                                                        The draft ESMF has been disclosed in the ANEP-PAEPU Website on Jun 15, 2012
                                                                        and in the Bank Infoshop on June 15, 2012. ANEP has carried out a public
                                                                        consultation on 06/14/12 on the instrument with educational community
                                                                        representatives, government representatives, local NGOs. The final ESMF
                                                                        documents the results of the consultations and takes into account the participant's
                                                                        views.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04              No    Sub-project specific locations would be selected during Project implementation.
                                                                        However, 100 potential eligible sites have been identified. Preliminary screening
                                                                        regarding these pre-identified sites indicates that works would take place in urban
                                                                        or sub-urban zones on public land, not involving protected areas or ecologically
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        fragile sites.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                       No    The Project will not support management of forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09                  No    This safeguard does not apply as the Project does not require the purchase,
                                                                        application or storage of pesticides and will not lead to an increased use of
                                                                        pesticides. While the safeguard is not triggered, schools may use pesticides
                                                                        during their operational phase to control pests. This aspect has been considered
                                                                        within any efforts to improve or strengthen ANEP’s protocols for school
                                                                        infrastructure management.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   No    Sub-project specific locations would be selected during Project implementation.
                                                                        However, 100 potential eligible sites have been identified. Preliminary screening
                                                                        regarding these pre-identified sites indicates that works would take place in urban
                                                                        or sub-urban zones on public land, not involving areas where existence of cultural
                                                                        resources is known or suspected. None of the potentially eligible schools to be
                                                                        upgraded are in historic buildings either.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            No    This safeguard policy is not triggered in Uruguay.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      No    OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) is not triggered, since experience with
                                                                        previous school construction and reconstruction with PAEPU shows that no land
                                                                        has been acquired or occupied for any civil works, nor has any physical or
                                                                        economic displacement to any formal or informal resident or tenant occurred. In
                                                                        order to ensure no involuntary resettlement will happen, a selection criterion would
                                                                        be applied whereby all schools to be included in the Project must prove that ANEP
                                                                        has the requisite land title, and that no displacement (economic or physical) will
                                                                        occur. In the event that a school is built on a land acquired by ANEP though a
                                                                        voluntary donation, the ESMF includes a screening tool to ensure that no
                                                                        involuntary resettlement would take place.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                No    The project will not support the construction or rehabilitation of dams nor will it
                                                                        support other investments which rely on the services of existing dams therefore the
                                                                        policy is not triggered.


                                                                                                                                                  Page 3 of 6
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP       No               The project will not affect international waterways as defined in the policy therefore
                               7.50                                                             this policy is not triggered.
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60           No               The policy is not triggered because the project will not be implemented in areas
                                                                                                known to involve disputed areas.

                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any potential l arge scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                  The Project’s physical interventions are foreseen under Component 1, whereby the construction of new schools and the reconstruction and
                                 refurbishment of schools would be financed; funds would be also provided for maintenance of existing FTS. These interventions are of small
                                 scale, and no particularly sensitive environmental conditions are know in the potentially eligible sites of implementation, thus, no potential large
                                 scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts are expected. Anticipated potential adverse environmental impacts would be primarily during the
                                 construction phase of civil works (e.g. construction staging, debris generation, dust emission, noise, safety, crosswalk and traffic restrictions
                                 around workplace, and other standard impacts of construction). During the operation stage, potential negative impacts would be related to
                                 potential misuse or maintenance problems of the school infrastructure. The prevention, reduction and mitigation of these impacts are mainly
                                 based on the adoption of engineering and management good practices, such as the specific measures included in the Environmental and
                                 Social Management Framework of the Project.

                                 In respect to social safeguards, it was agreed that OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) is not triggered, since experience with previous
                                 school construction and reconstruction with PAEPU shows that no land has been acquired or occupied for any civil works, nor has any physical
                                 or economic displacement to any formal or informal resident or tenant occurred.

                                 The FTS Project would bring a number of positive social outcomes. First, the FTS Project offers children a safe and positive environment during
                                 most of the time within weekday, with adults that care about them. Second, the extended time offers children a third meal, strengthening
                                 children’s nutrition, and allowing them to better concentrate on classroom learning. School lunches have also been shown to be very effective in
                                 increasing attendance. Third, in respect to prejudices, the redesigned teacher training programs would specifically work to make plain the
                                 added burden of discrimination that students face. This would help teachers make the most of the added time, and take a more proactive role in
                                 addressing the challenges of students most at risk of failure. Fourth, in sharing the responsibility for designing and implementing school
                                 management plans (including maintenance funds) with parents and community members, school directors would have an opportunity to
                                 communicate to parents some messages about the vital role that they might play in their own children’s learning.
                               2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                                  No potential indirect and/or long term adverse impacts due to anticipated future activities in the Project area have been identified.
                               3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                                  No alternatives were considered in Project preparation given the low sensibility of this Project.
                               4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
Public Disclosure Copy




                                  and implement the measures described.
                                   Given that the specific sub-projects will be entirely defined during Project implementation, ANEP has developed an Environmental and Social
                                 Management Framework in accordance with the environmental policies of the Bank. The ESMF will be used and implemented by ANEP,
                                 through the specialists within the PCU.

                                 Following the ESMF provisions, environmental criteria will be applied along the sub-project cycle. All the works would be designed and
                                 implemented in observance of the specific safety and building standards needed for schools, and green architecture criteria would be applied
                                 for the works of the Project (e.g. landscape integration, green roofs, natural ventilation, reuse of rainwater). During works execution, contractors
                                 would be required to implement specific Environmental Management Plans (EMP), prepared in accordance with the applicable regulatory
                                 framework and Bank´s guidelines. The EMP would state the foreseen potential impacts and would provide operational procedures to, among
                                 other aspects, control emissions (dust, noise, fumes) and manage solid waste and effluents in the construction site. The EMP would also cover
                                 communication requirements and safety aspects -including road and pedestrian safety as needed-. A Monitoring and Control Program would be
                                 part of the EMP in order to guide the supervision of the works execution and the proper implementation of the EMP. Supervision activities
                                 would be the responsibility of ANEP technical representatives. Upon the completion of works, the Use and Maintenance Manual included in the
                                 ESMF would be provided to the school authorities. The specialists of the PCU will perform field audits in the construction work site and the
                                 operational schools.

                                 In order to ensure no involuntary resettlement will happen, a selection criterion would be applied whereby all schools to be included in the
                                 Project must prove that ANEP has the requisite land title, and that no displacement (economic or physical) will occur. In the event that a school
                                 is built on a land acquired by ANEP though a donation, the ESMF includes a screening tool to ensure that no involuntary resettlement would
                                 take place.

                                 The ESMF also establishes the consultation process along the sub-project’s phases. It is based on the mechanisms that have been developed
                                 from the beginning of the TBEIP. Depending on the sub-project characteristics, communication activities may involve: a) site election, b)
                                 gathering of information regarding area singularities and cultural value, c) project presentation, d) start of works, e) finish of works / building
                                 inauguration, and f) ex-post consultation. Two of these activities, as consultation meetings, are mandatory for all sub-projects: project
                                 presentation and ex-post consultation.

                                 The implementation arrangements under the Project would be the same as those for the ongoing Third Basic Education Improvement Project.
                                 ANEP would remain the key responsible agency, while the PCU would continue to be entrusted with the implementation arrangements and the
                                 Project fiduciary-related aspects. The proposed implementing agency has a very strong track record in executing Bank financed operations.
                                 Since 1994 ANEP has implemented three education operations all of which have been satisfactorily executed. In addition, the valuable

                                                                                                                                                                          Page 4 of 6
                           experience gained during the implementation of these previous education Projects has been taken into account in the preparation of this
                           operation.

                           Social and environmental safeguards would be managed by a team of specialists within the PCU, the environmental and social team (EST).
                           The EST would consist of a group of three professionals: an Environmental and Social Responsible assisted by the Coordinators of the areas
                           of Projects and Works.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The Environmental and Social Team would have, according to the ESMF provisions, the following main responsibilities:
                           •         Incorporate environmental and social criteria and measures in sub-project site selection and in sub-project design
                           •         Prepare the environmental and social documentation of each sub-project, including the EMP for contractors
                           •         Incorporate environmental requirements in bidding documents and contracts
                           •         Organize, carry out and document public consultation activities
                           •         Supervise contractors’ implementation of EMP through performing field audits to the place of works, in order to reinforce
                           environmental supervision and support the Directores de Obra in those activities.
                           •         Provide environmental training to contractors, Directores de Obra and school responsible, particularly in the ESMF requirements,
                           tools and application
                           •         Organize and file all the relevant environmental and social documentation.

                           An assessment of the institutional capacity of the PCU was carried out during Project preparation. In general, it was found that the Unit staff is
                           competent to manage safeguards issues. However, some strengthening needs were identified so that they can carry out their duties, in
                           particular facing the increasing number of works. Identified areas for strengthening include: i) environmental management processes
                           consolidation, and ii) systematization of monitoring activities and result documentat.

                           In response, ANEP has established an Environmental and Social Management Strengthening Program as part of the ESMF. Under this
                           program, the Project would support the strengthening and consolidation of the social and environmental management at PCU through the
                           following activities: (a) organizing and assigning specific roles to team members; (b) providing the necessary human and material resources
                           (including technical assistance); and (c) holding training and capacity building activities for the EST and technical representatives of ANEP
                           involved in the environmental supervision of works (Directores de Obra). Clear safeguards implementation and supervision arrangements
                           would also support the improvement of the PCU environmental and social management.

                           A specific assessment of the environmental and social instrument implementation would be undertaken within the mid-term evaluation and at
                           Project completion stage.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                            on potentially affected people.
                            The draft ESMF has been disclosed in the ANEP-PAEPU Website on Jun 15, 2012 and in the Bank Infoshop on June 15, 2012. ANEP
                           conducted on June 14, 2012 focus group consultation on this instrument with: (i) local authorities, including the Ministry of Housing and
                           Territorial Order (MVOTMA - Ministerio de Vivienda y Ordenamiento Territorial); (ii) education community representatives; and (iii) local NGOs.
                           The participant's views will be incorporated in the ESMF final document, that will be publicly disclosed in the ANEP-PAEPU

                           Regarding school sub-projects, the ESMF establishes the consultation process along the Project’s phases. It is based on the mechanisms that
                           have been developed from the beginning of the current loan. Depending on the sub-project characteristics, communication activities with
Public Disclosure Copy




                           education community and other local representatives may involve: a) site election, b) gathering of information regarding area singularities and
                           cultural value, c) project presentation, d) start of works, e) finish of works / building inauguration, and f) ex-post consultation. Two of these
                           activities, as consultation meetings, are mandatory for all sub-projects: project presentation and ex-post consultation. At the consultations, the
                           architectural projects will be presented together with the extended time educational proposal. Therefore, Project implementation would open up
                           the opportunity to extend the consultation and participation of stakeholders to discuss issues relating to school sustainability.

                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                 14-Jun-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                             15-Jun-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                              15-Jun-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                           Directors
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                         disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                           Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                  Yes [     ]      No [    ]        NA [    ]

                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                           Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?                  Yes [     ]      No [    ]        NA [    ]

                           Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language          Yes [     ]      No [    ]        NA [    ]
                           that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?

                                                                                                                                                                   Page 5 of 6
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for   Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?              Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard    Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same        Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Task Team Leader:                    Diego Ambasz
                            Approved By:
                            Sector Manager:                      Name Reema Nayar (SM)                                                    Date: 18-Jun-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                                               Page 6 of 6
