                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA3345
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Jun-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Jun-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Ecuador                            Project ID:    P144489
                            Project Name:     Ecuador - Quito Metro Line One (P144489)
                            Task Team         Arturo Ardila Gomez
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         03-Jun-2013                        Estimated   25-Jul-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    LCSTR                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Urban Transport (95%), Public administration- Transportation (5%)
                            Theme(s):         City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (99%), Climate change (1%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      1684.98                 Total Bank Financing:      205.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                               Financing Gap:                0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                820.98
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                   205.00
                              Andean Development Corporation                                                          200.00
                              EC European Investment Bank                                                             259.00
                              Inter-American Development Bank                                                         200.00
                              Total                                                                                  1684.98
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed Project development objective (PDO) is to improve urban mobility in the city of Quito
                           serving the growing demand for public transport. The Project will reduce travel times, decrease


                                                                      Page 1 of 15
                         operational costs of the transport service, improve connectivity, security and comfort of the current
                         system and reduce emissions of pollutants and greenhouse gases.
                          3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1.       Construction of Two Metro Stations of the First Quito Metro Line: Construction of the
                         metro stations of La Magdalena and El Labrador.

                         2.        Infrastructure and Equipment Investment for the First Quito Metro Line: Civil works for the
                         construction of: (i) twenty-three kilometers of tunnel linking the Quitumbe and El Labrador metro
                         stations; (ii) thirteen metro stations; (iii) a yard and maintenance shops at the Quitumbe metro
                         station. Provision and installation of metro system-wide facilities (including the permanent way and
                         systems equipment) for the operation of the First Quito Metro Line. (This component is jointly
                         cofinanced among these four multilateral development banks.)

                         3.       Provision of Train Sets to Operate in the First Quito Metro Line: Provision of at least
                         eighteen, six-car train sets, with four automotive cars per train and auxiliary vehicles for track
                         maintenance and yard work, and workshop equipment.

                         4.       Project Management: Provision of technical assistance for the management oversight and
                         supervision of the Project.

                         5.       Technical Studies to Support Implementation: The carrying out of technical studies to
                         support the implementation of the Project, including a financial management and cost recovery study
                         (with recommendations on tariff structure) of the SITP, and the study to design the fare collection
                         with the SITP that will be compatible with the fare collection system for the metro.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Quito Metro Project is located in Quito, Ecuador. Quito has an elevation of approximately 2,800
Public Disclosure Copy




                         masl and a population of approximately 2,400,000. The metro line will be approximately 23 km in
                         length located in an urban environment. The line will run from the south of the city in Quitumbe
                         sector and heading north through the city sectors MoránValverde, Solanda, El Calzado, El Recreo,
                         and La Magdalena. The line then will reach the city center in the area of San Francisco and Alameda,
                         then reaches north of the city passing Ejido Park, Central University, La Pradera, La Carolina,
                         Iñaquito, Jipijapa and culminates in the sector El Labrador, specifically in the northern end of the
                         recently closed airport (Mariscal Sucre airport). The historic center of Quito has been designated as
                         a World Heritage Site by UNESCO, and one station of Phase 2 (Plaza San Francisco) is located in
                         this area.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Raul Tolmos (LCSEN)
                         Alonso Zarzar Casis (LCSSO)
                         Robert H. Montgomery (LCSEN)

                          6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The project is classified as Category A. An
                          BP 4.01                                              Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA),
                                                                               including an Environmental Management Plan



                                                                       Page 2 of 15
                                 (EMP), has been developed for the Metro Quito
                                 Project (Note: construction of the Metro Quito
                                 Project is separated into Phase 1 –construction of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 La Magdalena El Labrador Stations and Phase 2 –
                                 all remaining construction; the Bank project
                                 consists of financing a portion of Phase 2). The
                                 EIA included various support studies, including
                                 cartographic interpretation, topography,
                                 archeology and paleontology, heritage sites and
                                 structures, passive seismic, vibrations,
                                 earthquakes, hydrogeology, groundwater flow
                                 modeling, inspection of buildings and structures,
                                 affected pubic services, geology and seismic
                                 effects. The EIA has been approved by the
                                 Ecuador Ministry of Environment, responsible by
                                 law for this project. The Inter-American
                                 Development Bank, the European Investment
                                 Bank, and the Andean Development Cooperation
                                 (CAF) have approved financing for a portion of
                                 the Metro Quito Project. Other relevant studies
                                 that have been developed for the project include
                                 an additional social impact study, gentrification
                                 study, Environmental and Social Management
                                 Plan (EMP), social participation process report,
                                 historic center cultural heritage report, study on
                                 trees of historic importance, and socioeconomic
                                 study of transportation cost related to family
                                 expenditure.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 The project has various positive benefits,
                                 including improvement in the quality of life of
                                 the residents of Quito; promotes urban integration
                                 and organization and consequent land
                                 development; provides increased comfort,
                                 reliability and decreased commute times;
                                 increased urban accessibility and mobility; less
                                 superficial vehicular traffic on main roads,
                                 allowing for the decrease of traffic congestion,
                                 combustion gas contamination and sound, as well
                                 as commute times; air quality improvement of
                                 Quito, contributing to the reduction of greenhouse
                                 gas emissions and the mitigation of climate
                                 change; improved public health due to the
                                 reduced number of accidents and less
                                 environmental contamination; job creation; and
                                 increased commercial and economic activity.




                         Page 3 of 15
                                 In terms of potential negative environmental and
                                 social impacts and risks, in addition to typical
                                 infrastructure construction impacts which are
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 localized and of short duration (e.g., generation of
                                 noise, dust, waste management, etc.), there are
                                 some project specific impacts and risks of
                                 particular significance. Some potential
                                 significant impacts during construction are effects
                                 on soil stability or subsidence during tunnel
                                 excavation or vibrations that cause damage to the
                                 structure of buildings, changes in flow ground
                                 waters, effects on stations located in municipal
                                 parks (green areas), traffic congestion, noise and
                                 dust around metro station locations, transport and
                                 disposal of soil/excavated material from the
                                 tunnel and station excavations, possibility of
                                 archaeological finds, impacts cultural resources in
                                 the Quito historic center, worker health and safety
                                 risks in tunneling and excavation works, and
                                 decreased accessibility to businesses and homes
                                 in the immediate vicinity of metro stations.
                                 Potential significant operational phase impacts or
                                 risks include: vibration impacts on buildings,
                                 impact on ground water flow, waste management
                                 of metro rail car maintenance facilities, and risk
                                 of emergency event (e.g., fire, explosion, etc.).

                                 The project design has incorporated various
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 measures to minimize and mitigate some
                                 potential impacts and risk. Studies on the type of
                                 soils along the route have confirmed that there is
                                 limited risk to liquefaction or collapse. A
                                 sequential method will be used for tunnel
                                 construction that provides greater safety during
                                 works and reduces possibility of subsidence.
                                 Tunnel protection systems with be used to
                                 minimize risks of subsidence and impact on
                                 ground water flow.

                                 The project EIA includes an Environmental
                                 Management Plan (EMP) which presents
                                 mitigation and monitoring measures for each
                                 project phases (design, construction, operation
                                 and maintenance, and closing). The EMP
                                 includes: (i) Plan for the Prevention and
                                 Mitigation of Impacts, including plan for the
                                 prevention and reduction of air contamination,



                         Page 4 of 15
                                 noise and vibrations, plan for the prevention and
                                 mitigation of soil contamination, geology and
                                 geomorphology prevention and mitigation plan,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 plan for the prevention and mitigation of water
                                 contamination, plan for the prevention and
                                 mitigation of biological contamination, plan for
                                 the prevention and mitigation of mobility
                                 deterioration and urban accessibility, plan for the
                                 prevention and mitigation of damages to cultural
                                 resources, plan for the prevention and control of
                                 landscape impacts; (ii) Industrial Safety and
                                 Occupational Health Plan; (iii) Emergency and
                                 Contingency Response Plan; (iv) Community
                                 Relations Plan; (v) Environmental Training Plan;
                                 (vi) Waste Management Plan; (vii) Plan for the
                                 Restoration of Affected Areas; (viii) Closing and
                                 Abandonment Plan; (ix) Maintenance Plan; and
                                 (x) Monitoring and Follow-up Plan.

                                 EPMMQ has developed an Environmental and
                                 Social Management Plan (EMP) that builds upon
                                 the EMP and further develops various
                                 environmental, social, and health and safety
                                 aspects including: (i) Social Management Plan;
                                 (ii) Occupational Health and Safety Management
                                 Plan; (iii) Environmental Monitoring; (iv)
                                 Standard Construction Contract Conditions; (v)
                                 Plans for Excavated Soil Disposal (including
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 potential risk of encountering contaminated
                                 soils), Management of Patrimonial Trees, and
                                 Traffic Management during Construction of
                                 Metro Stations, (vi) Works in the Quito Historic
                                 Center, (vii) Institutional Organization and
                                 Responsibilities; (viii) Supervision/Monitoring
                                 and Reporting; (ix) Interagency Agreements, and
                                 (x) ESMP Budget Estimate.

                                 The EMP includeS various monitoring programs
                                 during construction and operation stages,
                                 including sampling sites, parameters and
                                 frequency. These include: air quality, noise,
                                 vibrations, soil quality, quality of surface and
                                 ground water.

                                 Environmental performance monitoring will incl
                                 ude: (i) environmental, health and safety
                                 monitoring and reporting by construction



                         Page 5 of 15
                                 contractor, who by contract must have designated
                                 environmental and health safety managers; (ii)
                                 environmental, health and safety supervision of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 construction works by an independent consultant
                                 firm reporting to EPMMQ; (iii) supervision by
                                 EPMMQ; (iv) supervision by Ministry of
                                 Environment regarding compliance with EMP
                                 and environmental regulatory requirements; (v)
                                 supervision by Ministry of Labor related to
                                 worker safety; and (vi) performance of an annual
                                 environmental audit by independent third party
                                 under terms of reference and selection approved
                                 by the Ministry of Environment.

                                 Information disclosure and public consultation
                                 has been performed (see ISDS section II.5 for
                                 details).

                                 The total project budget is approximately US$
                                 1,500,000,000, which approximately 0.6% is for
                                 the implementation of environmental
                                 management plans and social ($8,938,000).
                                 However it is important to note that many of the
                                 measures of socio-environmental prevention are
                                 already incorporated in the final design of the
                                 project and therefore are not considered in this
                                 ESMP budget. Considering these other measures,
                                 it is reported that the value of socio-
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 environmental prevention is approximately 5% of
                                 the total project cost.

                                 EPMMQ has developed a plan to develop and
                                 implement an Integrated Management System for
                                 Environment, Social, and Health and Safety.

                                 The Bank is working with EPMMQ to explore
                                 options to increase positive environmental and
                                 social benefits. The ideas include: (i)
                                 improvement of parks and recreational areas (e.g.
                                 El Ejido and La Alameda) will not only in
                                 relation with areas affected by construction of
                                 metro stations but more broadly on improvement
                                 in the whole park/recreational area; (ii)
                                 microeconomic development in the vicinity of
                                 stations through support to owners and
                                 storekeepers near each station; (iii) during
                                 construction of San Francisco Metro station,



                         Page 6 of 15
                                                                         Francisco, take the opportunity to improve
                                                                         adjacent buildings and facades, repaving streets
                                                                         and pedestrian ways, etc.; (iv) institutional
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         support to key institutions responsible of
                                                                         implementing actions associated with the project;
                                                                         and (v) support EPMMQ in developing of a more
                                                                         effective and efficient operational phase social,
                                                                         environmental, safety and occupational health
                                                                         management system based on international
                                                                         experience in other metro systems.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No              This policy should not be triggered since the
                                                                         project will not involve the significant conversion
                                                                         of natural habitats or critical natural habitats.
                                                                         There will be some impacts on a number of urban
                                                                         trees, some of which are of aesthetic and
                                                                         historical value. These impacts have been
                                                                         considered within the EIA, and recent EPMMQ
                                                                         efforts on re-designing the station location at El
                                                                         Ejido have helped reduce the impact on trees. The
                                                                         EMP provides measures to re-located directly
                                                                         impacted trees and re-vegetate the relevant metro
                                                                         stations after construction. None of the potential
                                                                         sites selected for tunnel soil/spoil disposal would
                                                                         significantly adversely impact any natural
                                                                         habitats as defined under this policy.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No              This policy should not be triggered since the
                                                                         project will not affect forests, forest dependent
                                                                         communities not will it involve changes in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         management of forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No              This policy should not be triggered since the
                                                                         project does not involve the purchase or use of
                                                                         significant quantities of pesticides. The project
                                                                         may during operation phase of the metro require
                                                                         the limited use of regularly available pesticides
                                                                         for pest control (e.g. rodents, etc.) in the tunnels.
                                                                         Applicable standard procedures will be
                                                                         established in the operation phase environmental
                                                                         management plan under OP 4.01.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes             This policy should be triggered given that a
                         BP 4.11                                         portion the proposed metro-line route passes
                                                                         directly underneath a portion of the historical
                                                                         center of Quito, which was declared as the first
                                                                         World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 1978.The
                                                                         construction works in this area are limited to
                                                                         tunneling (which will be done by conventional/
                                                                         traditional methods and not Tunnel Boring



                                                                 Page 7 of 15
                                 Machine (TBM)) and the construction of station
                                 (San Francisco). The operation of the metro is
                                 expected to have a positive impact by helping to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 reduce traffic congestion and facilitate better
                                 access to the area. The one potential future station
                                 (Plaza del Teatro) is not located in the area of
                                 Quito’s historical core declared as World
                                 Heritage Site by UNESCO. The construction in
                                 this area presents potential risks due to vibrations,
                                 soil subsidence, visual impacts of entrance to
                                 stations located in the historical plazas, and
                                 impacts to aesthetic values around the stations
                                 including trash. In order to help reduce potential
                                 risks in the historical center of Quito, several
                                 alternatives for technical design for stations in
                                 San Francisco and Plaza del Teatro were studied
                                 (e.g., resulting in using conventional tunneling,
                                 removing of all spoils at station south of San
                                 Francisco thus eliminating project truck traffic
                                 issue in the center, utilizing an existing building
                                 for San Francisco metro line entrance, etc.). An
                                 initial survey all buildings above the tunnel/line
                                 path has been completed and will be used to asses
                                 any potential actual impacts during construction.
                                 Based upon other works that have occurred in the
                                 past in the historic center and existing knowledge
                                 about Plaza San Francisco, it is reported that there
                                 is little change of any significant archeological
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 findings during the station construction (e.g.,
                                 mainly fill materials in shallow depths). The
                                 Municipality of Metro, based upon a study
                                 developed by EPMMQ, has submitted a report to
                                 UNESCO informing them of the proposed
                                 project. The Municipality reported that they do
                                 not anticipate any issue from UNESCO based
                                 upon other works completed in the past and
                                 similar reporting to UNESCO. As part of the
                                 EMP there is: (i) archaeological monitoring
                                 during construction stage, (ii) additional
                                 archeological monitoring before removal of
                                 surface materials required for constructing San
                                 Francisco station, (iii) archeological rescue and
                                 protection in case of chance finds, and (iv)
                                 building structural inspections and vibration
                                 monitoring. On a broader scale (i.e., beyond the
                                 project), the municipality developed a Historical
                                 Center Integral Restoration program which is



                         Page 8 of 15
                                                                        being implemented by the Heritage Metropolitan
                                                                        Institute (IMP). This program contemplates the
                                                                        Metro Quito project. The applicable design,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        mitigation and monitoring measures are
                                                                        established as part of the project EMP developed
                                                                        under OP 4.01. Staff of the World Heritage
                                                                        Center at UNESCO prepares conservation status
                                                                        reports and draft decisions on a yearly basis, for
                                                                        each site having potential issues. Such
                                                                        conservation status reports and draft decisions are
                                                                        then reviewed and voted for approval at the
                                                                        World Heritage Committee, which meets every
                                                                        year. Regarding Quito, the last conservation
                                                                        status report and draft decision (June 2013) do
                                                                        not forecast any risk of delisting the site from the
                                                                        World Heritage List as a result of the metro
                                                                        project, as the construction of a metro, per se,
                                                                        would not impact what is defined the Outstanding
                                                                        Universal Value on the basis of which the site
                                                                        was inscribed on the World Heritage List.
                                                                        Delisting the site, on the other hand, remains a
                                                                        risk, depending on how the project will be
                                                                        implemented. Hence the importance of following
                                                                        the EMP during construction.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    No              This policy is not triggered since the project
                                                                        activities will not affect indigenous peoples as
                                                                        defined in the policy.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes             OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement is
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4.12                                           triggered as a precaution in case more land is
                                                                        needed for stations or due to changes in project
                                                                        design. The client has prepared a Resettlement
                                                                        Policy Framework that was disclosed in country
                                                                        and in the Infoshop at appraisal. EPMMQ owns
                                                                        the land for the four inter modal surface stations.
                                                                        The other 11 underground stations have the
                                                                        entrances located in public areas. The two surface
                                                                        stations currently under construction are on
                                                                        public lands that belong to the MDMQ. No one
                                                                        lives currently in these areas. During 2012 prior
                                                                        to the Bank’s formal involvement, the MDMQ
                                                                        purchased a house in Plaza de San Francisco and
                                                                        several plots of land in Quitumbe to be used for
                                                                        the yards and maintenance shops for the trains.
                                                                        The Bank carried out a due diligence to assess if
                                                                        these purchases were consistent with Bank policy
                                                                        (OP4.12). The due diligence reviewed the process
                                                                        followed and the prices paid and concluded that


                                                                Page 9 of 15
                                                                                they were consistent with Bank policy. Detailed
                                                                                information is available in project files.
                                                                                Two dump sites have been selected: i) Quebrada
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                San Pedro which land belongs to MDMQ and ii)
                                                                                Quebrada San Jose del Nayón, a former private
                                                                                quarry currently been used for dumping garbage.
                                                                                According to the environmental legislation the
                                                                                owners of the quarry need to fill up the site again
                                                                                in order to close down the quarry. EPMMQ will
                                                                                offer the dump material from the project to fill the
                                                                                quarry thus helping the owner to comply with the
                                                                                law. No purchase of land is needed for this quarry
                                                                                and it is not envisaged. There are more dump
                                                                                sites that have been identified, but no decisions
                                                                                have been made yet in regard to whether these
                                                                                will be used.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No                This policy should not be triggered as the
                                                                                project will neither support the construction or
                                                                                rehabilitation of dams nor will it support other
                                                                                investments which rely on services of existing
                                                                                dams.
                            Projects on International           No                This policy should not be triggered as the
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                project will not finance activities involving the
                                                                                use or potential pollution of international
                                                                                waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                   This policy should not be triggered as the
                            7.60                                                project will not finance activities in disputed
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                areas as defined in the policy.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                None
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                                The potential positive long-term impacts due to the project include improved transportation,
                              reduced traffic and reduced air emissions due to vehicles (improved air quality) thus reduced travel
                              time, improved access to employment and quality of life, and reduced environmental health
                              impacts. Indirectly these should lead to improved productivity and land use management.
                              Estimates of demand/usage are approximately 356,000 in 2016 (approximately 36,000 of which
                              would not use their car and 311,000 existing public transport) and 538,000 in 2020. The project
                              may indirectly lead to micro-economic develop around/near the metro stations and changes to
                              existing bus lines.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.


                                                                       Page 10 of 15
                            Three types of alternative analysis were performed: alternatives of transport, site/route
                          alternative, and construction design alternatives. An alternative analysis was performed to
                          determine the appropriate mass transit system to meet future demand given the city characteristics.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          The main alternatives included a zero alternative (continuing with the same transport system), use
                          of conventional buses, rapid bus system on segregated lanes or BRT, light rail and trams, and rapid
                          transit system or metro system. The analysis clearly concluded that the subway or metro is the
                          only option, from among the mass transit systems, capable of becoming the central and structuring
                          axis of an integrated mass transit system the IMTS, transporting passenger volumes at the speeds
                          required and desired in the city of Quito especially given projected demand. It would not occupy
                          the current road space nor paralyze traffic in large parts of the city during its development and
                          construction phase.

                          For the metro route selection analysis, a total of 12 alternative routes were initially identified and
                          assessed. Three routes were then selected for a detailed analysis using the following criteria:
                          demand characteristics (location of centralities and administration / services concentrations;
                          present and future nodes generating personal mobility and transport demand), geo-engineering
                          (geomorphological safety and feasibility, geological / geotechnical / subsurface tectonics and
                          seismic and hydrogeological condition); topographical limitations and geographical accidents of
                          geometric and constructive effect, infrastructure (telecommunications, drinking water and sewer
                          networks; civil constructions, existing and projected public works; city road system and
                          articulation of current transport network, urban space (equipment, urban development and housing
                          growth trend; design Limitations like minimum radii, transition curves, minimum lengths of
                          straight sections, etc.; availability of physical space for the location and construction of stations,
                          workshops and garages of the first line of the Metro de Quito; interconnectivity requirements of
                          future enlargements of the first line of the Metro de Quito, and environmental, social and heritage
                          aspects (identification and assessment of potential impacts on the environment, and social and
                          heritage elements of the city; identification and assessment of environmental and operational risks;
                          areas of possible expropriation). After studying and analyzing each of the alternatives in terms of
Public Disclosure Copy




                          the physical, biotic and socio-cultural characteristics of the project, of the construction methods,
                          alternative 1 (Central) was chosen as the most viable both for now and the future, considering the
                          demand for mass transit service and the restructuring of the current transport system in the city of
                          Quito, as well as the possibility of the construction of Metro lines in the future that complement
                          and further improve mass transit.

                           The project design included analysis of alternatives to help reduce potential environmental
                           impacts. For example, the selected design will utilize conventional tunneling in the historic center
                           of Quito in order to reduce potential impacts due to vibrations, and will not use the San Francisco
                           station to remove tunnel spoils (soil) to eliminate project-associated truck traffic. The exact
                           station locations have been slightly alternated (e.g., Ejido and Alameda) to reduce impacts on trees
                           of patrimonial importance.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            The Metropolitan District of Quito created a public company “Metropolitan Subway Empresa
                           Pública Metropolitana Metro de Quito? (EPMMQ), under whose responsibility is all processes
                           aimed at the conceptualization, planning, development and engineering studies, implementation,
                           operation and maintenance of the metro line in Quito.

                          The project EIA includes an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) which presents mitigation


                                                                     Page 11 of 15
                           and monitoring measures for each project phases (design, construction, operation and
                           maintenance, and closing) and EPMMQ has developed an Environmental and Social Management
                           Plan (EMP) that builds upon the EMP and further develops various environmental, social, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           health and safety aspects.

                           EPMMQ has established the Department of Social Responsibility, which is responsible for
                           environmental, social and health and safety. The department includes a manager and four areas
                           (presently one staff per area): environment, social, health and safety, and cultural resources. The
                           main responsibilities include: design, implement and maintain policies; supervision and
                           inspection; and training. Additional support is provided by outside consultants related to specific
                           technical areas or needs. Other EPMMQ staff provide input and assistance to certain technical
                           aspects, such as project design, interagency arrangements, public consultation. Various
                           components of EMP will be implemented by the project construction company, as established in
                           the EMP. EPMMQ will hire an independent consulting company to monitor and supervision
                           environmental, health and safety aspects in project construction. They will also contract, per the
                           project environmental license, for an annual independent environmental audit by independent third
                           party under terms of reference and selection approved by the Ministry of Environment. In order to
                           have a more effective implementation of the EMP, EPMMQ has established formal (e.g.,
                           convenios) and informal arrangements with various other public agencies/institutions, such as
                           Secretaría de Movilidad del DMQ related to traffic management, Instituto Metropolitano de
                           Patrimonio related to cultural resources and Quito historical center, Secretaría de Ambiente del
                           DMQ related to environmental regulatory compliance, and EPMAS and EPMMOP related to soil
                           disposal and waste disposal. The Ministry of Environment was the responsible agency for issuing
                           the project Environmental License and is responsible subsequent supervision. The Ministry of
                           Labor is responsible for worker health and safety regulatory compliance.

                           Environmental supervision/performance monitoring will include: (i) environmental, health and
                           safety monitoring and reporting by construction contractor, who by contract must have designated
                           environmental and health safety managers; (ii) environmental, health and safety supervision of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           construction works by an independent consultant firm reporting to EPMMQ; (iii) supervision by
                           EPMMQ; (iv) supervision by Ministry of Environment regarding compliance with EMP and
                           environmental regulatory requirements; (v) supervision by Ministry of Labor related to worker
                           safety; and (vi) performance of an annual environmental audit by independent third party under
                           terms of reference and selection approved by the Ministry of Environment.

                           EPMMQ is developing a plan to further strengthen the Department of Social Responsibility, in
                           particular related to the upcoming increased demands associated with the construction of Metro
                           Quito Phase 2 works. EPMMQ has also developed a plan to develop and implement an Integrated
                           Management System for Environment, Social, and Health and Safety.

                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             During the development of the project design and related demand studies, various stakeholders
                           were contacted for input. EPMMQ implemented a Social Participation Process/Plan associated
                           with the project EIA and the Metro Quito project. This process included establishment of 19
                           information centers installed in various parts of the city of Quito, including the historic center. The
                           locations of these centers allow fully coverage of the area of influence of the Metro de Quito. The
                           draft EIA was made available to the public. Simultaneous to the operation of the Information


                                                                      Page 12 of 15
                           Centers, 9 Public Hearings were held to present and discuss the project and its EIA. Other
                           participation mechanisms were also used, such as: website, social networks, fairs, exhibits,
                           printout material, etc. Stakeholder/public comments provide were related to various aspects of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           project: technical, environmental, social and heritage. Reportedly approximately 7,000 persons
                           participated in the overall process and approximately 15,000 information bulletins distributed.
                           The following were the main issues of interest to citizens: Technical issues - project cost, funding
                           sources, rate, route of the Metro, station locations, construction methods, energy use, Metro’s life
                           period, security systems in the Metro, emergency system, crossing through ravines and aquifers,
                           etc.; Environmental issues: vibration, pollution reduction, contingency measures, safety measures,
                           tree management, prevention programs, tailings, etc.; Social issues: safety, employment, ability to
                           carry bicycles, hours of operation, measures to mitigate social effects, social benefits,
                           expropriation, compensation, etc.; and Heritage issues: Plaza de San Francisco, Historic Center.
                           The comments, concerns, suggestions of citizenship were collected in matrixes listing the answers
                           given and links to the respective chapters of the EIA and the EMP.

                           The PMA and PGS have identified measures for ongoing public participation. An Information and
                           Follow-up Plan aims to implement various activities to provide information locations in which
                           different stakeholders learn and comment on the Metro Quito project (information centers). The
                           PGS also establishes that a Communication and Community Relations Plan will be implement,
                           having the objectives to: inform stakeholders about the technical aspects of Quito Metro project,
                           the benefits to the public, and the contribution in improving mobility in the city; disseminate
                           information on activities during the construction and operational phases of the Project Metro
                           Quito; disseminate the results of the implementation of Environmental Management Plan;
                           establish specific communication mechanisms; and promote the participation of stakeholders in
                           monitoring the project. The PGS also states that different conflict/complaint resolution
                           mechanisms will be implemented. The Bank is also contributing with a grant as well as technical
                           assistance to develop a geo-referenced ICT-based citizen feedback platform for strengthening
                           grievance redress mechanisms and conflict resolution.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                    01-Nov-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                 01-Jan-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive    25-Apr-2013
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ecuador                                                        01-Jun-2012
                           Comments: Disclosed associated with public consultation on draft EIA
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                    30-May-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                 03-Jun-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ecuador                                                        10-Jun-2013
                           Comments: Disclosed associated with public consultation on draft RPF
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the


                                                                     Page 13 of 15
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                             Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             property?
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Arturo Ardila Gomez


                                                                       Page 14 of 15
                         Approved By
                         Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)    Date: 17-Jun-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Advisor:
                         Sector Manager:     Name: Aurelio Menendez (SM)    Date: 17-Jun-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            Page 15 of 15
