                                                                     INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                              APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA497
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Jan-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                       India                                    Project ID:                      P124614
                              Project Name:                  Rajasthan Agricultural Competitiveness Project (P124614)
                              Task Team Leader:              Severin L. Kodderitzsch
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 17-Jan-2012                                   Estimated Board Date:            27-Mar-2012
                              Managing Unit:                 SASDA                                    Lending Instrument:              Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (60%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (20%), Agricultural
                                                             extension and resear ch (10%), Animal production (10%)
                              Theme:                         Rural services and infrastructure (70%), Rural markets (20%), Rural policies and institutions (10%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                       Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                        48.40
                                   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                              109.00
                                   Local Communities                                                                                                          9.10
                                   Total                                                                                                                    166.50
                              Environmental Category:        B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to establish at scale the feasibility of a distinct agricultural development approach that
                              helps farmers to get more rupees per unit of water in compensation for using fewer units of water by integrating water management and
                              agricultural technology, farmer organizations, and market innovations in selected locations across the ten agro-ecological zones of Rajasthan
Public Disclosure Copy




                              capable of sustainably increasing agricultural productivity and farmer incomes.

                              3. Project Description

                              The Project is organized into the following three components:

                              Component 1: Climate Resilient Agriculture (tentative cost: US$87.7 m): This component will support climate-resilient approaches that allows for
                              the sustainable use of the natural resource base through agricultural and livestock production systems aiming to increase long term productivity
                              and farm incomes in an environment marked by increased climate and, in particular, rainfall variability. More specifically, this component will
                              support measures that improve: (a) harvest, capture, collection, delivery and distribution of water for agriculture and livestock purposes in surface
                              water irrigated canal command areas, ground water sources and rainfed areas; (b) on-farm water use efficiency; (c) soil moisture and fertility
                              improvements; (d) sustainable intensification and diversification of farm production; and (e) integrated crop and livestock farming systems.

                              Sub Component 1A: Improvement of water use efficiency: This will be taken up under three different water scenarios, i.e. (i) irrigated command
                              areas under surface (canal) irrigation, (ii) command areas under groundwater irrigation and (iii) rainfed area. Across all three water resource
                              scenarios the project will support improvement in soil and moisture conservation (through contour bunding, contour vegetative barriers, etc.) and
                              complimentary agriculture support services. Matching grant financing will be provided for development plans proposed, developed and
                              implemented by the respective farmer groups which in turn will be responsible for mobilizing their contribution either in cash or in-kind or both.

                              Subcomponent 1 B: Technology transfer and market led advisory services: The focus of this sub-component will be on improving on-farm water
                              use efficiency in the clusters representing three water scenarios by promoting the demonstration and adoption of land and water management and
                              crop husbandry practices which improve agricultural productivity, profitability and sustainability while reducing water footprint of agriculture. The
                              project will finance (a) the demonstration and adaptation of location-specific soil and water conservation practices, including soil carbon
                              sequestration practices with a view of possibly mobilizing carbon payments; and (b) the demonstration and use of improved crop varieties,
                              integrated pest and nutrition management, as well as appropriate agronomic practices. Public-private partnership in agricultural service delivery
                              will be encouraged.

                              Subcomponent 1 C: Livestock strengthening and management: Livestock provides a potentially significant source of diversified income to
                              smallholder farmers operating in difficult climatic conditions. The project will support small ruminant livestock development (sheep and goats)
                              through (a) establishing silvi-pasture plantations on private and common land as well as fodder processing and storage facilities, so that nutrition is
                              made available for livestock round the year; and promoting green fodder cultivation as a crop diversification strategy; (b) developing organized
                              livestock markets and livestock group marketing approaches; and (c) strengthening the Animal Husbandry Department's capacity to locally deliver
                              cost-effective livestock support services such as animal health and nutrition, and to provide market linked advisory services.
                                                                                                                                                                         Page 1 of 7
                         Component 2: Markets and Value Chains (tentative cost US$33.8 m): The objective of this component is to enable farmers to engage in profitable
                         market oriented production, that is sustainable and to promote partnerships and market linkages with other value chain participants and
                         agribusinesses. The component will help producer groups, agro enterprises, and commodity associations, to actively engage in the development of
                         commodity value chains by partially financing demand-driven investment proposals to producer organization through a matching grant. This will be
                         done by further organizing members of water user groups and developing their capacity and skills for input and output marketing. It is expected
                         that aggregation will bring economies of scale in procurement of inputs and marketing of agricultural produce, thus enabling access to wider
Public Disclosure Copy




                         markets. These producer organizations will be an important vehicle for promoting market-oriented production in their geographical jurisdiction and
                         can act as centers for technology dissemination and input / output marketing. Project will support (a) develop value chains aiming to establish
                         longer term partnerships and market linkages between farmer groups and agribusiness enterprises, facilitated through an Agri-Business Promotion
                         Facility (ABPF); and (b) develop alternate market channels.

                         Sub Component 2A: Agri-Business Promotion Facility (ABPF). The competitiveness of small-holder farmers and agribusinesses will be promoted
                         by facilitating the development and establishment of demand-driven value chains through a participatory approach. An Agri-Business Promotion
                         Facility (ABPF), established under the project, will facilitate (i) the roll out of these participative value chains identification and stakeholder
                         consultation; (ii) promote investments in agribusiness, foster backward and forward linkages in the value chains for agricultural products, facilitate
                         access to finance by agribusiness entrepreneurs, and promote positive policy change; (iii) facilitate the implementation of Rajasthan’s Agribusiness
                         Policy; and (iv) mobilize national and state grants.

                         Sub Component 2B: Market Infrastructure and Agribusiness Support. This sub component will finance demand-based sub-projects proposed by
                         farmer groups, and producer organizations to build strategic linkages amongst the value chain participants with a view to increase
                         competitiveness, productivity, quality and market access. Market Infrastructure support will be provided to support farmer groups with matching
                         grant investments in rural market infrastructure and for productive infrastructure such as storage facilities, grading and sorting equipment,
                         collection centers etc. Agribusiness support will provide producer organizations with matching grant directed towards agribusiness support and will
                         co-finance investment proposals from producer organizations and producer groups established under the project and that are actively seeking to
                         expand their operations. Proposals that qualify for matching grants will have one or more of the following general characteristics: (i) provide clear
                         linkage through formal contracts between farmer groups/ producer organizations and agribusiness/ value chain participants; and (ii) have some
                         public good character that benefits many participants in a value chain.


                         Component 3: Farmers Organizations and Capacity Building (tentative cost: US$25.5 million):This component will support (a) mobilization and
                         establishing of farmer groups and capacity building for participatory planning and plan implementation; (b) strengthening of institutions and human
                         resources associated with the project implementation (i.e. participating line department and other relevant agencies). The community based
                         organizations (CBO) proposed will be organized around the three themes of the RACP- water resource management, agriculture, and value chain
                         development.

                         Component 4: Project Management and M&E (tentative cost: US$19.5 million): This component will undertake project management, provide for
                         robust monitoring and evaluation (M&E) systems with a view of potentially scaling up approaches deemed successful under this operation across
                         the state; as well as aim to build synergies and convergence with ongoing schemes from the Government of Rajasthan (GoR) and the
                         Government of India (GoI) such as Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY), the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
                         (MNREGS), etc. Development and pilot testing of production risk management tools in crop and livestock sectors will be supported under this
                         component, in partnership with insurance companies and banks.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         The RACP will be implemented in selected locations across ten agro-ecological zones (AEZ) in Rajasthan. Each AEZ in the state typically includes
                         three or four districts. Within an AEZ one District will be identified across which two Clusters will be developed with a primary focus on improving
                         water management across three water sources, i.e. either canal water or ground water or harvested rainwater (watersheds.) For each AEZ one or
                         several commodities will be supported in a value chain approach. Commodities can include traditional crops (annual, perennial) cultivated in
                         Rajasthan and for which the AEZ is believed to have a comparative advantage; or new crops for which a clear rationale and analysis exists that a
                         comparative advantage can indeed be established over time. Small ruminant (goat and sheep) development will be taken forward as a value chain
                         in two or more AEZ. There would be up to 20 Clusters supported under the RACP. For each Cluster the relevant hydrological catchment area will
                         be identified which provides for the basis of water resource management activities and each Cluster will comprise at least 10,000 ha of cultivation
                         for the lead commodity under Value Chain approach (which together with secondary crops may result in Clusters areas up up to 20,000 or
                         covering about 70 villages). ommodity under the Value Chain approach (which together with secondary crops may result in Clusters areas up to
                         20,000 or covering between 70 to 150 villages).
                         RACP activities in a Cluster will be implemented on the basis of a Cluster Agricultural Competitiveness Plan (CACP). The CACP is the outcome of
                         a planning process that aims to (a) identify opportunities towards developing one or two value chains in which the community deem themselves to
                         have a potential competitive advantage and to (b) select from a List of Eligible project investments and within the funding constraints those public
                         investments that will be enable the community to address constraints and enhance opportunities towards establishing identified value chains. The
                         value chain proposed would envisage addressing broad sub-sectoral issues as well as help establish specific partnership arrangements between
                         farmer groups or producer organizations with agribusiness companies.

                         Actual selection: To date, six clusters had been selected:
                         •           Two clusters are at an advanced stage of preparing Cluster Agricultural Competitiveness Plans (CACP), i.e. Boraj and Mokhampura
                         clusters, both in Jaipur District;
                         •           One cluster has initiated preparation of a CACP, i.e. Oshia in Jodpur; and
                         •           Three further clusters have been identified by the GoR PT in Bundi, Alwar and Ganganagar districts, respectively.
                         Some fourteen Clusters remain to be identified which will take place early during the implementation of the RACP. This will allow GoR to gain
                         initial experience in the preparation of CACPs, as well as to introduce a more demand driven selection process (as opposed to the initial rather top
                         down approach). As such the current implementation arrangements provide for a framework to plan and implement CACPs

                         Project Area and Coverage

                         The RACP will be implemented in selected locations across the ten agro-ecological zones (AEZ) in Rajasthan. Each AEZ in the state typically
                                                                                                                                                                   Page 2 of 7
                         includes three or four districts. For each AEZ one or several commodities will be supported in a value chain approach. Commodities can include
                         traditional crops (annual, perennial) cultivated in Rajasthan and for which an AEZ is believed to have a comparative advantage; or new crops for
                         which a clear rationale and analysis exists that a comparative advantage can indeed be established over time. Small ruminant (goat and sheep)
                         development will be taken forward as a value chain in two or more AEZ.

                         Within an AEZ one District will be identified across which (for reasons of ease of implementation), two Clusters will be developed with a primary
                         focus on improving water management across the three water sources, i.e. either canal water or ground water or harvested rainwater
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (watersheds.) There would be up to 20 Clusters supported under the RACP. The principles for Cluster selection include: (1) Each Cluster provides
                         for a demonstration or pilot on how to effectively support sustainable and profitable agriculture with a view towards potentially scaling up this model
                         (if successful) in the future (outside of the RACP). For a Cluster to be “testable? it requires a defined theme, demonstration objective and research/
                         development hypothesis that needs to be made explicit at the on-set and supported through the definition of a results framework (key indicators,
                         baseline and monitoring arrangements). (2) If multiple Clusters are identified within one AEZ (based on selected lead commodity), these Clusters
                         will be implemented within the same District to facilitate implementation. (3) For each Cluster the relevant hydrological catchment area will be
                         identified which provides for the basis of water resource management activities. (4) Each Cluster will comprise at least 10,000 ha of cultivation for
                         the lead commodity under the Value Chain approach (which together with secondary crops may result in Clusters areas up to 20,000 or covering
                         between 70 to 150 villages).
                         RACP activities in a Clus ter will be implemented on the basis of a Cluster Agricultural Competitiveness Plan (CACP). The CACP is the outcome of
                         a planning process that aims to (a) identify opportunities towards developing one or two value chains in which the community deem themselves
                         tohave a potential competitive advantage and to (b) select from a List of Eligible project investments and within the funding constraints those public
                         investments that will be enable the community to address constraints and enhance opportunities towards establishing identified value chains. The
                         value chain proposed would envisage addressing broad sub-sectoral issues as well as help establish specific partnership arrangements between
                         farmer groups or producer organizations with agribusiness companies.

                         Actual selection: To date, six clusters had been selected:
                         •           Two clusters are at an advanced stage of preparing Cluster Agricultural Competitiveness Plans (CACP), i.e. Boraj and Mokhampura
                         clusters, both in Jaipur District;
                         •           One cluster has initiated preparation of a CACP, i.e. Oshia in Jodpur; and
                         •           Three further clusters have been identified by the GoR PT in Bundi, Alwar and Ganganagar districts, respectively.
                         Some fourteen Clusters remain to be identified which will take place early during the implementation of the RACP. This will allow GoR to gain
                         initial experience in the preparation of CACPs, as well as to introduce a more demand driven selection process (as opposed to the initial rather top
                         down approach). As such the current implementation arrangements provide for a framework to plan and implement CACPs

                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                         Priti Kumar (SASDI)
                         Varun Singh (SASDS)

                         6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                    Yes        No     Explanation
                         Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                 ✖                The project will support investments in (a) collection, delivery and distribution
                                                                                              of water for agriculture and livestock purposes in surface water irrigated canal
                                                                                              command areas, ground water sources and rainfed areas; (b) on-farm water
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              use efficiency; (c) soil moisture and fertility improvements; (d) sustainable farm
                                                                                              production; (e) integrated crop and livestock farming systems and (f) value
                                                                                              chains through sorting, grading, storage, processing and rural haats aiming to
                                                                                              establish longer term partnerships and market linkages between farmer groups
                                                                                              and agribusiness enterprises. While the project has been designed around
                                                                                              components that have strong sustainability principles and is therefore
                                                                                              expected to result in positive eco-system benefits, there are potential
                                                                                              environmental issues that are mainly of a cumulative nature. These include
                                                                                              soil degradation, over-extraction of groundwater, reduced downstream flows,
                                                                                              build-up of pest resistance, pollution of the eco-system with agro-chemicals,
                                                                                              pesticide-related health and safety issues and erosion of biodiversity.

                                                                                              As a consequence, an Environmental Assessment (EA) of the proposed
                                                                                              project has been undertaken, and an Environmental Management Framework
                                                                                              (EMF) prepared, to ensure compliance with the applicable regulations and
                                                                                              triggered safeguards policies. The EMF sets out the procedures that will be
                                                                                              applied to the schemes to be taken up by farmer groups and their federations
                                                                                              as part of the Cluster Agricultural Competitiveness Plans (CACP) making use
                                                                                              of investments provided to them under Components 1 and 2 of the project.
                                                                                              The EMF comprises a set of procedures for granting environmental approval
                                                                                              including (i) Screening through a Regulatory Requirements List to provide
                                                                                              approval to activities that don’t contravene the relevant national and state
                                                                                              regulations and the triggered Bank safeguard policies (ii) Criteria for
                                                                                              classification of investments on the basis of the perceived intensity of
                                                                                              environmental impact of the schemes being low-medium or high; (iii)
                                                                                              Environmental Guidelines (EGs) for Sustainable Production, Water Resources
                                                                                              Development and Management, Livestock Development and Management and
                                                                                              Post–Harvest Storage and Processing key project investments; (iv) EMP
                                                                                              formats that help to apply the EGs and prepare a mitigation plan for the project
                                                                                              investments.




                                                                                                                                                                    Page 3 of 7
                               6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                   Yes         No     Explanation
                               Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                   ✖      The project will not take up any agricultural activities inside protected areas
                                                                                                    (wild life sanctuaries, national parks etc). Further there is no possibility of
                                                                                                    these areas being adversely impacted by villages or habitations of indigenous
                                                                                                    people located in the proximity of these areas. Hence the policy is not
                                                                                                    triggered.
Public Disclosure Copy




                               Forests OP/BP 4.36                                            ✖      The project will not take up any agricultural activities inside forests. Further,
                                                                                                    there is no possibility of these areas being adversely impacted by villages or
                                                                                                    habitations of indigenous people located in the proximity of these areas.
                                                                                                    Hence the policy is not triggered.
                               Pest Management OP 4.09                             ✖                The key objective of interventions in crop production is to increase crop
                                                                                                    productivity so that farmer income is also enhanced. The dominant and
                                                                                                    “business-as-usual? approach to achieving this is to promote crop production
                                                                                                    by introducing chemical fertilizers and apply chemical pesticides to control
                                                                                                    pests and diseases that attack the crop. However, use of such “Green
                                                                                                    Revolution? technologies results in the long-run in decreased yield, frequent
                                                                                                    crop failures and increased costs thereby increasing risk to the farmer and
                                                                                                    making him more vulnerable. Further, imbalanced and excessive use of
                                                                                                    chemicals in farming destroy the soil biota and thereby its fertility as well,
                                                                                                    leading to a need for increased use of chemical fertilizers. Similarly, increased
                                                                                                    use of chemical pesticides leads to destruction of pest predators and increase
                                                                                                    in pest and diseases. Further, these agri-chemicals would pollute the village
                                                                                                    ecosystem and affect the health of the farming families in the village and their
                                                                                                    livestock as well. Since RACP is expected to promote sustainable production
                                                                                                    practices as a part of project design the above issues are not considered to be
                                                                                                    critical in the project; however, as a matter of precaution to address any
                                                                                                    potential and unforeseen issues of pest and pesticide management, OP 4.09
                                                                                                    has been triggered.
                               Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                        ✖
                               Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                       ✖                RACP triggers OP/BP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples, as tribal people have
                                                                                                    significant presence Banswara, Udaipur, Dungarpur, Chittorgarh districts etc.
                                                                                                    Some of these districts and other areas with tribal presence would be covered
                                                                                                    under RACP clusters. Consistent with requirements of OP 4.10, a Tribal
                                                                                                    Development (Indigenous Peoples Framework) is prepared to ensure informed
                                                                                                    consultations and targeted outreach among tribals, promote their inclusion and
                                                                                                    participation in project interventions, institutions and benefit sharing; and
                                                                                                    enable the project to adopt socially and culturally compatible ways of working
                                                                                                    among tribal beneficiaries.
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                 ✖                RACP does not envisage any acquisition of private lands or physical
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                    displacement. However, OP/BP 4.12 is applicable due to the likelihood of
                                                                                                    small scale adverse impacts associated with physical infrastructure (water
                                                                                                    conservation structures, godowns, rural markets, livestock centres etc) or
                                                                                                    interventions on village commons (fodder/pasture development, community
                                                                                                    ponds etc). These interventions could result in small scale loss of structures,
                                                                                                    livelihoods and/or access to land and natural resources. The social
                                                                                                    management framework includes resettlement policy framework (RPF) that
                                                                                                    sets out screening of social impacts of such interventions and provision of
                                                                                                    rehabilitation assistance measures for mitigating any potential adverse impacts
                                                                                                    on beneficiaries, especially vulnerable households. Mitigation plans would be
                                                                                                    prepared wherever required.
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                     ✖
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                     ✖
                               7.50
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                         ✖

                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                 Environment: The potential environmental issues are of cumulative nature and include soil degradation, over-extraction of groundwater,
                                 reduced downstream flows, build-up of pest resistance, pollution of the eco-system with agro-chemicals, pesticide-related safety issues and
                                 erosion of biodiversity. No large-scale or irreversible impacts are expected.

                                 Social: RACP aims to improve the productivity, incomes and livelihood security of smallholder farmers with actual or potential commercial
                                 outlook. A significant proportion of the beneficiaries will be tribal people in tribal-dominated RACP clusters. Tribal people will also be included in
                                 the project interventions and benefits in other clusters. No significant large scale adverse social impacts are identified at this stage. Community-


                                                                                                                                                                            Page 4 of 7
                           planned activities on panchayat or common lands could result in small scale, localized losses of land, assets, access to grazing areas.
                            Describe any potential indirect and/or could also face opposition anticipated
                         2. Interventions on water and pasture lands long term impacts due to and conflicts.future activities in the project area:
                           This project is about promoting sustainable climate resilient agriculture and sustainable water source augmentation and efficient use. Therefore,
                           technically, the project should take up measures to halt and if possible reverse the already existing environmental degradation in the state.
                           However, as a matter of abundant caution, an EMF will mainstream these concerns by making mitigation measures a part of the cropping and
                           water management strategy of the project. Therefore, no severe or long term adverse environment or social impacts are expected as a result of
                           RACP activities. Furthermore, the PMU of RACP has a clear functional mandate and limited budgets. Consequently, the nature of activities/
Public Disclosure Copy




                           works taken up by them is likely to consistently remain of the same pattern during the project duration.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                           Environment: Project alternatives are not relevant in this context. However, a number of features have been built into the EMF with the intention
                           of avoiding or minimizing adverse impacts. Some of these are:
                           •           Sustainable water management and integrated farming practices are part of the core design of the project
                           •           Emphasizing on adherence to the relevant national and state regulations by virtue of compliance with a regulatory list.
                           •           Not supporting investments that are not permissible under the applicable regulations, or ensuring that wherever permissions are
                           required they are duly obtained.
                           •           Provision of a screening tool to categorize subproject according to level of impact.
                           •           Provision of environmental guidelines for Sustainable Production, Water Resources Development and Management, Livestock
                           Development and Management and Post–Harvest Storage and Processing key project investments
                           •           Provision for comprehensive capacity building of all stakeholders associated with the project including PMU, PIU, DPMU and DLIC
                           officials, representatives from support organizations, technical staff of line departments, and other project staff.

                           Social: Potential adverse social impacts are minimized by i) making private land acquisition ineligible; ii) making the CACP planning a demand
                           driven community-based process with focused consultations; iii) promoting and strengthening farmers organizations and collective water/
                           commons management; iv) the requirement of social impact screening of small scale infrastructure and other interventions on village commons,
                           and implementation of any required mitigation measures.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                            and implement the measures described.
                           The borrower (Department of Agriculture, Government of Rajasthan) has limited experience in developing and implementing environmental
                           safeguards related activities. However the issues of environmental safeguards is directly linked to sustainable water and agriculture
                           management which are known to the Department of Agriculture (DoA) through their experience in a gamut of agriculture and watershed related
                           programs. However, capacity building of the functionaries of DoA and the line departments will have to regularly take place in the areas of
                           sustainable management of water and agriculture practices to reinforce the innovative project design and EMF aspects.

                           The borrower has guided the preparation of the EA/EMF for the project with the help of individual consultants. It has been agreed with DoA that
                           personnel with the responsibility for environmental management will be located as follows in the project institutional structure: (i) the
                           Environmental Specialist in the State PMU will hold charge for environment aspects and will be responsible for (a) the review and approval of
                           the CACPs (b) monitoring, supervision and oversight of external environmental audits linked to EMF compliance possibly with support from a
                           cadre of task-based consultants recruited by the PMU, (c) the selection of experts for undertaking the EIAs of high-impact schemes and (d) the
                           provision of overall guidance and technical support to the state PIU, DPMU and DLIC officials; and (ii) each of the DPMU will be staffed with a
                           district nodal officer that is entrusted with the dual responsibility of environment management. This officer will facilitate and conduct technical
Public Disclosure Copy




                           reviews of scheme-specific environmental appraisal reports as well as the monitoring linked to EMF implementation at the district level; and (iii)
                           technical agencies or service providers that will be recruited by the PMU to prepare the CACP and implement them. These agencies will have
                           the required environmental expertise to mainstream the preparation and implementation of the EMPs as part of the CACPs. The EA/EMF of
                           RACP has provision for a structured capacity building program on implementation, supervision and monitoring of environmental safeguards. In
                           light of the above, the borrower has adequate capacity and motivation to implement safeguard-related procedures in an appropriate and
                           satisfactory manner.

                           Social:

                           The borrower has undertaken social assessment (SA) and prepared a social management framework (SMF) for RACP, with the help of
                           individual consultants. The SMF includes measures to i) mitigate potential small scale impacts related to loss of land, structure, livelihoods and
                           access to common lands/grazing areas (resettlement policy framework), ii) as well as a tribal development framework. GOR will be engaging
                           Social Development specialists/experts at the PMU and Cluster level (through service providers) for implementing, monitoring and supervising
                           the SMF.

                           The Rajasthan Government’s Departments of Agriculture//Horticulture, Animal Husbandry, Soil and Water Conservation, Ground water, and
                           Agricultural Marketing do have good experience of working with farmers and rural communities in Rajasthan. However, experience of
                           developing and implementing social safeguards related to involuntary resettlement impacts and tribal people is limited. The Department of
                           Groundwater and Rural Development have operational familiarity with social safeguards in the context of the ongoing Bank-supported
                           operations in water sector and rural livelihoods. RACP would need a strong and structured capacity building program on implementation,
                           supervision and monitoring of social safeguards.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                            on potentially affected people.
                           Primary beneficiaries are smallholder farmers, both men and women, with an actual or potential commercial outlook, brought together through
                           collective action towards achieving economies of scale e.g.: water user groups, ground water management communities, livestock herders,
                           watershed groups, women’s self help groups, farmer producer organizations and natural resource management institutions. In addition,
                           secondary beneficiaries will comprise other farmers obtaining better access to water through improved groundwater recharge or better water
                           distribution at the tail-end of command areas, as well as agricultural laborers through increased wages. Other stakeholders consist of private
                           sector partners (i.e. agro processors and agro industries, wholesalers, traders participating through value chains); public institutions (i.e. the six
                           GoR line departments); and (c) service providers (including several universities and a range of NGOs).


                                                                                                                                                                      Page 5 of 7
                           Stakeholder Consultations. GoR held field visits, focus group discussions and multi-stakeholder consultations with men and women farmers,
                           tribal groups, panchayat representatives, local NGOs, government officials, agrimarket traders and farmers’ producer companies in Jaipur
                           (Boraj, Mokhampura, Jhotwara, Laporia, Bagru), Udaipur (Mahuli, Jhadol), and Banswara (Arthunia, Masotia) during November 22-28, 2011.
                           Feedback and suggestions were sought on key environmental and social issues and strategies through these consultations during its
                           preparation. Overall, the response to the project components and activities has been positive among the primary stakeholders.

                           Public Consultation Workshops: An EA/EMF and SA/SMF disclosure workshop will be held in Jaipur in January 2012 and is expected to have
Public Disclosure Copy




                           attendance by a cross-section of the public and officials from several state government departments, NGOs, private companies and research/
                           academic agencies. The draft final EA/EMF and SA/SMF would be presented at this workshop and comments will be recorded and incorporated
                           into the EA/EMF and SA/SMF report.

                           Disclosure: The EA/EMF and the SA/SMF would be disclosed prior to appraisal by (i) posting the reports on GOR’s DoA websites and at the
                           Bank’s Infoshop; and (ii) translating the executive summary into the local language (Hindi) and displaying it prominently in all district libraries in
                           Rajasthan. In addition, the report will be distributed to all the district collectors. Access to a copy of the full EA/EMF will be provided to interested
                           individuals on request.

                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                                 Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                    05-Jan-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                                22-Dec-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                 12-Jan-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                           Directors
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                                 Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                    05-Jan-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                                12-Dec-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                 12-Jan-2012
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                                 Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                    05-Jan-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                                22-Dec-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                 12-Jan-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                                 Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                    05-Jan-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                                22-Dec-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                 12-Jan-2012
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                         disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                           Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                     Yes [     ]       No [    ]        NA [     ]

                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                           If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or SM? Are                   Yes [     ]       No [    ]        NA [     ]
                           PMP requirements included in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                           Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                           If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and approved by           Yes [     ]       No [    ]        NA [     ]
                           the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                           If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the             Yes [     ]       No [    ]        NA [     ]
                           plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information

                                                                                                                                                                       Page 6 of 7
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?              Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language      Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for   Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?              Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard    Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same        Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Signed and submitted by:                                                Name                                                 Date
                            Task Team Leader:                    Sarita Rana                                                              13-Jan-2012
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:     Sanjay Srivastava (RSA)                                                  20-Jan-2012
                            Comments:     cleared
                            Sector Manager:                      Simeon Kacou Ehui (SM)                                                   13-Jan-2012
                            Comments:     Cleared.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                                                 Page 7 of 7
