                                                                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                            APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSA567
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Feb-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                       Moldova                                 Project ID:                       P118518
                              Project Name:                  Moldova Agricultural Competitiveness Project (P118518)
                              Task Team Leader:              Anatol Gobjila
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 29-Feb-2012                                  Estimated Board Date:             01-May-2012
                              Managing Unit:                 ECSS1                                   Lending Instrument:               Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                        Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (70%), Crops (15%), Banking (10%), Central government administration (5%)
                              Theme:                         Rural markets (33%), Rural services and infrastructure (33%), Rural policies and institutions (17%), Export
                                                             development and competit iveness (17%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                      Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                        2.00
                                   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                              18.00
                                   Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                                                         4.44
                                   SWEDEN Swedish Intl. Dev. Cooperation Agency (SIDA)                                                                       3.00
                                   LOCAL BENEFICIARIES                                                                                                      10.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                    37.44
                              Environmental Category:        B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives
Public Disclosure Copy




                              The Project Development Objective is to enhance the competitiveness of the agro-food sector by supporting the modernization of the food safety
                              management system; facilitating market access for farmers; and mainstreaming agro-environmental and sustainable land management practices.

                              3. Project Description

                              The Project will focus on three priority enabling areas and their elements:
                              -         Firstly, it will focus on the modernization of the public system of food safety management which is critically necessary to maintain
                              domestic market share and increase access of food exports to traditional markets in the FSU countries and the EU market.
                              -         Secondly, it will focus on organization of farmers and facilitation of investments for modern post-harvest technologies and equipment.
                              -         Thirdly, it will focus on providing information and incentives to farmers aimed at mainstreaming sustainable land management practices.
                              The three areas above are modeled according to the EU CAP pillars.

                              The design of the proposed project, which will fully blend an IDA allocation of $18 million and GEF resources of $4.4 million, will take into account
                              investments and activities that the Government of Moldova and the international donor community have already conducted, launched, or
                              programmed under any of these areas (EU, MCC, USAID and IFAD). As such, the Project would aim to: (a) complement these investments; and
                              (b) enhance the integration of investment efforts and technical assistance in these areas; while (c) remaining sufficiently focused to address issues
                              in key value chains with comparative advantages and thus potential competitive advantages on domestic and foreign markets. The Project will
                              have the following components:

                              Component 1 (US$ 9 million): Enhancing Food Safety Management. This component would support the Government ambitious agenda in
                              engendering critically necessary adjustments in the food safety and quality management systems. The country has embarked on a process of
                              deep and comprehensive reforms in the sphere of Sanitary and Phyto-Sanitary actions (SPS) in order to ensure high levels of consumer protection
                              on the internal market, as well as create a platform for expansion of Moldova produce into the EU market. As the Moldovan Government has
                              explicitly set a strategic course for EU integration, the implementation of EU legislation in the field of SPS is inevitable, and is in fact a primary
                              factor in the impending negotiations on the Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement, as part of a future Association Agreement with the
                              EU. Adoption of EU acquis on SPS carries significant implications for state institutions in charge of food safety and quality, producers and
                              consumers. EU regulations in these fields demand some of the highest standards in the world and consequently compliance by Moldova to these
                              rigors would entail a lengthy and complex process that requires substantial financial efforts for necessary human and technical capacity
                              enhancements. The component would be structured in two sub-components that would aim to address key priorities identified in the framework of
                              Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement negotiations, focused on regulatory, institutional and technical strengthening of the food safety
                              management system.

                              Component 2 (US$15 million): Enhancing market access potential. Acknowledging that the need for investments promoting marketability and

                                                                                                                                                                        Page 1 of 5
                         market integration of hey agricultural products –specifically in the horticultural sector– is positively correlated to progress in improving post-harvest
                         infrastructure and in promoting increased levels of farmer organization, this component would support the establishment and further organization of
                         productive partnerships, and the application of modern post-harvest technologies by these emerging entities. This support would be expected to
                         translate into an increasing share of quality products that meet international quality standards, and therewith strengthen the sectors relative
                         competitiveness and consequently its income generation potential. Support under this component recognizes that the ability of the horticultural
                         sector to serve increasingly demanding national and regional markets will ultimately also remain a function of producers’ ability to organize and
                         cooperate both (a) through cooperation in production logistics, adaptation of voluntary international standards, and implementation of quality
Public Disclosure Copy




                         management and promotion schemes, and (b) cooperation in the establishment and use of post-harvest technologies and in the joint marketing of
                         horticultural products. The design and configuration of this component would fill a critical gap in the incentive system for producers to actually enter
                         into productive partnerships by providing an initial incentive in the form of conditional investment support.

                         Component 3 (US$11.35 million): Enhancing land productivity through sustainable land management. As part of a broader push of the project to
                         increase competitiveness of the agriculture sector, this component would support activities aimed at enhancing land productivity through
                         mainstreaming of sustainable land management and good agro-environmental practices. The activities of the component will be aligned along
                         three lines of support: (i) strengthening of human, institutional and technical capacity (both locally and nationally) for the implementation of SLM
                         activities; (ii) financial incentives to farmers for the adoption of sustainable land management; and (iii) investment support for the rehabilitation of
                         anti-erosion protection strips (hedges) with the purpose of maintaining and enhancing the productivity of agricultural land.

                         Component 4: Project Management (US$1.6 million). This component will provide technical and financial support for project management. The
                         implementation agencies for the proposed Project will be the Ministry of Agriculture and Food Industry (MAFI) and the Ministry of Environment
                         (ME). The Consolidated Agricultural Project Management Unit (CAPMU), which has nearly 10 years of experience in implementing World Bank
                         and GEF Projects will serve as a fiduciary agent for both implementation agencies. This component will finance activities such as (i) the PMU staff
                         and operations, (ii) Monitoring and Evaluation activities, (iii) training programs and (iv) audits.

                         Contingencies: US$0.5 million.

                         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         The project will be implemented countrywide.


                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                         Arcadii Capcelea (ECSS3)
                         Sophia V. Georgieva (ECSS4)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                             Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01               Yes              While generally the project will provide many environmental and social benefits
                                                                                            (such as increased food safety and farmer income due to higher agricultural
                                                                                            productivity, enhanced agricultural competitiveness, improved farmer skills in land
                                                                                            conservation or increased opportunity for engagement in small scale agri-
                                                                                            businesses by farmers), it may also cause some negative impacts. These impacts
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            might be associated with the project supported competitive and matching grant
                                                                                            schemes which are expected to finance: (a) producer-mobilization interventions on
                                                                                            a pilot basis and supporting post-harvesting investments aimed at improving
                                                                                            quality, consistency and quantity of primary supply (washing, grading, packing,
                                                                                            ripening room equipment, cold-storage, minor-processing); and (b) investments in
                                                                                            technologies and equipment for soil conservation-friendly agriculture as well as for
                                                                                            soil management activities. The proposed activities under these schemes, if not
                                                                                            adequately implemented, may cause some environmental impacts related to: (a)
                                                                                            increased pollution of ground and surface waters due to soil erosion, use of
                                                                                            fertilizers and pesticide, as well as the processing of agricultural products; (b)
                                                                                            threats to human health and wildlife due to poor handling of fertilizers and
                                                                                            pesticides; (c) increased siltation of water bodies due to soil erosion; (d) solid
                                                                                            waste resulting from pre-processing of agricultural products. Additionally the
                                                                                            project will support the rehabilitation of buildings, border control points and
                                                                                            laboratory facilities which may include minor civil works which also might generate
                                                                                            solid waste, air pollution and health hazards.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                       No               The borrower confirmed that activities involving conversion of areas which are
                                                                                            important wildlife habitat would not be eligible for financing.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                                No               This policy will be not triggered as all project activities will be implemented on
                                                                                            existing agricultural land and on the currently functioning border control points and
                                                                                            laboratory facilities.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09                           Yes              While the project will not finance the purchasing and/or application of pesticides, it
                                                                                            is possible that pesticide use will increase due to the increased intensity of
                                                                                            cropping supported by the project's grant schemes of the project and/or due to
                                                                                            promoting conservation agriculture. Therefore, OP 4.09 is triggered. No separate
                                                                                            Pest Management Plan is needed, but the Environmental Management Framework
                                                                                            includes measures to raise awareness and educate potential beneficiaries
                                                                                            regarding safe pesticide handling and use of Integrated Pest Management to
                                                                                            enhance sustainability and reduce human and environmental exposure to
                                                                                            dangerous products.


                                                                                                                                                                        Page 2 of 5
                               Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11          No               There will be no impact on physical cultural resources as all proposed activities will
                                                                                                be implemented on existing agricultural lands and/or within the laboratory facilities.
                               Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                   No               N/A
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12             No               The borrower confirmed the project will not support activities and sub-projects that
                                                                                                might result in resettlement. Any infrastructure constructed under the project will
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                be: a) located on land already owned by participants, or will be bought or leased
                                                                                                on a willing buyer-willing seller basis, and b) will be screened to ensure that it is
                                                                                                free of legal encumbrance, or informal use or occupation by others who lack formal
                                                                                                title. Furthermore, pasture improvement will not entail any form of involuntary
                                                                                                pasture closure or limitation of access. These conditions will be specified in the
                                                                                                Project Operational Manual.
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                       No               N/A
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP       No               N/A
                               7.50
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60           No               N/A


                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                   While generally the project will provide many environmental and social benefits (such as increased food safety and farmer income due to
                                 higher agricultural productivity, enhanced agricultural competitiveness, improved farmer skills in land conservation or increased opportunity for
                                 engagement in small scale agri-businesses by farmers), it may also cause some negative impacts. These impacts might be associated with the
                                 project supported competitive and matching grant schemes which are expected to finance: (a) producer-mobilization interventions on a pilot
                                 basis and supporting post-harvesting investments aimed at improving quality, consistency and quantity of primary supply (washing, grading,
                                 packing, ripening room equipment, cold-storage, minor-processing); and (b) investments in technologies and equipment for soil conservation-
                                 friendly agriculture as well as for soil management activities.

                                 The proposed activities under these schemes, if not adequately implemented, may cause some environmental impacts related to: (a) increased
                                 pollution of ground and surface waters due to soil erosion, use of fertilizers and pesticide, as well as the processing of agricultural products; (b)
                                 threats to human health and wildlife due to poor handling of fertilizers and pesticides; (c) increased siltation of water bodies due to soil erosion;
                                 (d) solid waste resulting from pre-processing of agricultural products. Additionally, the project will support the rehabilitation of buildings, border
                                 control points and laboratory facilities which may include minor civil works which also might generate solid wastes, air pollution and health
                                 hazards.

                                 The project will also have positive impacts on the environment and natural resource base of the project area: prevention of soil degradation;
                                 increase of soil moisture; increase in biomass and organic matter of soils; reduction of sediment loads to the rivers; and a decrease of run-off
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 and soil losses. This would result in a series of economic benefits: (a) increased soil productivity due to the adoption of SLM practices; (b) the
                                 value of nutrient recovery in the soil; and, (c) increased agricultural crops yields.

                                 The project triggers two WB OPs and specifically OP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment and OP 4.09 on Pest Management. The OP 4.01 is
                                 triggered as the project will support a series of activities which will generate some environmental and social impacts. To address these impacts
                                 the borrower prepared an EMF (see point above). While the project will not finance the purchasing and/or application of pesticides, it is possible
                                 that pesticide use will increase due to the increased intensity of cropping supported by the Project's grant schemes of the project and/or due to
                                 promoting conservation agriculture. To address the issues related to this OP the EMF includes measures to raise awareness and educate
                                 potential beneficiaries regarding safe pesticide handling and use of Integrated Pest Management to enhance sustainability and reduce human
                                 and environmental exposure to dangerous products. Such measures are described in the section VI of the EMF.

                                 The borrower confirmed the project will not support activities and sub-projects that might result in resettlement. The EMF clearly indicates that
                                 any infrastructure constructed/rehabilitated under the project will be: (a) located on land already owned by participants, or will be bought or
                                 leased on a willing buyer-willing seller basis, and, (b) will be screened to ensure that it is free of legal encumbrance, or informal use or
                                 occupation by others who lack formal title. Furthermore, these documents will also specify pasture improvement will not entail any form of
                                 involuntary pasture closure or diminished access.

                                 As stated in the EMF prepared by the borrower, OP/BP4.04 on Natural Habitats also would not be triggered as the project will not support any
                                 activities which might involve conversion of natural areas. The OP/BP 4.36 on Forests policy also will be not triggered as all project activities
                                 will be implemented on existing agricultural land and on the currently functioning border control points and laboratory facilities. Similarly, there
                                 will be no impact on physical cultural reso urces as all proposed activities will be implemented on existing agricultural land and/or within the
                                 laboratory facilities.
                               2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                                  The potential long term impacts are positive and relate to increased agricultural competitiveness as well as increased soil productivity and
                                 crop yields. The project will also bring long term positive impacts in terms of soil conservation by improving land management practices.
                               3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                                  N/A
                               4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                                  and implement the measures described.

                                                                                                                                                                           Page 3 of 5
                            To address project-related potential negative impacts the borrower prepared an EMF which specifies the Environmental Impact Assessment
                           (EIA) requirements for the project activities and sub-projects to be financed. This document covers the following: rules and procedures for
                           environmental screening; guidance for preparing sub-projects EIA and/or simple EMPs as well as of EMP Checklist for identified small scale
                           construction and reconstruction activities; possible mitigation measures for different types of sub-projects; requirements for monitoring and
                           supervision of implementing of EIA/EMPs. The EMF contains also a series of measures to raise awareness and educate potential beneficiaries
                           regarding safe pesticide handling and use of Integrated Pest Management. These measures are targeted at providing a framework for
                           educating farmers on issues related to pesticide handling and promoting integrated pest management (IPM) and thus, understanding and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           managing pest problems in the horticultural sector, reducing human and environmental health risks associated with pesticide use, and
                           protecting ecosystem by conserving beneficial agents such as natural enemies of pests and pollinators to increase productivity. The project will
                           hire a national research institution and/or an NGO with necessary expertise in horticultural crop and IPM capabilities as well as with capacity to
                           deliver training for farmers. Based on the research and technical support needs of the project beneficiaries, the selected consultant will develop
                           IPM packages for horticultural systems, develop and deliver a training program with the aid of demonstrations, adaptive research trials and
                           experiential learning in the farmer fields. This institution will train the trainers and project specialists, as well as sub-project beneficiaries and
                           assist the Project Management Unit in designing a monitoring and evaluation program. The proposed activities would also cover field
                           demonstrations with improved pesticide usage as well as IPM technologies. The Consolidated Agricultural Project Management Unit (CAPMU)
                           will coordinate the implementation of these activities.

                           The EMF will be integrated into the Project's Operational Manual and will be used as part of all contracts involving proposed activities and
                           selected sub-projects. The Bank is expected to provide a special training to the CAPMU team, so they can promote compliance with the EMF
                           and EMP. The subproject EMPs will be also integrated into the contracts for approved activities, both into specifications and bills of quantities
                           and the Contractors will be required to include the cost in their financial bids and grant proposals.

                           The EMF specifies its implementing responsibilities and arrangements. The proposed Project will be implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture
                           and Food Industry (MAFI) and the Ministry of Environment (ME). MAFI has extensive experience in successfully implementing World Bank
                           projects (ex. on-going RISP-II and RISP-IIAF, Avian Influenza projects), while the ME has extensive experience in implementing GEF funded
                           projects (ex. Moldova Agricultural Pollution Control and POPs projects). CAPMU, which has nearly 10 years of experience in implementing
                           World Bank and GEF projects will serve as a fiduciary agent for both implementation agencies. CAPMU has a highly qualified Environmental
                           Specialist, being responsible for project safeguards issues. Up to now the CAPMU environmental and social performances have been qualified
                           as adequate. The WB team will continue to monitor closely EMF implementation, providing, if needed, relevant assistance. The EMF and sub-
                           projects EMPs implementation will remain under the direct responsibility of the CAPMU, including responsibilities for supervision and monitoring
                           of construction activities. Compliance with the EMF and EMPs and monitoring of the impact during the construction phase will be undertaken by
                           the CAPMU Environmental Specialist as part of his contract supervisory duties.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                            on potentially affected people.
                             The EMF was disclosed and consulted in the country. On January 18, 2011, CAPMU has disseminated the draft summary EMF to key project
                           stakeholders (Ministry of Environment; Ministry of Agriculture and Food Industry; State Ecological Inspectorate) for review and comments, also
                           posting it in the same day its full English version along with the EMF Summary in Romanian for wide public on CAPMU web site (www.capmu.
                           md). On January 26, 2012, CAPMU conducted a public briefing and consultation meeting on the EMF document. The meeting concluded that
                           the draft EMF document covers practically all potential impacts and possible mitigation measures. The draft document was revised after the
                           meeting, taking into account outputs from the consultation. The final version of the EMF (Romanian) and its English version were posted on the
                           CAPMU website and submitted to the World Bank for its disclosure in the Infoshop. EMF will be used by the client during the project
Public Disclosure Copy




                           implementation.

                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                                Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                   18-Jan-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                               18-Jan-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                01-Feb-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                           Directors
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                                NA
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                   NA
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                               NA
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                NA
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                         disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                           Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                    Yes [     ]      No [     ]       NA [     ]

                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                                                                                                                                                                     Page 4 of 5
                              If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or SM? Are            Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              PMP requirements included in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                              Management Specialist?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?              Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language      Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for   Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?              Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard    Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same        Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Task Team Leader:                    Anatol Gobjila
                            Approved By:
                            Sector Manager:                      Name Dina Umali-Deininger (SM)                                           Date: 24-Feb-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                                               Page 5 of 5
