                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                    Report No.: ISDSC842

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Oct-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Armenia                            Project ID:       P127759
                            Project Name:       IRRIGATION SYSTEM ENHANCEMENT PROJECT (P127759)
                            Task Team           Giuseppe Fantozzi
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           26-Nov-2012                        Estimated         26-Mar-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      ECSAR                              Lending           Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector:             Irrigation and drainage (90%), General energy sector (10%)
                            Theme:              Water resource management (70%), Rural policies and institutions (20%), Rural
                                                services and infrastructure (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                                Amount
                              Borrower                                                                          4.40
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                            22.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Local Farmer Organizations                                                        0.50
                              Total                                                                            26.90
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is (i) to reduce water losses and energy needs for
                           operating selected schemes and (ii) to improve the capacity of Water Users Associations.
                           C. Project Description
                           The development objective would be sought through: (i) interventions to convert, where feasible,
                           pump-based irrigation to gravity irrigation, and to upgrade the efficiency of pump-based irrigation
                           where conversion would not be feasible; and (ii) interventions to upgrade WUA-level irrigation
                           canals, outlet canals of pumping stations and to pilot drip irrigation. Limited additional activities will
                           also aim at piloting bio-drainage in the Ararat valley and institutional measures and interventions to
                         improving participation and governance in Water Users Associations (WUAs).

                         The Project would consist of three components:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Improving the energy efficiency of selected parts of the irrigation system
                         infrastructure (US$15.0 million): This will include:
                         a) Conversion of pump-based irrigation to gravity (US$10.0 million): The rationale for this sub-
                         component would be to lower the cost of water by converting pump-based irrigation to gravity
                         irrigation. The Project would provide for the construction of two gravity systems (Meghri,
                         Geghardalich).
                         b) Upgrading of non-convertible pump-based irrigation systems (US$ 5.0 million): This sub-
                         component would aim to lower the operating cost and improve the efficiency of irrigation systems in
                         areas where pump-based irrigation is the only option and is proven to be economically justified.
                         Interventions would include necessary mechanical improvements to about 15 pumping stations to
                         ensure their uninterrupted operation and energy use efficiency, in parallel with the upgrading of
                         about 35 km of outlet canals to minimize high value water losses.

                         Component 2: Improving the conveyance efficiency of selected part of the irrigation system. (US$7.5
                         million): This will include:
                         a) Upgrading of tertiary level canals (US$5.5 million). In order for the benefits of membership in
                         WUAs to become more visible to farmers, this sub-component would provide funding, on a cost-
                         sharing basis (most probably 15 percent), to upgrade irrigation infrastructure for which participating
                         WUAs are responsible. This would cover about 10 km of secondary and 20 km of tertiary canals. It
                         would be done through contractual arrangements.
                         b) Upgrading of selected outlet canals for pumping stations (US$1.0 million). In parallel with the
                         upgrading of pumping stations in component 1 (b) about 35 km of outlet canals to minimize losses of
                         high value water will be needed.
                         c) Pilot programs (US$1.0 million): This sub-component would support pilot activities to test, under
                         actual farm conditions, the technical feasibility and economic desirability of: (i) drip irrigation (US
Public Disclosure Copy




                         $0.75 million): Volunteer farmers would be invited to participate in this pilot program on a cost-
                         sharing basis (most probably 35 percent). The pilot would probably involve 5 sites in the command
                         areas of 5 WUAs (Ararat, Vagharshapat, Armavir, Araks, Khoy) pre-selected on the basis of the
                         intensity of cropping and the frequency of water shortage.; and (ii) bio-drainage (US$0.25 million):
                         The aim would be to test the technical and cost effectiveness of bio-drainage as an environment-
                         friendly approach to lowering the groundwater level and preventing soil mineralization. The pilot
                         would cover about 500 ha, 20% of which would be planted in tree species suitable for the purpose at
                         hand and offering potential economic value for the communities affected. The pilot program would
                         be located in the Ararat Valley, along the Araks River, possibly in the Sis, Noramarg, Araksvan and
                         Baghramyan communities.


                         Component 3: Capacity building for WUAs and Project Management (US$4.4 million): This will
                         include:

                         1.      Capacity building for WUAs: The primary focus of this sub-component would be on making
                         WUAs governed by and serving the interest of the totality of their members, including women.
                         While past support to WUAs centered on their legal establishment and the creation of administration
                         and operation capabilities, this Project would address mainly governance and participation issues.
                         This will include setting up of a mechanism to generate gender disaggregated monitoring data.
                           Operational training will also be included through refreshment courses of modules already developed
                           in the past (procurement, financial management, irrigation techniques, O&M planning and fee
                           setting, etc.) and the development of a new module on efficient on-farm use of water.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           2.       Project Management: This sub-component would provide for overall project management,
                           coordination of the implementation process, preparation of preliminary design documents,
                           coordination and monitoring of technical supervision of civil works, preparation of tender documents
                           and management of the procurement process, monitoring project activities, and reporting on progress
                           in project implementation.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the           safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Bulk of the individual investments under the Irrigation System Enhancement Project (ISEP) will be
                           concentrated in Ararat, Armavir, and Aragatzon provinces (marzes) of Armenia. Two schemes
                           targeted for conversion from pumping to gravity system are located in Syunik marz (Meghri), and
                           Kotayk marz (Geghardalich).
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Project will be managed by the Water Sector Project Implementation Unit (PIU) operating under
                           the State Committee for Water Management (SCWM), which has more than a decade of experience
                           in implementing water projects, mainly those financed by the Bank.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Darejan Kapanadze (ECSEN)
                           Kosuke Anan (ECSSO)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             OP/BP Environmental Assessment is triggered
Public Disclosure Copy




                           BP 4.01                                             and Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) of
                                                                               the proposed project activities is required. EIA
                                                                               for one specific investment to be financed from
                                                                               the project was carried out under the MCC
                                                                               program. Based on the experience from
                                                                               Irrigation Rehabilitation Emergency Project
                                                                               (IREP), this EIA report is expected to be
                                                                               suitable for the purposes of the proposed ISEP,
                                                                               provided that it gets updated and revised to
                                                                               satisfy all requirements of the Bank policy.

                                                                               The project proposes to improve irrigation
                                                                               efficiency and to lower costs by converting two
                                                                               existing deteriorated pump irrigation schemes
                                                                               (Gegardalich and Meghri schemes) to gravity
                                                                               fed schemes. This would imply moving some
                                                                               water intakes from their current locations to new
                                                                               ones. In case of Meghri scheme, multiple
                                                                               intakes from Araks River will be replaced by a
                                                                               single new intake from Meghri River, which is
                         the tributary of Araks; and in case of
                         Geghardalich, several pumping intakes drawing
                         water from Azat reservoir will be substituted
Public Disclosure Copy




                         with water intake from Geghardalich reservoir.
                         The latter exists at present, though needs
                         increase of capacity through heightening of the
                         dam. While the amount of water intake is not
                         expected to change for the Araks scheme, the
                         EIA shall investigate potential negative
                         ecological impacts of the change in intake
                         location.

                         A full-scale EIA was carried out for the works
                         proposed on Meghri scheme, though with recent
                         changes in the design the EIA report needs an
                         update. It is expected that EIA report for
                         Meghri will be re-worked prior to the ISEP
                         appraisal as part of the consultant assignment
                         for the Meghri feasibility study and the detailed
                         design under the on-going IREP AF. It is
                         advisable that procurement arrangements for
                         conducting EIA for Geghardalich scheme are
                         made promptly to ensure timely delivery of the
                         EIA report for the Bank approval and disclosure
                         by the Project appraisal.

                         Testing of bio-drainage technique is one of the
                         proposed activities under the ISEP. It implies
Public Disclosure Copy




                         planting trees to pull out excess water from the
                         soil and rendering it suitable for cultivation.
                         The excess water is the result of water logging
                         due to many years of irrigation in the area in the
                         absence of functional drainage. It is not clear
                         whether bio-drainage would be effective in this
                         situation, as it would not address the problem of
                         excess mineralization (salinity) of the soil which
                         frequently arises in such cases. Therefore, this
                         project idea will be further investigated during
                         ISEP preparation, and a decision made as to
                         whether to include the pilot activity. If found to
                         be viable as a pilot activity, an Environmental
                         Assessment will be carried out which will focus
                         on the pilot area but also take into account
                         potential impacts and mitigation requirements
                         should the pilot be successful and thus trigger
                         larger scale application of the approach in the
                         area. Among the issues to be addressed is the
                                                                 need to avoid use of invasive non-native tree
                                                                 species.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes   OP 4.09 Pest Management is triggered, because
                                                                 some agricultural areas, which had been out of
                                                                 irrigation due to deteriorated infrastructure, will
                                                                 be brought back to irrigation as a result of IEEP
                                                                 and that would most likely imply increased use
                                                                 of pesticides. While there is no need of
                                                                 developing a Pest Management Plan, promotion
                                                                 of sound pesticide use practices will be included
                                                                 into the project design.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement is
                         4.12                                    triggered, because construction of new irrigation
                                                                 pipelines, as well as rehabilitation of the
                                                                 existing ones - to lesser extent - may cause a
                                                                 need for land take or temporary restriction of
                                                                 land use. No physical relocation or large scale
                                                                 land acquisition is likely, though, because
                                                                 rehabilitation of the existing schemes usually
                                                                 does not cause such impacts, and construction
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 of the new sections of pipelines is planned along
                                                                 the right-of-way of the existing
                                                                 communications.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         Yes   OP/BP 4.37 Safety of Dams is triggered,
                                                                 because conversion of Gegardalich pumping
                                                                 scheme to gravity implies switching of water
                                                                 abstraction from Azat reservoir to the
                                                                 Gegardalich reservoir and expansion of the
                                                                 latter to be achieved by increasing the height of
                                                                 the existing dam from 13.9 m to 15.5 m.
                         Projects on International         Yes   OP/BP 7.50 Projects on International
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                    Waterways if triggered, because conversion of
                                                                 Meghri scheme implies construction of a new
                                                                 water intake point from river Meghri - a
                                                                 tributary of an international river Araks. Once
                                                                 this new intake becomes operational, the
                                                                 existing several intakes from river Araks will be
                                                                 decommissioned. According to the available
                                                                 design documents, the volume of water
                                                                                                                                 abstraction from the new intake point on river
                                                                                                                                 Meghri will be the same as the total designed
                                                                                                                                 capacity of present abstraction points on river
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 Araks. ISEP intervention is not designed to
                                                                                                                                 increase volume of water abstraction from river
                                                                                                                                 Araks, but will rather substitute several points
                                                                                                                                 of abstraction from Araks with one point of
                                                                                                                                 abstraction from a tributary of river Araks.
                                                                                                                                 Therefore, approval from the RVP will be
                                                                                                                                 sought in order to except the proposed activities
                                                                                                                                 from the riparian notification requirement under
                                                                                                                                 OP 7.50 para 7(a).
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Oct-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      EIA reports, including EMPs, for larger scale construction works on Geghardalich and Meghri
                                      schemes, as well as site-specific EMPs for smaller scale interventions will be prepared and
                                      disclosed before appraisal. Detailed designs for drip irrigation and bio-drainage pilot sub-projects
                                      may not be known at that stage, in which case Environmental Management Framework for the
                                      pilot activities program will be developed and disclosed also prior to the appraisal. All site-
                                      specific environmental reports and management plans will be discussed with stakeholders and
                                      finalized before commencement of works at any specific site.
                                      The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared and disclosed prior to appraisal,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      based on the existing RPF for the IREP. Site-specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) will be
                                      prepared in accordance with the RPF and disclosed before commencement of specific civil works
                                      as applicable.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Giuseppe Fantozzi

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 09-Oct-2012
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Dina Umali-Deininger (SM)                                                                                            Date: 21-Oct-2012




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
