                                                                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                             APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA729
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Apr-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        Philippines                              Project ID:                       P119069
                              Project Name:                   National Sector Support for Kalusugan Pangkalahatan (Universal Health Care) (P119069)
                              Task Team Leader:               Sarbani Chakraborty
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 05-Mar-2012                                    Estimated Board Date:             05-Jul-2012
                              Managing Unit:                  EASHH                                    Lending Instrument:               Sector Investment and Maintenance Loan
                              Sector:                         Health (80%), Other social services (20%)
                              Theme:                          Health system performance (80%), Other social protection and risk management (20%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                        Amount
                                   Borrower                                                                                                                     0.00
                                   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                                     300.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                     300.00
                              Environmental Category:         C - Not Required
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              The project development objective (PDO) is to increase financial risk protection under the National Health Insurance Program (NHIP) for all
                              Filipinos with a major focus on underserved populations identified through the National Household Targeting System for Poverty Reduction (NHTS-
                              PR).

                              3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                              The project consists of two components: (i) health financing, (ii) service delivery transformations. Strengthened monitoring and evaluation is a
                              cross-cutting theme across both components.

                              Component 1: Health Financing: The objective of this Component is to support the Philippines Health Insurance Corporation (PhilHealth)
                              implement Strategic Thrust 1 of KP/UHC which focuses on financial risk protection under the NHIP with a special emphasis on poor households.
                              This will be achieved through the following sub-components: (i) expanding membership of NHTS-PR families into the NHIP, (ii) enhanced
                              PhilHealth benefits and improved services under the NHIP which will benefit NHTS-PR households, (iii) organizational strengthening with the
                              objective of increasing PhilHealth capacity to deliver greater value to customers, (iv) strengthened DOH stewardship of health financing. It consists
                              of four sub-components:

                              Sub-Component 1.1: Increasing membership of NHTS-PR households into the NHIP: This sub-component will support DOH and PhilHealth
                              effectively enroll NHTS-PR families into the NHIP and includes the following activities: (i) PhilHealth clean-up of NHTS List provided by DSWD, (ii)
                              providing NHTS list to health care providers, (iii) ensuring informed NHTS-PR members through the RNHeals Batch 3 training, DSWD municipal
                              links, community health teams (CHT) and the PhilHealth CARES Program (PhilHealth employed nurses, PhilHealth desk/link at the hospital level),
                              (iv) Close coordination with DSWD in the implementation of membership for 4P beneficiaries (5Ps – PhilHealth para sa 4Ps), (v) timely distribution
                              of ID cards. The GOP will provide full national government (NG) subsidy, contingent on the adoption of amendments to the NHIP Law or other
                              provisions, for the poorest 20 percent of the population (initially 5.2 million poor families identified through the NHTS-PR) and implement partial
                              subsidy schemes for near poor families identified through NHTS-PR in partnership with local government units (LGUs) and members.

                              Sub-Component 1.2: Enhanced NHIP benefits package implementation: PhilHealth will incrementally expand the benefits package for all members
                              – initially with a focus on specific groups such as sponsored program members (NHTS-PR families), Overseas Foreign Workers (OFW) and
                              organized groups. Expansion of the benefits package will be linked to actuarial calculations and broadly embedded in value for money
                              considerations. Specifically, PhilHealth will: (i) implement a no-balanced billing (NBB) policy, initially for a limited number of cases and for specific
                              sections of NHIP members (sponsored program/NHTS-PR households) and eventually expand this policy to cover all members, (ii) implement
                              All-Case Rates (ACR) for acute inpatient care within a coherent strategy for managing costs and quality (example through global budgets and
                              enhanced monitoring), (iii) implement a catastrophic health benefit for all NHIP members linked to PhilHealth actuarial calculations, (iv) implement
                              a primary care benefits (PCB). In the implementation of expanded benefits, PhilHealth will focus on the types of provider payment mechanisms
                              that will ensure that the benefits are delivered in the most optimal manners, and adopt institutional capacity building interventions for improved
                              monitoring and quality assurance on the implementation of the enhanced benefits package. PhilHealth has defined the following interventions will
                              be initially implemented vis-à-vis public and private providers – implementing performance commitments in place of warranties of accreditation,
                              making the performance commitment specific to service capability, ensuring electronic data submission, stronger monitoring and strengthening
                              staff capacity to manage contracts with providers.

                                                                                                                                                                           Page 1 of 4
                         Sub-Component 1.3: Organizational Change Management: Philhealth recognizes that in order to implement the enhanced vision of UHC for all
                         Filipinos thr ough the NHIP, organizational strengthening and change management will be necessary. PhilHealth will incrementally implement
                         interventions to: (i) change the mindset of the organization to focus on customer orientation and embracing change, (ii) increasing accountability
                         for performance, (iii) strengthening strategy and management skills into the system, (iv) increasing organizational efficiency.

                         Sub-Component 1.4: DOH Stewardship of Health Financing: The Department of Health is the steward in the health system and plays an important
Public Disclosure Copy




                         role in tracking health expenditures and using an evidence-based approach to increase public financing in a broader context of fiscal space
                         analysis. It also has a responsibility to hold affiliated agencies such as PhilHealth accountable for the effective implementation of the National
                         Health Insurance Program as well as ensuring that local government units face the necessary incentives to increase financing for the health sector.
                         These stewardship tasks entail: (i) regular updates of the National Health Accounts (through the National Statistics Office), (ii) use of the NHA for
                         evidence-based policy-making, (iii) country-wide implementation of Local Health Accounts (LHA) and integration into the LGU scorecard and (iv)
                         creating the necessary linkages between the LGU scorecard and performance-based grants for LGUs.

                          Component 2: Service Delivery Transformations to Support a Reformed NHIP and DOH Public Health Program for Local Government Units
                         (LGUs)

                         The objective of this component is to support the Department of Health (DOH) implement Strategic Thrust 2 of KP/UHC which focuses on
                         improved access to quality hospitals and health care facilities through accelerated upgrading of public health facilities. The health service delivery
                         reforms identified under KP/UHC complement the health financing interventions.

                         Sub-Component 2.1: Transforming DOH Hospitals: This sub-component would support the implementation of various interventions to enable DOH
                         hospitals to earn Centers of Quality or Centers of Excellence accreditation status from PhilHealth. The attainment of Centers of Quality or
                         Excellence awards requires that both DOH and the DOH hospitals undertake several steps that would transform DOH hospitals. These will include:
                         (i) Crafting of policies that would mandate costing of hospital services and the setting up of unified financial management systems, improved
                         information management systems, and dynamic quality improvement systems; (ii) Training of hospital managers on the above interventions, and
                         implementation of the said policies; (ii) Mobilizing additional financing through increased government funding, public-private partnerships, retention
                         of expanded hospital income, and other mechanisms in order to increase resource inputs including health personnel, drugs, and diagnostics.

                         Sub-Component 2.2: Transforming LGU Provision of Hospital and health-related MDG services – This sub-component would support the improved
                         implementation of Health Facility Enhancement Program (HFEP) and LGU performance grants to leverage improved service delivery by LGUs.
                         This will also support the prioritization of the DOH inputs in 11 provinces and the National Capital Region which would only prioritize the LGUs with
                         the most numbers of NHTS poor families but also LGUs where gaps in vaccination, facility-based deliveries, and TB control are highest. These
                         reforms are expected to lead to improved LGU provision of hospital and health-related MDG services for their constituents, particularly PhilHealth
                         enrolled NHTS poor families. Among the reforms that would contribute in transforming LGU service delivery are: (i) Ensuring the completion of all
                         necessary infrastructure and equipment upgrading of LGU health facilities and the accreditation of the upgraded health facilities with PhilHealth (as
                         agreed bilaterally in the PIPHs), (ii) Service level agreements between DOH and provinces, and between provinces and their component LGUs
                         that would set clear responsibilities and accountabilities and mobilize additional financing through increased government funding, public-private
                         partnerships, retention of expanded hospital income, and other mechanisms in order to increase resource inputs including health personnel, drugs,
                         and diagnostics, (iii) Leveraging DOH transfers for increased LGU investments in implementing the immunization, and maternal, newborn, child
                         health and nutrition (MNCHN) programs, (iv) Supporting the improvement of LGU supply chain and logistics management particularly drugs and
                         medicines supply chain and logistics systems for the immunization, TB control, and MNCHN programs, (v)Supporting the improvement of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         management and financial systems of LGU hospitals and health centers including advocating to and convincing local chief executives to grant
                         management and fiscal autonomy to hospitals and health centers.

                         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         This is a national project. The location of project sites is not yet known and will be determined during project implementation. In general, the project
                         sites may be located in any part of the country.

                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                         Maria Loreto Padua (EASPS)
                         Gerardo F. Parco (EASPS)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                            Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01              Yes
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                      No
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                               No
                         Pest Management OP 4.09                          No
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11           No
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                    Yes
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12              No
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                        No
                         Projects on International Waterways OP/BP        No
                         7.50
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60            No




                                                                                                                                                                     Page 2 of 4
                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                   The potential infrastructure investments are described in Component 2 of the Project under Health Facility Enhancement Program. This
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 component can allow for financing of necessary infrastructure and equipment upgrading of LGU health facilities. The scope of investment is
                                 limited to the upgrading of existing LGU health facilities. No new health facilities are to be constructed. There are no specific projects/
                                 investments identified during the preparation of this project, for implementation during the first year. It is expected that the likely investments will
                                 have two major impacts 1) general construction related impacts and 2) impacts from generation of health care waste. The impacts of general
                                 construction activities are temporary and easy to mitigate. Health Care Waste should be properly handled, processed and disposed to avoid
                                 impacts such as cross contamination by pathogenic material and toxic waste. Since the project aims to increase coverage of health services
                                 among underserved population, it is expected to improve the access of indigenous people to health care.
                               2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                                  The long term beneficial impact of the Project is to provide increased access to health care services to the underserved communities in the
                                 country, which would likely include indigenous communities. Prevention, early diagnosis and treatment of disease due to increased access to
                                 health services will lead to lower medical costs and more productivity.
                               3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                                  Not applicable
                               4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                                  and implement the measures described.
                                   An Environmental Code of Practice (ECOP) has been developed by the DOH to manage the general construction related impacts of the
                                 Project. This ECOP will be included in all construction contracts to be financed under the Project. The DOH has a comprehensive technical
                                 guideline on the proper management of health care waste. These guidelines have been used in the previous World Bank funded projects with
                                 similar investments. These guidelines will be used in this project and implemented by each health care facility. The DOH has also assigned
                                 focal persons in charge of Safeguards in the PMO.

                                  The DOH has adopted an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) for the National Sector Support for Health Reform Project. For the
                                 Second Women’s Health and Safe Motherhood Project, the Department, in coordination with the Regional Offices of the National Commission
                                 on Indigenous Peoples (NCIP), satisfactorily implemented an IP Development Plan for Surigao del Sur. This involved discussions/consultations
                                 with key IP leaders in the course of the implementation. Related to this, the DOH also adopted Administrative Order 18 (Establishment of
                                 GIDA) which defines the strategic guidelines for reaching Geographically Isolated and Disadvantaged Areas (GIDA). The GIDA goals and
                                 objectives, policy statements and program components cover the IP groups since they are among those that are in geographically isolated and
                                 disadvantaged areas. Thus, the GIDA served as critical guidelines that enhanced geographic reach of health services and facilities among
                                 IPs. Although health services for IPs and non-IPs involve the same procedures, health communication activities were adapted to IP groups to
                                 improve their health-seeking behavior and convince them to avail of health services. For purposes of the proposed project, the DOH has
                                 prepared a simplified IP plan. The IP plan draws from the lessons learned from implementing the previous IPPF under the WHSMP2 and
                                 NSSHRP as well as the GIDA. It focuses on strengthening the information base on health of IPs as well as continuing the development and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 adoption of IP responsive health policies, financing, communication and delivery mechanisms to ensure increased access of IP to UHC,
                                 including health insurance. A key component of the plan is monitoring KP/UHC indicators among IP groups in order to track and address (as
                                 needed) differential uptake of KP/UHC policies.
                               5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                                  on potentially affected people.
                                  The groups which will be affected by possible investments of the project are the following: health care facility staff and personnel, communities
                                 served by the facility and the households living close to the facility; and local government units. Public consultations, especially in GIDA areas
                                 where a large number of IPs are based have been completed during project preparation, ensuring the representation of vulnerable/marginalized
                                 groups including women, urban poor and indigenous people. The National Commission on Indigenous Peoples was consulted in the
                                 preparation of the IP plan.

                               B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                               Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                                 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                               Yes
                                 Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                  10-Aug-2011
                                 Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                              13-Dec-2011
                                 Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                               27-Oct-2011
                                 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                                 Directors
                                Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                                 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                               Yes
                                 Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                  25-Nov-2011
                                 Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                              01-Dec-2011
                                 Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                               29-Nov-2011
                               If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                               disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                                                                                                                                                                             Page 3 of 4
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                            The Project Development Objective (PDO) and associated PDO indicators and description of Component 1 (Health Financing) were marginally
                            changed wording but not content) to reflect PhilHealth’s new strategic vision. These changes did not change the scope and content of the
                            disclosed simplified Indigenous People’s Plan (IPP) and Environmental Code of Practice (ECOP). However to make sure that all project related
                            documents are fully harmonized, a simplified IPP and ECOP (with the changes in PDO and Component 1 wording and indicators) will be re-
                            disclosed in country and a revised version sent to the Info shop by April 30th, 2012.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                              Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?              Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                              If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and approved by    Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?              Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language      Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for   Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?              Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard    Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same        Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Task Team Leader:                    Sarbani Chakraborty
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:     Name:                                                                    Date:
                            Sector Manager:                      Name Eva Jarawan (SM)                                                    Date: 02-Apr-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                                                Page 4 of 4
