                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC822

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Jul-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Georgia                          Project ID:      P130421
                            Project Name:      Regional Development Project II (P130421)
                            Task Team          Ahmed A. R. Eiweida
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          17-Sep-2012                      Estimated        06-Nov-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSS6                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector:            General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (60%), Urban Transport
                                               (30%), Sub-national government administration (8%), Voc ational training (2%)
                            Theme:             Infrastructure services for private sector development (30%), City-wide
                                               Infrastructure and Service Delivery (25%), Cultural Heritage (25%), Urban
                                               Economic Development (10%), Regional integration (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            6.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                  30.00
                              Total                                                                        36.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective is to improve infrastructure services and institutional capacity to
                           support the development of tourism-based economy and cultural heritage circuits in the Imereti
                           region.
                           C. Project Description
                           The Project includes two components (building on the design and lessons learned under the RDP):

                           Component 1: Infrastructure Investment
                         Provision of financial resources to local self-governments (LSGs) to carry out Investment
                         Subprojects for the following activities:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Urban regeneration: An integrated approach is proposed for renewal of Tskaltubo city and the
                         heritage village of Vani. This includes a) the rehabilitation of municipal infrastructure and utilities in
                         the central area, b) conservation and upgrading of public spaces and cultural buildings, and c)
                         conservation of public buildings with vernacular architecture. The proposed conservation and
                         upgrading activities will help improve livability and hospitality in a culturally-informed manner,
                         enhance attractiveness for visitors, revitalize the urban nuclei, and attract increased volume of private
                         sector investments around the medical and spa tourism cluster.

                         Tourism circuit development: Integrated approach to culture heritage site upgrading and improved
                         management in the most attractive four cultural and natural heritage sites located along the main
                         tourism circuit/route in Imereti. These include a) improved urban landscaping and public parking; b)
                         construction of info kiosks, cafes and public toilets; and c) improving access roads. The main tourism
                         and culture heritage circuit has been identified, connecting the following cultural and natural heritage
                         sites, which are targeted for upgrading: Gelati Church; Vani Museum and ethnographic site; Ubisa
                         Monastery; and Katskhi Church and Katskhi Monastery Column.

                         The estimated cost of this component, including physical and price contingencies, is about US$32.28
                         million, of which IDA will provide US$26.9 million and the Recipient will provide US$5.38 million
                         counterpart funding.

                         Component 2: Institutional Development

                         Enhancing the institutional capacity and performance of the Georgia National Tourism
                         Administration (GNTA), the Agency for Culture Heritage Preservation of Georgia (ACHP), the
                         Agency of Protected Areas (APA), the Project Implementing Entity - Municipal Development Fund
                         of Georgia (MDF), and other local and regional entities to carry out the following activities:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                Destination management and promotion, including preparation of site management plans and
                         local outreach campaign;
                                Geo-tourism routes and tourism portal;
                                Skilled workforce development and capacity building;
                                Construction supervision and sustainable site management of cultural heritage; and
                                Performance monitoring & evaluation activities.

                         The estimated cost of this component, including physical and price contingencies, is about US$3.72
                         million, of which IDA will provide US$3.1 million, and the Recipient will provide US$0.62 million
                         counterpart funding.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the               safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project will be implemented in various locations within Imereti Region, Georgia. Proposed sites
                         of subprojects include: Tskhaltubo, Vani, Gelati, Katskhi, and Ubisa.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The Municipal Development Fund of Georgia (MDF) will be the implementing agency for RDP II.
                         MDF has long successful history of implementing World Bank supported projects with a good track
                           record of safeguard compliance. Implementation of the RDPII is considered more challenging,
                           though, due to its multi-sectoral nature, diversity of its components, and interventions planned in the
                           historical settlements, as well as nearby cultural heritage and natural sites, and protected areas. But
Public Disclosure Copy




                           MDF has been performing well in the implementation of RDP I and its institutional capacity for
                           meeting these challenges will be further enhanced through (i) direct involvement of the Government
                           entities responsible for conservation of cultural heritage and natural environment into decision
                           making, designing, and implementing individual investments, (ii) delivering safeguards training of
                           MDF's in-house staff, and (iii) using supplemental external consultancy for technical supervision of
                           works (including environmental and social monitoring of works).
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Darejan Kapanadze (ECSS3)
                           Kosuke Anan (ECSS4)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The Project carries investment components in
                           BP 4.01                                               support to infrastructure development and
                                                                                 therefore triggers OP/BP 4.01 Environmental
                                                                                 Assessment. None of the project supported
                                                                                 activities are expected to have significant, long
                                                                                 term, or irreversible impacts on the natural
                                                                                 environment, therefore the project is classified
                                                                                 as environmental Category B.

                                                                                 An Environmental Management Framework
                                                                                 (EMF) prepared for the RDP will be upgraded
                                                                                 and adapted to the purposes of RDP II. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 EMF will guide the preparation of subproject-
                                                                                 specific Environmental Reviews (ERs) and/or
                                                                                 Environmental Management Plans (EMPs).

                                                                                 A Strategic Environmental Cultural Heritage,
                                                                                 and Social Assessment (SECHSA) will be
                                                                                 carried out by the client in conjunction with the
                                                                                 preparation of a Tourism Development and
                                                                                 Marketing Strategy for the region. SECHSA
                                                                                 will identify risks and opportunities associated
                                                                                 with the overall development program proposed
                                                                                 for Imereti. The SECHSA will a) pool baseline
                                                                                 information on the target region, b) analyze the
                                                                                 expected long term, cumulative, and induced/
                                                                                 indirect impacts of the proposed policy
                                                                                 approaches, and c) assess the institutional
                                                                                 capacity of the government agencies to manage
                                                                                 environmental cultural and social implications
                                                                                 of the regional development in Imereti,
                                                                 including gap analysis and recommendation for
                                                                 capacity building.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 The EMF, as well as site-specific ERs and/or
                                                                 EMPs for individual investments, will be
                                                                 prepared satisfactory to the Bank, disclosed, and
                                                                 discussed with the stakeholders prior to the RDP
                                                                 II appraisal and before tendering of works.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No    None of the proposed subproject sites are
                                                                 located within or in immediate proximity to the
                                                                 designated natural protected areas, or the natural
                                                                 habitats of the exceptional conservation value.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   The project aims at attracting increased flow of
                         BP 4.11                                 tourists to the natural and cultural heritage sites
                                                                 of Imereti region. This would imply
                                                                 improvement of access to these sites and
                                                                 development of tourist infrastructure around
                                                                 them. Implementation of civil works in the
                                                                 immediate proximity to the historical
                                                                 monuments and other elements of the cultural
                                                                 heritage carries the risk of affecting their
                                                                 aesthetic value, accidental damage, or gradual
                                                                 deterioration.
                                                                 Also, development of tourist infrastructure and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 improving access to the cultural sites will imply
                                                                 earth works carrying high likelihood of chance
                                                                 finds. OP/BP 4.11 is triggered to ensure that no
                                                                 element of cultural heritage is affected
                                                                 negatively neither during construction nor
                                                                 operation of the infrastructure provided under
                                                                 the project. Site-specific ERs and/or EMPs will
                                                                 cover the aspect of cultural heritage preservation
                                                                 and carry relevant mitigation measures, as well
                                                                 as arrangements for monitoring their
                                                                 implementation.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   OP/BP 4.12 is triggered in light of temporary
                         4.12                                    impacts of anticipated civil works and in case
                                                                 land acquisition is required under connectivity
                                                                 or targeted investments. Because the location
                                                                 and footprint of these investments will not be
                                                                 known until implementation, the Resettlement
                                                                                                                                 Policy Framework (RPF) prepared for RDP will
                                                                                                                                 be updated for the purposes of RDP II.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) for
                                                                                                                                 individual subprojects will be prepared as
                                                                                                                                 needed in line with the RPF and resettlement
                                                                                                                                 measures implemented prior to commencement
                                                                                                                                 of civil works at any given subproject site.
                                                                                                                                 RAPs will be prepared prior to Project appraisal
                                                                                                                                 for pre-identified subprojects of which
                                                                                                                                 footprints are already known or of which
                                                                                                                                 affected people are already identified.

                                                                                                                                 There is a possibility of resettlement of nine
                                                                                                                                 households residing in the archaeological
                                                                                                                                 protection area of Vani, depending on the
                                                                                                                                 design of the subproject, which has not been
                                                                                                                                 finalized.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International                                         TBD                           OP/BP 7.50 will be triggered during preparation
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            if the Swedish International Development
                                                                                                                                 Cooperation Agency (SIDA) insists to fund the
                                                                                                                                 proposed rehabilitation of Tskaltubo wastewater
                                                                                                                                 treatment plant under TF co-financing
                                                                                                                                 arrangement instead of the currently proposed
                                                                                                                                 parallel stand-alone TF financing arrangement.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 03-Sep-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      May-September 2012.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Ahmed A. R. Eiweida

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 12-Jul-2012
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Stephen George Karam (SM)                                                                                            Date: 12-Jul-2012




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
