                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                  Report No.: ISDSA5307
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Aug-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Aug-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Cambodia                             Project ID:    P144715
                            Project Name:      Cambodia Global Partnership for Education Second Education Support Project
                                               (P144715)
                            Task Team          Prateek Tandon
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       30-Aug-2013                             Estimated   04-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                         Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: EASHE                                    Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                    Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Primary education (50%), Pre-primary education (30%), Secondary education
                                               (20%)
                            Theme(s):          Education for all (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        38.50           Total Bank Financing:   0.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                         Financing Gap:          0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                      0.00
                              Education for All - Fast Track Initiative                                                    38.50
                              Total                                                                                        38.50
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The objectives of the Project are to assist the Recipient to expand access to ECE for 3-5 year olds
                           and contribute to improved access to and quality of basic education, particularly for those from
                           disadvantaged backgrounds.



                                                                          Page 1 of 7
                          3. Project Description
                         The project consists of four components:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Improving the Access and Educational Experience of Vulnerable and Disadvantaged
                         Students (US$24,100,000).

                         This component aims to support the access to and quality of education for vulnerable and
                         disadvantaged students through sub-components on: (i) expanding access to Early Childhood Care
                         and Development; and (ii) increasing access to basic education services.

                         Component 2: Benchmarking Student Competencies ($4,200,000).

                         This component aims to enhance Cambodia’s capacity to assess student competencies. The
                         component includes sub-components on: (i) nationalizing Early Grade Reading and Mathematics
                         Assessments (EGRA and EGMA); and (ii) supporting national assessment.

                         Component 3: Improving Cambodia’s Teaching Force ($2,200,000).

                         This component focuses on the systemic challenges of raising teacher quality in Cambodia through
                         sub-components on: (i) improving pedagogical training; and (ii) strengthening school leadership.

                         Component 4: System Management and Monitoring and Evaluation ($8,000,000).

                         This component will support the enhancement of sub-sector results-based management under the
                         Public Financial Management Reform Program and encompass grant management, monitoring and
                         evaluation. The sub-components are: (i) strengthening system management; and (ii) project
                         management and monitoring and evaluation.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis (if known)
                         Nationwide.

                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Satoshi Ishihara (EASTS)
                         Makathy Tep (EASTS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes               The GPE project prepared an Environmental and
                          BP 4.01                                           Social Management Framework (ESMF) which
                                                                            laid out screening procedures for sub-projects and
                                                                            included relevant information on the management
                                                                            of environmental issues in the project. Since the
                                                                            types of construction activities to be supported by
                                                                            the proposed project are of small scale and site
                                                                            specific, a set of Environmental Codes of Practice
                                                                            (ECOPs) was prepared, covering mitigation
                                                                            measures for generic impacts on school


                                                                    Page 2 of 7
                                                                         construction and operations-related activities and
                                                                         the provisions for “chance-find? procedures to be
                                                                         applied in the event that cultural heritage is
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         subsequently discovered during implementation.
                                                                         The project has updated the Environmental
                                                                         Management Plan (EMP) developed and
                                                                         implemented under ESSSUAP and will apply this
                                                                         tool where appropriate and necessary. The ECOP,
                                                                         a site screening form, and the updated EMP are
                                                                         included as different chapters in the ESMF.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No             The project will not cause any degradation of
                                                                         natural habitats as defined under the safeguard
                                                                         policy.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No             The project will not degrade critical forest areas
                                                                         as defined under the safeguard policy.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No             The project will not involve any procurement of
                                                                         pesticides nor cause any increased use of
                                                                         pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No             The project will not adversely affect sites with
                         BP 4.11                                         archaeological, paleontological, historical,
                                                                         religious, or unique natural values.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes            The focus of the project on children in remote
                                                                         areas, those from poor families and those with
                                                                         disabilities is expected to contribute to social
                                                                         inclusion and greater equality of opportunity.
                                                                         Given this focus on disadvantaged children and
                                                                         the nationwide coverage, of the project including
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         those areas inhabited by ethnic minorities (EM),
                                                                         the safeguard policy OP/BP 4.10 on Indigenous
                                                                         Peoples (IPs) is triggered.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No             No land acquisition, loss of lands and/or
                         4.12                                            resettlement will occur since no civil works will
                                                                         be financed under the project outside the existing
                                                                         school premises. A pool of potential construction
                                                                         sites have been identified, all of which are located
                                                                         on MoEYS-owned lands. The construction
                                                                         activities for the ECE classrooms will be
                                                                         extensions of existing primary school facilities
                                                                         within their current grounds’ boundaries, and
                                                                         DoE constructions will occur on vacant MoEYS-
                                                                         owned lands. The task team has confirmed that no
                                                                         acquisition of land under the project, no
                                                                         relocation or loss of shelter, no loss of assets or
                                                                         access to assets and no loss of income sources or
                                                                         means of livelihood will occur. No legacy issues
                                                                         exist, and physical relocation will not be



                                                                 Page 3 of 7
                                                                                 necessary. Therefore, Bank’s OP4.12 on
                                                                                 Involuntary Resettlement is not triggered. In the
                                                                                 sector’s previous projects in Cambodia—the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 Cambodia Education Sector Support Project
                                                                                 (2005 - 2011) and the Cambodia Education
                                                                                 Sector Support Scale Up Action Program (2008-
                                                                                 2012)—which included similar interventions,
                                                                                 neither land acquisition nor physical relocation
                                                                                 was necessary. The MoEYS is asked to keep
                                                                                 copies of the stamped certifications of the land
                                                                                 entitlement from the Phnom Penh municipal
                                                                                 authority and other local governmental authorities
                                                                                 on file. Having these documents on file will likely
                                                                                 be helpful if further questions about the land
                                                                                 entitlement issues come up.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No                The project does not involve any dams.

                            Projects on International        No                   The project does not involve international
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                   The project will not be located in any known
                            7.60                                                 disputed areas as defined in the policy.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               Environment:
Public Disclosure Copy




                              There are no major civil works supported under the project, and thus the project will not have any
                              potential adverse large scale significant or irreversible impacts. There are likely to be some
                              concerns related to traffic, dust, noise and waste management during the construction of formal
                              preschools, Community Preschools (CPS) and District Offices of Education (DoE), but these are
                              minor, site-specific, short-term and reversible in nature. The project’s environmental category is
                              thus classified as “B?.

                             Social:
                             A pool of potential school construction sites have been identified, including those areas inhabited
                             by ethnic minorities or Indigenous Peoples (IP); the World Bank’s safeguard policy OP/BP 4.10
                             on Indigenous Peoples (IPs) is thus triggered.

                             The OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement is not triggered because no acquisition of private
                             land, or loss of private assets including trees and structures, will occur, and that physical relocation
                             will not be necessary. A pool of potential construction sites have been identified, all of which are
                             located on MoEYS-owned lands. The construction activities for the ECE classrooms will be
                             extensions of existing primary school facilities within their current grounds’ boundaries, and DoE
                             constructions will occur on vacant MoEYS-owned lands.




                                                                         Page 4 of 7
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            Environment & Social:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           There are no potential direct, indirect and long-term environmental and social impacts anticipated
                           for the proposed project in the project area.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            Not applicable
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            Environment:
                           Given the nature and small scale of the proposed civil works under the project, a formal
                           environmental assessment report was not considered necessary. For the purpose of enhancing
                           environmentally-friendly measures and mitigating any adverse impacts caused by the construction
                           activities, an Environmental and Social Management Framework has been prepared. It includes a
                           checklist on construction sites, Environmental Codes of Practice (ECoP), and an Environmental
                           Management Plan updated from the one developed for ESSSUAP, a previous education project
                           which the current project is a follow-on. These instruments will be included in the requisite
                           bidding documents. Contractor specifications to address environmental issues, including
                           construction dust and noise control, waste management, site management, safety controls,
                           provision of clean water and sanitation facilities, unexploded ordinance removal, and asbestos
                           containing material demolition management have also been adequately addressed in the ECOPs
                           and the ESMF and will be integrated into bidding documents.

                          Institutional Capacity:
                          The institutional capacity is considered to be adequate. The Ministry of Youth, Education and
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Sports (MoEYS) will lead project activities and be responsible for everyday implementation of the
                          grant at the operational level. Building on experience from the previous education sector
                          operation, ESSSUAP, the MoEYS will appoint an international Technical Advisor who will
                          manage the proposed civil works under their respective components together with the Department
                          of Construction. Additionally, a designated Environment Safeguards Officer and a Social
                          Safeguards Officer will be appointed and will be responsible for managing the safeguards issues
                          involved in each sub-project.

                          Social:
                          A Social Assessment (SA) was conducted in March 2013 to evaluate the project’s potential
                          positive and adverse effects on potential subproject sites and to examine project alternatives where
                          adverse effects may be significant. Free, prior and informed consultation was conducted in two IP
                          communes (Sekong and Krang Teh) selected from a pool of potential project sites during the
                          social assessment exercise. The assessment showed strong support from the communities for the
                          implementation of the project and identified project benefits to the IPs. An Indigenous Peoples
                          Planning Framework (IPPF) has been prepared to provide guidance to the development of site-
                          specific (Indigenous Peoples’ Plans) IPPs during implementation, and a social safeguards officer
                          will be hired under the Project Management Committee (PMC) and will be responsible for the
                          overall implementation of the IPPF, and the preparation and disclosure of site-specific IPPs during
                          implementation.


                                                                     Page 5 of 7
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Environment:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Public consultations have been conducted including consultation meetings with the people who are
                           potentially affected by the project (government officials, parents, teachers, students, villagers) and
                           other stakeholders regarding the project and their concerns. Their feedback has been taken into
                           account in the Environmental Safeguards Guidelines and the project design. The ESMF was
                           disclosed locally at the MoEYS website on August 13, 2013 and through InfoShop on August 7,
                           2013.

                           Social:
                           Free, prior and informed consultations with two IP communes have been conducted during the
                           social assessment exercise. Focus group discussions with parents, teachers, residents near project
                           site and other stakeholders were conducted. Local government leaders and education professionals
                           were interviewed. An IPPF was prepared and disclosed locally at the MoEYS website on August
                           13, 2013 and through InfoShop on August 7, 2013.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      29-Jul-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   07-Aug-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Cambodia                                                         13-Aug-2013
                           Comments: Ministry of Education, Youth, and Sports website - http://www.moeys.gov.kh/en/
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         sessp/416-sessp.html
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      29-Jul-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   07-Aug-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Cambodia                                                         13-Aug-2013
                           Comments: Ministry of Education, Youth, and Sports website - http://www.moeys.gov.kh/en/
                                         sessp/416-sessp.html
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?

                                                                      Page 6 of 7
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                             Indigenous Peoples?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Prateek Tandon
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name:                                                   Date:
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Luis Benveniste (SM)                              Date: 19-Aug-2013




                                                                        Page 7 of 7
