                                                                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                             CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC592
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 31-Jan-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        Madagascar                               Project ID:                       P128831
                              Project Name:                   Madagascar-Irrigation and Watershed Management Project - PHRD Complementary Financing (P128831)
                              Task Team Leader:               Achim Fock
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 19-Mar-2012                                    Estimated Board Date:             31-May-2012
                              Managing Unit:                  AFTAR                                    Lending Instrument:               Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                         Agricultural extension and research (40%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (35%), Irrigation and drainage
                                                              (15%), General agricul ture, fishing and forestry sector (10%)
                              Theme:                          Rural services and infrastructure (50%), Rural markets (40%), Rural policies and institutions (10%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                         Amount
                                   Borrower                                                                                                                      0.00
                                   Japan Policy and Human Resources Development Fund                                                                           13.23
                                   Total                                                                                                                       13.23
                              Environmental Category:         A - Full Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              B. Project Objectives

                              The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the proposed Project is “to sustainably increase rice productivity in selected irrigation sites and their
                              surrounding watersheds.? This PDO is well aligned with the program-level objective of the ongoing BVPI-IDA, which is “to sustainably increase
                              rice productivity in selected irrigation schemes and their associated watersheds.? It is also in line with the objectives of the World Bank ISN, the
                              objectives of the PNDR and SNDR, and the objectives of the PHRD TA program.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              C. Project Description

                              The proposed Project will have five components: four technical components and one administrative component.

                              Component 1: Development of Commercial Agriculture, including: (i) support to agricultural services; and (ii) support to private investments. The
                              objective for this component is to lay the foundations for sustainable intensification and diversification of both irrigated and rainfed rice production
                              systems in the targeted watersheds, and to improve market access.

                              Component 2: Irrigation Development, including: (i) support to irrigation development; and
                              (ii) irrigation investments. The objective of this component is to lay the foundations for improved management, maintenance and sustainability of
                              irrigation services provision in four large-scale irrigation schemes through rehabilitation of irrigation infrastructure, capacity strengthening of
                              stakeholders and clarification of roles and responsibilities, and establishment of an appropriate incentive framework.

                              Component 3: Watershed Development, including: (i) planning and capacity building for sustainable watershed development; and (ii) sustainable
                              investments in watersheds including biological (e.g., tree planting) and physical (e.g., check dams) measures. The objective of the component is to
                              lay the foundations for sustainable management of watersheds including irrigated and rainfed agriculture, and improved productivity of existing
                              natural resources.

                              Component 4: Support for Rice Research and Development, including: (i) support to basic rice seed production; (ii) improvement of chemical soil
                              analysis capability of the research system; and (iii) development of rice research and extension linkages.

                              Component 5: Project Management, including: (i) Project management; and (ii) Project monitoring and evaluation. The objective of this component
                              is to manage and use resources in accordance with the Project’s objectives and procedures and to evaluate the Project’s results.

                              D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                              The Project will be implemented in selected irrigation sub-schemes and in the related watersheds. These sub-schemes are part of irrigation
                              schemes that are already being targeted by the national BVPI program. Components 1, 2, and 3, as well as a focus area of Component 4, will be
                              implemented mainly in specific sectors of the Marovoay and Itasy irrigation schemes. The targeted area includes about 5,700 ha of potentially
                              irrigated land plus the associated watersheds. The Project will also support irrigation design studies in the Anony and Imamba-Ivakaka irrigation
                              schemes. Finally, it will contribute to strengthening the national rice research and development system
                            E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

                           The Government has longstanding experience in implementing Bank-funded projects throughout the country, so it has developed considerable
                           capacity to implement social and environmental safeguards policies. This Project will scale up and expand the scope of activities currently being
                           carried out under BVPI, and it will be implemented by the same agencies. The PUI that will implement both operations already counts among its
                           staff a well qualified Socio-Environmental Specialist responsible for overseeing the proper implementation of all applicable social and
                           environmental safeguard policies.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Nevertheless, to ensure that World Bank safeguards policies are properly implemented for the proposed Project, provision will be made to
                           enhance the technical capacity within the Project Implementation Unit (PIU).

                            F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

                           Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTCS)
                           Paul-Jean Feno (AFTEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

                            Safeguard Policies Triggered                     Yes       No        TBD                                 Explanation
                            Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01               ✖                          OP 4.01 is triggered because the Project will support rehabilitation of
                                                                                                         irrigation-related infrastructure, investments in watershed
                                                                                                         development and/or protection, and livestock production. As part of
                                                                                                         the preparation of the IDA-financed BVPI, the Government prepared
                                                                                                         a Regional Environmental and Social Assessment (RESA), which
                                                                                                         was disclosed in-country on 04/04/2006 (at project sites and through
                                                                                                         announcements that appeared in national newspapers and on
                                                                                                         government websites) and at the Infoshop in Washington on
                                                                                                         03/14/2006. The activities to be supported under the proposed
                                                                                                         Project are expected to have mostly positive environmental and
                                                                                                         social impacts, with both environmental and social management
                                                                                                         measures fully integrated into the Project design. Nevertheless, the
                                                                                                         Project sites are located in regions with globally important
                                                                                                         biodiversity resources, and the Project might lead to increased use
                                                                                                         of fertilizers and pesticides that might impact these local and trans-
                                                                                                         boundary natural resources. The Project will also finance sub-
                                                                                                         projects, such as check dams, anti-erosion structures, or other
                                                                                                         structures. These sub-projects will be screened for environmental
                                                                                                         and social impacts, and a determination will be made whether a
                                                                                                         detailed or abbreviated Environmental and Social Impacts
                                                                                                         Assessment study will be needed as part of the feasibility analysis.
                                                                                                         The current RESA will be updated, and if necessary revisions will be
                                                                                                         made to take into account new activities to be supported under the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                         proposed Project. The updated RESA will be publicly disclosed in-
                                                                                                         country and at the World Bank InfoShop prior to appraisal.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                       ✖                          TOP 4.04 is triggered because the Project sites are located in areas
                                                                                                         with globally important biodiversity resources, including the
                                                                                                         mangrove habitats in Marovoay region. As stated above, the
                                                                                                         updated RESA will spell out procedures needed to minimize
                                                                                                         negative impacts on natural habitats.
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                    ✖      The RESA report will determine whether forests are likely to be
                                                                                                         affected by the proposed Project. The RESA will indicate the extent
                                                                                                         to which forests might be affected by Project-supported
                                                                                                         infrastructure investments, and it will provide appropriate guidance
                                                                                                         for sub-project implementation and monitoring. As stated above, the
                                                                                                         updated RESA will be publicly disclosed in-country and at the World
                                                                                                         Bank InfoShop prior to appraisal.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09                           ✖                          OP 4.09 is triggered because the Project will support activities
                                                                                                         designed to increase agricultural production, which will require
                                                                                                         increased use of inputs, including pesticides. To ensure the safety of
                                                                                                         pest management practices supported under the Project, taking into
                                                                                                         account both the upstream watershed communities and the
                                                                                                         downstream riparian communities, the project will prepare a Pest
                                                                                                         and Pesticides Management Plan (PPMP) for Sub-Projects, building
                                                                                                         on experience gained under the previous operation (BVPI APL 1). A
                                                                                                         Pest and Pesticide Management Plan (PPMP) to reduce the
                                                                                                         exposure of the farming communities living both upstream and
                                                                                                         downstream from the Project-affected areas will be prepared and
                                                                                                         publicly disclosed in country and at the InfoShop prior to appraisal.
                                                                                                         The PPMP will also promote the development and use of Integrated
                                                                                                         Pest Management Practices (IPMP). Because of the likelihood of
                                                                                                         possible impacts on both transboundary natural resources and
                                                                                                         communities living upstream and/or downstream of the Project-
                            Safeguard Policies Triggered                                      Yes           No           TBD                                             Explanation
                                                                                                                                    affected watersheds, the PPMP will be a stand-alone document. It
                                                                                                                                    will be publicly disclosed in-country and at the World Bank InfoShop
                                                                                                                                    prior to appraisal.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                                           ✖                      OP 4.11 is not triggered. No Physical Cultural Resources are
                                                                                                                                    expected to be impacted by the Project. Nevertheless, a chance find
                                                                                                                                    procedure will be inserted into the RESA to provide guidance on
                                                                                                                                    how to adequately mitigate any potential impacts on physical cultural
                                                                                                                                    resources in the Project intervention areas.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                                    ✖                      No Indigenous Peoples (as per World Bank definition in OP/BP
                                                                                                                                    4.10) have been identified in the Project area.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                                 ✖                                   OP 4.12 is triggered because the Project will support the
                                                                                                                                    rehabilitation of irrigation-related infrastructure (under Component
                                                                                                                                    2). This might result in taking of land, loss of socioeconomic assets,
                                                                                                                                    and/or restriction of access to livelihood support assets. It is
                                                                                                                                    expected that any land acquisition, loss of socioeconomic assets, or
                                                                                                                                    reduction in access to livelihood support assets will occur on a
                                                                                                                                    limited scale. Should this happen, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP)
                                                                                                                                    will be prepared during project implementation and publicly
                                                                                                                                    disclosed in-country and at the InfoShop. Any RAPs prepared under
                                                                                                                                    the Project will be based on criteria spelled out in a Resettlement
                                                                                                                                    Policy Framework (RPF) to be completed during preparation and
                                                                                                                                    publicly disclosed in-country and at the InfoShop prior to appraisal.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                           ✖                                   OP 4.37 is triggered because even though the Project will not
                                                                                                                                    finance the construction of large dams, (i) the Project might support
                                                                                                                                    the construction of small check dams, and (ii) many of the irrigation
                                                                                                                                    schemes that have been identified for rehabilitation rely on existing
                                                                                                                                    large dams. To ensure safe management of Project-supported
                                                                                                                                    irrigation investments, a Small Dams Safety Manual will be prepared
                                                                                                                                    as a standalone document to be annexed to the updated Regional
                                                                                                                                    Environmental and Social Assessment (RESA). The manual will be
                                                                                                                                    disclosed in-country and at the World Bank InfoShop prior to
                                                                                                                                    appraisal.
                            Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                                        ✖                      OP 7.50 is not triggered. Madagascar is an island
                            7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                                            ✖                      There are no disputed areas associated with the Project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                           A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 16-Apr-2012
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
                              should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                •         Updated Regional Environmental and Social Assessment (RESA) : Mid-March 2012 (before appraisal)
                                •         Updated Pest and Pesticides Management Plan (Stand-alone Document) : Mid-March 2012 (before appraisal)
                                •         Generic Dam Safety Analysis (DSA) with the Small Dams Security Manual (Standalone to be annexed to the RESA) : Mid-March
                                2012 (before appraisal)
                                •         Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF): Mid-March 2012 (before appraisal)
                                The studies are expected to begin by the end of January 2012 and to be completed by the end of March 2012.

                         IV. APPROVALS
                            Signed and submitted by:
                            Task Team Leader:                                Name: Sossena Tassew                                                                                  Date: 31-Jan-2012
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                 Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                     Date: 03-Feb-2012
                            Comments:
                            Sector Manager:                                  Name: Iain G. Shuker (SM)                                                                             Date: 31-Jan-2012
                            Comments:          Cleared




                            1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                             form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
