                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                  Report No.: ISDSA1274
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Oct-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Nepal                               Project ID:   P128905
                            Project Name:      Nepal Agriculture and Food Security Project (P128905)
                            Task Team          Animesh Shrivastava
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          07-Sep-2012                         Estimated   30-Nov-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASDA                               Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector:            General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%), Agricultural extension
                                               and research (20%), Animal production (20%), Crops (2 0%)
                            Theme:             Other rural development (60%), Global food crisis response (25%), Nutrition
                                               and food security (15%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                               Financing Source                                                              Amount
                              Borrower                                                                        11.50
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Global Agriculture and Food Security Program                                    46.50
                              Total                                                                           58.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective is to enhance food and nutritional security of vulnerable
                           communities in selected locations of Nepal. 14. Food security will be realized through increased
                           food availability, made possible by increasing productivity of agriculture (both crop and livestock);
                           and nutrition security through improved nutrition, made possible by promotion of diversified diets
                           and improved feeding and caring practices for pregnant and nursing women and children up to 2
                           years of age.
                            3. Project Description
                           The proposed project is based on grant proposal submitted by the GoN for funding under the Global
                           Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP). The proposal was approved by the Steering


                                                                        Page 1 of 10
                         Committee of the GAFSP and awarded a grant amount of US$ 46.5 million.

                         Overall Design. In order to achieve its PDO, the project will seek to address the inter-locking
Public Disclosure Copy




                         problems in the project area through coordinated interventions, including: (i) adaptation
                         (customization/validation) and release in specific agro-ecologies of relevant available technologies to
                         boost productivity and climate resilience of agriculture; (ii) enhancing local availability of improved
                         seed and livestock; (iii) supporting farmers to adopt improved management and husbandry practices,
                         use of modern inputs and market access; (iv) improving household availability of nutritious foods
                         through community grain banks, homestead production (kitchen gardens and backyard poultry),
                         promotion of diversified diets, increased nutrient intakes and improved feeding and caring practices
                         for pregnant and nursing women and children up to 2 years of age; and (v) promotion simple women-
                         friendly and labor saving technologies. By design, the project will be putting farmers at the core of
                         the interventions to ensure that the technology and practices developed and disseminated represent
                         farmer interest and needs. It will follow a pragmatic approach, offering a menu of options which,
                         however, will be designed according to area (agro-ecological) and beneficiary (socio-economic)
                         characteristics. Overall, the project will have four components, the fourth relating to project
                         management.

                         Component 1: Technology Development and Adaptation (Cost US$ 9.3 M) This component will
                         support the PDO by developing for project area farmers’ use appropriate technologies and resources
                         (seeds and breeds) that contribute to increased productivity of crops and livestock. There are two sub
                         components: (i) Improved production technologies for Crops, and (ii) Improved production
                         technologies for Livestock. The crops’ sub-component comprises varietal selection, development
                         (especially with regard to drought tolerance), maintenance and production of source seeds upon field
                         validation. The pre-identified promising crops to be targeted include rice, wheat, maize, millet,
                         barley and potato due to their prevalence and caloric potential; but the component may also include
                         minor and nutritionally significant crops such as buckwheat, blackgram, soybean, local beans, lentil
                         and other select food crops and vegetables. The scale and extent of cultivation of these crops will
                         vary according to suitability of the agronomic conditions for the specific location. Additionally the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         project will develop and validate the following agronomic practices for dissemination in the project
                         areas: integrated crop management technologies, land preparation and planting methods, soil fertility
                         restoration measures, harvesting and post-harvest loss management practices, seed treatment, and soil
                         moisture/water harvesting techniques. Staff trained under the project will conduct research, trials and
                         demonstrations at NARC field research stations and volunteer farmer fields in the project district in
                         order to ensure validation and participatory varietal selection. The livestock sub-component
                         comprises improving breeding stock for goat and poultry production, and development of improved
                         technology packages. Activities to be financed under this component include: providing trials and
                         demonstrations, conducting training and capacity building activities, improving research
                         infrastructure and operating costs for source seed production and germplasm import (eggs, semen,
                         bucks etc), developing and managing foundation breeding stock. The expected outputs from this
                         component will be release of improved crop varieties and poultry parental lines and bucks, improved
                         packages for crop and livestock production, more problem-focused research and better extension
                         support and communications with accompanying supply lines of certified and marketable seed and
                         breeding stock.

                         Component 2: Technology Dissemination and Adoption (US$31.4M) This component will support
                         the PDO by enabling farmers in the project area to adopt improved agricultural production
                         technologies and management practices (especially those developed and promoted under Component
                         1). The component is designed to address the following set of constraints: restricted availability of

                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                         improved variety seeds and breeding stock, weak absorption capacity of farmers, poor animal
                         husbandry, limited farmer capacity to make complementary on-farm investments, and limited
                         capability and outreach of extension departments. The component has three sub-components: (i)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         support for crop production (disseminating improved varieties and practices, including for local seed
                         production and kitchen gardens, on-farm water management support and farm level post harvest
                         value addition); (ii) support for livestock production (poultry in the mountain districts; meat and
                         dairy goat and dairy cattle/buffalo in the mid-hill districts); (iii) Institutional Strengthening for
                         Extension and Outreach (strengthening and technically backstopping extension at VDC and
                         community levels, including capacity building of “lead? farmers and village resource persons for
                         farmer-to-farmer learning). Items to be financed under this component include farmer group
                         identification and mobilization, training for farmers and agricultural/livestock support service
                         providers, organization of demonstrations through Farmer Field Schools (FFSs) support to farmers
                         for adoption of disseminated technologies. Formation and development of FG and FFS will be
                         supported by service providers/NGOs. Expected results from this component on the crop side are
                         adoption of improved crop varieties and practices by farmers and enhanced availability of good
                         quality seed at the local level. On the livestock side, expected results are adoption of improved breed
                         of livestock and better husbandry practices, leading to increased production of meat (poultry and
                         goat), milk (goat, cattle and buffalo) and eggs.

                         Component 3: Food and Nutritional Status Enhancement (US$10.7 M) This component will
                         contribute to enhancing food and nutrition security in project areas through increased food
                         availability for vulnerable households and promotion of diversified diets and improved feeding and
                         caring practices for pregnant and nursing women, and children between 6-24 months of age. The
                         component comprises activities that leverage key entry points in the agriculture sector to improve
                         nutrition, as well as through strengthening and supporting key nutrition interventions in project areas.
                         There are three sub-components, namely: (i) Enhancing food availability for vulnerable households
                         and alleviating seasonal food shortages through; promoting community grain banks; home-level food
                         preparation, preservation and processing of locally available high nutritive-value foods; (ii)
                         Improving feeding and caring practices by; promoting Behavior Change Communications (BCC) and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         homestead production (kitchen garden and backyard poultry) groups amongst households with
                         pregnant or nursing mothers and children under two; providing nutrition education to farmers groups;
                         promoting simple household labor-saving and drudgery-reducing technologies for women to liberate
                         time for self and child care, (iii) Institutional strengthening and capacity building by; training of
                         agriculture department staff for pro-nutrition actions; strengthening capacity of the Department of
                         Food Testing and Quality Control (DFTQC) to promote safe and nutritious foods in the project area.
                         Activities to be financed under the nutrition component include: development of nutrition education
                         and BCC packages and material; simple technologies for home food processing, preservation and
                         reducing women’s labor and drudgery; grain banks; and training.

                         Component 4: Project Management (US$6.6 M) This component will contribute to attainment of the
                         PDO by ensuring that (i) interventions undertaken under the project are properly planned,
                         coordinated and aligned with project design and development objectives; (ii) implementation and
                         institutional arrangements and activities are in line with relevant fiduciary and safeguards policies,
                         procedures and standards; and (iii) there is due monitoring, oversight and reporting of project
                         implementation and the resulting outputs and outcomes. The project will finance the establishment
                         and operation of (i) a Project Management Unit (PMU) in Kathmandu, and (ii) a Regional Project
                         Support Unit (RPSU) in each region – Surkhet in the Mid-Western region and Dipayal in the Far-
                         Western region. At the district level, major implementation responsibilities will be through the
                         district level offices of the Agriculture or Livestock Departments (District Agriculture Development

                                                                      Page 3 of 10
                         Office (DADO) and District Livestock Service Office (DLSO) respectively. District Project Support
                         Unit (DPSU) will be assigned the role to facilitate district level stakeholder coordination, project
                         orientation and coordination of joint planning and participatory monitoring involving stakeholders
Public Disclosure Copy




                         either at DADO or DLSO. The DPSU responsibilities will be decided by the MOAD on the
                         recommendation of PMU. Activities to be financed under this component include: (i) establishing
                         and supporting project units at the overall and regional levels; (ii) specialized support services
                         relating to key activities such as external audit, financial accounting and procurement; and (iii)
                         training of staff involved in project implementation.

                         Project Component Inter-linkages. Each component of the project, while having distinct and separate
                         functions, will have synergistic linkages with the other components, which together will aim to
                         address the availability, access and utilization of food in support of the PDO. Components 1 & 2
                         have a strong linkage: the agricultural research and development coming out of component 1 will be
                         disseminated for field-level adoption through the farmer extension mechanisms of component 2.
                         Livestock products even in small quantities improve nutrition and so over 95% of livestock activities
                         will target women and overlap with kitchen gardens supporting diet diversity and manure for these
                         gardens. Attempts will be made during implementation – reflected in Project Implementation Plan
                         (PIP) – to link Component 3 with the other components in order to make them nutritionally sensitive
                         through activities that leverage key entry points in the agriculture sector. Significant project evidence
                         from Nepal shows that (i) BCC for improved nutrition is less effective without agriculture-related
                         interventions; and conversely (ii) when increases in household income and productivity of nutritious
                         foods occurs (e.g., kitchen gardens), people become more receptive to BCC messages. Thus this
                         component will take advantage of the increased food availability and access of nutritious food – such
                         as eggs, meat, milk and vegetables – enabled by Components 1 and 2, in order to translate production
                         into consumption and improved nutrition outcomes. Under Component 3, women will be given
                         training in the safe processing of locally available nutritious foods (from household kitchen gardens
                         and backyard poultry) for food storage and improved dietary intake. Women will also benefit from
                         the labor saving technologies, which will allow them more time and ability to care for infants and
                         children. Extension agents and FGs organized under component 2 will also benefit from nutrition
Public Disclosure Copy




                         training made possible by curriculum developed and training organized through component 3. Thus,
                         the activities (and resultant outputs) of each component combine with the activities of the others to
                         ensure that key aspects of food security (including issues of availability, access, and utilization) are
                         addressed in a way that allows the project beneficiaries to improve their food consumption and
                         nutritional outcomes.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Project Area: The project will be implemented in 19 hill and mountain districts of the Mid- and Far-
                         Western development region of Nepal. These districts comprise 784 Village Development
                         Committees (VDCs) which together have over 600,000 households and a population of about 3.35
                         million . It is expected that approximately half of these VDCs will be covered directly by the project.
                         Within each project district, two clusters of contiguous VDCs will be chosen in order to share
                         administrative and technical support staff. Similarly, within each VDC two or three clusters of
                         contiguous wards will be chosen. The choice of the districts, VDCs and wards within them will be
                         guided by clear selection criteria (described in the Project Implementation Plan or PIP) reflecting
                         considerations of need/demand, relevant area (agro-ecological) and beneficiary (socio-economic)
                         characteristics, scope/potential for demonstrating impact, and technical and administrative feasibility.
                         The choice of beneficiaries within a ward (the lowest administrative unit for organizing project
                         interventions) will also be guided by specific selection criteria – detailed in the Project


                                                                       Page 4 of 10
                         Implementation Plan (PIP) – which will reflect the intended purpose and focus of an intervention/
                         activity, and will therefore vary across components. The intensity (or “extent?) of coverage within a
                         ward will be also determined by the nature of the intervention. Where the purpose of the project is to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         demonstrate technologies/practices for adoption by subsequent groups, a relatively small proportion
                         of beneficiaries in the wards will be chosen. (The other households in the wards are expected to
                         benefit by taking up these demonstrated activities as indirect beneficiaries through farmer-to-farmer
                         support.)
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Drona Raj Ghimire (SASDI)
                         Bandita Sijapati (SASDS)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes               Triggered because the subproject/activities,
                         BP 4.01                                              although small scale, may have adverse impacts
                                                                              on natural environment, human health and safety.
                                                                              The subproject/ activity EA process and EMP
                                                                              would address any issue related to natural habitat,
                                                                              forest as well as pesticide use.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          Yes               Although subproject/activities are unlikely to be
                                                                              implemented in the protected area, this OP is
                                                                              triggered as a precautionary step because there
                                                                              are protected areas/ known natural habitat in
                                                                              project districts/ regions.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                   Yes               This OP is triggered because pressure on forests
                                                                              is likely to increase due to livestock promotion,
                                                                              and some micro-infrastructure may be located in
                                                                              the forest areas.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09              Yes               Since control of disease and pests is one of the
                                                                              activities that will be undertaken under the
                                                                              project, this OP has been triggered as a
                                                                              precautionary measure. Project will not support
                                                                              purchase of chemical pesticides, but activities
                                                                              aimed at increasing agriculture productivity could
                                                                              induce use of (or increase existing use of)
                                                                              pesticide, and seed protection may need to use
                                                                              pesticide.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        Yes              This OP is triggered to ensure that any adverse
                                                                              effects of the project are avoided or minimized,
                                                                              that Indigenous Peoples receive culturally
                                                                              appropriate social and economic benefits, and that
                                                                              each project activities entails free, prior and
                                                                              informed consultations with these groups. This is
                                                                              particularly important since there is a significant
                                                                              presence of vulnerable communities in the project


                                                                      Page 5 of 10
                                                                        areas including Dalits, indigenous people
                                                                        (Janjatis), women, marginal farmers, landless
                                                                        households who tend to be more resource poor,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        food insecure, socially excluded, lack access to
                                                                        public services, and face considerably more
                                                                        constraints participating in development activities
                                                                        than others around them.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes             This OP is triggered as a precautionary measure
                         4.12                                           in connection with possible need for additional
                                                                        land during the construction of small scale
                                                                        physical infrastructure; rehabilitation of local
                                                                        irrigation infrastructure, rainwater harvesting, etc;
                                                                        construction/upgrading of storage facilities,
                                                                        research facilities and farmer service centers;
                                                                        rehabilitation of community infrastructure
                                                                        including for improving rural access, post-harvest
                                                                        management, marketing, etc; and infrastructure
                                                                        support for the establishment of collection
                                                                        centers.
                                                                        In these instances, the Social Management
                                                                        Framework developed for the project specifies
                                                                        that either public land will be used or will be
                                                                        made available through voluntary donation.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No

                         Projects on International        Yes             This OP is triggered because some of the project
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                           supported activities would relate to micro-
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        irrigation that may use water from rivers/stream.
                                                                        All rivers/stream from Nepal flows to India.
                                                                        However, project is expected to support
                                                                        rehabilitation/maintenance of the existing
                                                                        irrigation channels managed by farmers, and this
                                                                        is unlikely to lead to significant reduction in
                                                                        water flows and/or degradation of water quality in
                                                                        the downstream. The possible impacts on water
                                                                        quality and quantity going to neighboring
                                                                        riparians would be minor and insignificant and
                                                                        therefore notification exception 7(a) was sought
                                                                        and granted. The Environmental Management
                                                                        Framework environmental screening and
                                                                        assessment as well as monitoring and evaluation
                                                                        system will identify and reject or manage
                                                                        interventions that could significantly negatively
                                                                        impact the downstream effects in India.
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                         7.60



                                                                Page 6 of 10
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential l arge scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               No potentially large scale, significant and/or irreversible environmental and social impacts have
                              been identified by the Social Assessment, Environmental Management Framework and the Social
                              Management Framework. Some activities may have limited environmental impacts – these
                              activities are either Category B or Category C (no Category A activity is expected). Safeguards
                              policies that are triggered under this project include:

                              •        OP/BP 4.01       Environmental Assessment;
                              •        OP/BP 4.04       Natural Habitats;
                              •        OP/BP 4.36       Forests;
                              •        OP/BP 4.09           Pest Management;
                              •        OP/BP 4.10       Indigenous People;
                              •        OP/BP 4.12       Involuntary Resettlement; and
                              •        OP/BP 7.50       Projects on International Waters.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                                The assessment made as part of the Social and Environmental Management Frameworks does not
                              indicate long-term, potentially significant and large scale adverse environmental or social impacts
                              due the proposed project activities. Soil degradation, pressure on forests from livestock and
                              induced/ increase in the use of pesticide are some of the issues identified by the EMF. However,
                              these risks are limited in nature, and the EMF already has provisions to avoid or minimize and
                              mitigate even the limited risks, for example WHO Category I and II pesticides are not permitted,
                              stall feeding will be promoted, activities located in or dependent on resources from protected area
                              are ineligible etc. On the social front, presence of vulnerable communities, including indigenous
Public Disclosure Copy




                              people, and the possible need to acquire additional land under the project have been identified in
                              the social assessment. Accordingly, the SMF developed for the project and also the overall design
                              of the project seek to maximize project benefits to local communities, including vulnerable groups,
                              minimize adverse effects of project interventions, and ensure the participation of vulnerable
                              groups in all phases of project cycle. Further, in terms of acquisition of land, the SMF specifies
                              that either public land will be used or will be made available through voluntary donation.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                                Not relevant.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                                The main implementing agency for the project is the Ministry of Agriculture Development
                              (MOAD). Though it has a Gender Equity and Environment Division, the division may not have
                              hands-on operational experience and expertise in addressing environmental and social safeguard
                              issues. However, the Ministry is implementing IDA supported PACT project: through this project
                              safeguard awareness and capacity at the district and entrepreneur levels within the PACT area are
                              being strengthened through activities such as orientations, training and human resources support.
                              These will have to be complemented by further incorporating capacity strengthening measures.
                              Project includes environmental and social capacity strengthening measures, such as resources to


                                                                        Page 7 of 10
                           strengthen social and environmental capacity of GEED, provision of human resources at center
                           and districts, targeted environment and social awareness and training, and targeted orientations on
                           the SMF and EMF as well as availing project resources for hiring need-based environmental and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           social development services.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Consultations on the project were held with affected stakeholders (development partners, CSOs
                           and beneficiaries) at local, regional and national levels. The primary stakeholders will be local
                           farmers, which represent a large part of the target population in the Mid and Far West Regions. In
                           order to mitigate potential adverse effects, project activities will take participatory approaches (e.g.
                           participatory evaluation and variety selection on NARC research stations as well as farmer fields
                           in the project areas) in order to ensure demand-based feedback and to account for any undesired
                           field-level effects of the interventions. Criteria for targeting beneficiaries will be developed so as
                           to ensure non-exclusionary principles.

                           Social Management Framework: The Social Management Framework (SMF) prepared for the
                           project seeks to maximize benefits to local communities, including vulnerable groups, minimize
                           adverse effects of project interventions, and ensure the participation of vulnerable groups in all
                           phases of project cycle. These measures are in compliance with Bank’s Operational Policy 4.10 on
                           the Indigenous Peoples and Operational Policy 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement. The SMF
                           includes social screening guidelines for land acquisition and donation, a vulnerable community
                           development strategy, gender development strategy, consultation and information disclosure
                           mechanism, monitoring, institutional arrangement for implementing SMF, funding mechanism,
                           and a procedure for capacity building. Broadly speaking, the project does not foresee any land
                           acquisition or displacement of people. In cases where additional land is required for small-scale
                           rural infrastructure projects, either public land or those donated voluntarily by community
                           members will be utilized. In terms of indigenous people, the SMF also includes explicit reference
                           to a Vulnerable Community Development Framework (VCDF) prepared for the project which
Public Disclosure Copy




                           offers specific guidelines for consultations with vulnerable groups, strategies to overcome social,
                           capacity and resource constraints, and measures to ensure equal project benefits to indigenous
                           people and other vulnerable communities.

                           Environment Management Framework: The project has prepared an Environmental Management
                           Framework (EMF). The EMF is consistent with Government’s and Bank’s environmental
                           requirements and it will be applied to mainstream, screen and assess, and manage environmental
                           aspects during planning, selection and implementation of subprojects/activities. EMF requires
                           each activity/ subproject to be subjected to environmental screening, appropriate level of
                           assessment and monitoring. The assessment done during preparation of EMF concludes that the
                           potential adverse impacts are small in scale, limited to-the subproject locality/surroundings. These
                           impacts are typically related to soil erosion/ landslides and soil degradation, pressure on forest and
                           forest resources, induced pesticide uses, and impacts on bio-diversity. These impacts can be
                           avoided and/or mitigated through known and readily available or easily designed mitigation
                           measures. Hence the overall project is categorized as Category B, but many of the subproject/
                           activity would be Category C. Potential positive environmental results from the project include
                           decreased pressure on marginal lands, improved water management, stall feeding combined with
                           reduced number of unproductive cattle will reduce pressure on forests etc.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date


                                                                       Page 8 of 10
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      15-Aug-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  27-Jul-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   15-Aug-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      15-Aug-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  27-Jul-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   15-Aug-2012
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      15-Aug-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  27-Jul-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   15-Aug-2012
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   NA
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      NA
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  NA
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   NA
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
                         ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a              Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Sector Manager?

                                                                    Page 9 of 10
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                             Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Animesh Shrivastava
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Sanjay Srivastava (RSA)                           Date: 17-Oct-2012
                            Coordinator:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: William B. Magrath (SM)                           Date: 18-Oct-2012




                                                                       Page 10 of 10
