                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSC2321

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Mar-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-Mar-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Africa                         Project ID:     P125018
                            Project Name:     West Africa Regional Disease Surveillance Capacity Development (P125018)
                            Task Team         Enias Baganizi
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         16-Apr-2013                    Estimated       20-May-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                  Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    AFTHW                          Lending         Specific Investment Loan
                                                                             Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Health (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Health system performance (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        10.75               Total Bank Financing:         0.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                             Financing Gap:                0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                  0.75
                              Africa Catalytic Growth Fund (ACGF)                                      10.00
                              Total                                                                    10.75
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective is to strengthen the capacity of WAHO and WHO to design a
                           regional disease surveillance and response system for ECOWAS.
                           C. Project Description
                           The project will have two components:

                            Component 1 (Regional Capacity Development) will support regional capacity development for
                         technical and political leadership in multi-disease surveillance and response. This involves
                         enhancing the institutional capacity of WAHO and supporting discrete activities and technical
                         support functions of WHO-AFRO. The projec t will provide assistance in three main areas: (i)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         framework and costed operational strategy formulation; (ii) health information management
                         strengthening; and (iii) resource mobilization. The specific objectives of Component 1 are:

                         Framework and Operational Strategy Formulation

                          •      Establishment of frameworks for the expansion of inter-country/cross-border collaboration,
                         partnership, donor coordination, cooperation, information/knowledge sharing, and specimen
                         management with international networks and partners (Article 21 of IHR 2005 and WAHO Strategic
                         Objective No 2) (WAHO/WHO-AFRO);

                         •       Preparation of a costed operational strategy endorsed by the 15 countries;

                          •      IHR core capacity country assessments and spatial mapping of laboratory and diagnostic
                         capacity in the 15 member states of ECOWAS (WAHO/WHO-AFRO);

                          •      Support for the adaptation of the WHO accreditation process for quality assurance,
                         laboratory procedures and specimen management (WHO-AFRO);

                          •      Revision of national strategies and plans in line with WHO's Technical Guidance for
                         Integrated Disease Surveillance and Response in the African Region (WHO-AF RO);and

                          •      Identification and evaluation of potential centers of excellence to serve as hubs for diagnostic
                         reference, training and technical assistance at the regional level for selected priority diseases such as
                         malaria, TB, HIV/AIDS, onchocercias is, and epidemic prone diseases (WAHO/WHO-AFRO).

                         Health Information Management Strengthening
Public Disclosure Copy




                          •       Strengthening the capacity of WAHO and the WHO-AFRO to coordinate disease
                         surveillance and response (WAHO strategic objective #9) through operational research and improved
                         ICT capacity, building on WAHO's Integrated Health Information Management System (WAHO/
                         WHO-AFRO).


                         Resource Mobilization Strategy

                          •      Estimation of resource requirements for the upgrading and expansion of facilities and
                         services, including the IHIMS, operations research, which will contribute to the costed operational
                         strategy (WAHO).

                         Component 2 (Strengthening Human Resources) will support specialized training in disease
                         surveillance and response in collaboration with the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                         (CDC), WHO and USAID. The project will expand ECOWAS member state access to two types of
                         applied epidemiology training programs: the Field Epidemiology Training Program (FETP) and the
                         Field Epidemiology and Laboratory Training Program (FELTP). The FELTP contains all the
                         components of an FETP, but it also trains select laboratory scientists using a competency-based
                         curriculum that supports laboratory-based surveillance and outbreak response. The programs allow
                           MOHs to strengthen their disease surveillance, outbreak response, and program evaluation. They are
                           modeled after the Epidemic Intelligence Service training of the CDC. The specific objective of
                           Component 2 is:
Public Disclosure Copy




                            •       Strengthening human resources for improved national integrated disease surveillance and
                           response capacity through the introduction/strengthening of field epidemiology and laboratory
                           training programs (FELTP), guidance, technical assistance and quality assurance.

                            Training can be provided through in-service short courses in particular skills areas for field-based
                           staff and through a two-year full-time training and service program for Ministry of Health employees
                           who have medical or scientific training. Residents spend about 25% of their time taking courses and
                           75% performing duties in the field. This combination of classroom-based instruction and mentored
                           practical work allows residents to receive hands-on multi-disciplinary training in public health
                           surveillance, outbreak investigation, field laboratory management, program evaluation, and other
                           aspects of epidemiologic research and methods. At present the first cohort of 12 Residents from 4
                           West African countries is being trained and there are approximately 100 graduates of FETP and
                           FELTP short courses in the sub-region. The project will build on this achievement and provide
                           funding for both short term and long term training.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Project activities, including trainings, will take place in Burkina Faso, where WAHO and the WHO-
                           IST are located.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           N/A

                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Svetlana Khvostova (AFTSG)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        No              Project activities will not include any
                           BP 4.01                                             construction or procurement of equipment or
                                                                               medical supplies (drugs, vaccines, reagents).
                                                                               The project will have no adverse environmental
                                                                               or social impacts. No safeguards policies are
                                                                               triggered.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                           Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.12
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 25-Mar-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      N/A
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Enias Baganizi

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Cary Anne Cadman (RSA)                                                                                               Date: 27-Mar-2013
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Trina S. Haque (SM)                                                                                                  Date: 25-Mar-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
