                                                                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                             CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                               Report No.: AC6480
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Mar-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        Bhutan                                    Project ID:                       P123820
                              Project Name:                   Bhutan Improving Rural Livelihoods (P123820)
                              Task Team Leader:               Bekzod Shamsiev
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 09-May-2012                                     Estimated Board Date:             18-Sep-2012
                              Managing Unit:                  SASDA                                     Lending Instrument:               Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                         Crops (50%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%)
                              Theme:                          Rural services and infrastructure (60%), Other rural development (30%), Rural policies and institutions (10%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                          Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                             0.00
                                   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                                  12.00
                                   Financing Gap                                                                                                                  0.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                        12.00
                              Environmental Category:         B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              B. Project Objectives

                              The main objectives of the proposed project are to enhance agriculture production systems and income generating opportunities of poor
                              communities in the project area by improving access and supporting farmer engagement in commercial opportunities. The project area would
                              consist of 6 dzongkhags of south-western and south-central Bhutan. These objectives would be achieved by improving access, stimulating
                              agriculture productivity growth and supporting development of non-farm employment opportunities in the selected regions. Improvement in market
Public Disclosure Copy




                              access would be achieved by investments in marketing and road infrastructure. Agricultural productivity and rural incomes would increase through
                              promotion of improved irrigation and land management practices, investments in simple post-harvest, processing and value additive activities.

                              Poverty mapping will be used to target project resources more effectively to rural areas, as part of a general drive to increase the efficiency and
                              effectiveness of public expenditure. To avoid spreading too thinly over the entire region, project activities would be concentrated in 26 geogs
                              which will be organized in three regional clusters. The twenty-five geogs of the six dzongkhags (Samtse, Ha, Chukkha, Dagana, Wangdue and
                              Trongsa) include over 10,000 households and a total population of over 60,000. The proposed project area represents the poorest areas of
                              Bhutan which, chiefly because of their remoteness and predominantly subsistence-based agriculture, have been largely excluded from the
                              country’s mainstream development, despite its good agriculture potential and accounts for about one-sixth of the country’s total cultivable area.

                              C. Project Description

                              The proposed project would consist of the following components:

                              Component A. Rural Infrastructure. The project would primarily finance construction and rehabilitation of rural access roads, irrigation, marketing
                              and post-harvest infrastructure (e.g. storage and threshing or processing equipment) where needed. The focus of this component is to connect the
                              communities to larger roads and regional markets and improve production potential through improved water availability. Specifically, this
                              component would finance combination of the improved access to markets and services with investments in rural roads, together with investments
                              in irrigation, post-harvest handling, storage, and processing to allow households to respond fully to the opportunities created by improved
                              connectivity and productivity. In line with the established practice, the construction of roads and irrigation facilities would be managed at
                              dzongkhag level. This component would consist of two sub-components:

                              Component A.1. Improving Rural Productivity and Access to Markets. The objective of investments in rural infrastructure development and
                              improvement will be to improve production, reduce post-harvest losses and increase market access. This component would be implemented at
                              Dzongkhag level as it requires coordination at higher than community level and conforms to the current practices and the RGoB decentralization
                              policy. Infrastructure will be in the form of public goods and will include roads, irrigation, market facilities, community level post-harvest facilities
                              and other small scale infrastructure as identified by local government plans and communities.

                              Component A.2. Improving Productive Assets of Existing Producer Groups. The interventions supported by this sub-component would address
                              major productivity constraints and enhance farm income of involved producers in a differentiated way, depending on the specificity of each
                              Dzongkhag. Specifically, the project would finance the rehabilitation of declining citrus orchards (mainly affected by the Greening disease), assist
                              the producers with replanting of cardamom plantations that have been devastated by fungal and viral diseases in the recent years. Project
                           resources would be also provided to existing livestock groups organized around about 270 farming households (in selected geogs in Haa, Chukka,
                           Samtse, Dagana and Trongsa), to enable an increased production of eggs and dairy products that are in high demand by the communities. Well
                           tested investment packages (sheds, quality equipment, productive breeds, and training) would be provided to organized groups on a cost-sharing
                           basis, following existing and working modalities that are promoted by the MOAF through the dzongkhag RNR staff in many parts of the country.
                           Similarly, and on a cost-sharing basis, over 25 Community Forest Groups and about 1,400 households (in selected geogs in Haa, Chukka,
                           Samtse, Dagana, Trongsa, and Wangdue) would receive project assistance and support for their wood and Non-Wood-Forest Products (NWFP)
                           production and value addition activities. Finally, the project would support investments of tested wildlife damage mitigation and sustainable land
Public Disclosure Copy




                           management technologies (developed respectively, by the Wengkhar Research Centre and the National Post Harvest Centre under the
                           coordination of the National Plant Protection Centre; and by the Sustainable Land Management Project) in all project dzongkhags. This
                           intervention is estimated to benefit directly over 1,700 households but would also determine the awareness of surrounding communities on such
                           technologies. It would likely stimulate their investment interest that could be addressed through the other financing opportunities and mechanisms
                           offered by the project (Component B).

                           Component B. Community Investment. The objective of this component is to expand access of rural communities to finance for investments in
                           income generating activities such as climate smart agriculture practices, improved productivity of agriculture, livestock and non-farm income
                           generation. Capacity building and credit enhancement facilities could be provided to qualified micro-finance institutions to encourage and
                           strengthen interactions with communities and develop appropriate financial instruments/products for their needs. For example, links will be
                           established with micro-finance institutions (such as BDBL) to establish community accounts and encourage saving accounts. Under this model,
                           funds would be managed by communities through revolving funds which would carry positive interest rates. Similarly, TA to communities to
                           manage these funds and make informed investment decisions will be needed. The activities supported through the use of revolving funds would
                           focus on increasing economic and livelihood opportunities by improving access to finance through provision of credit enhancement instruments
                           and/or credit to (or through) Participating Financial Institutions (PFIs) and encouraging communities to develop stronger linkages with banks and
                           other financial institutions. Examples of successful rural credit initiatives, including revolving fund experiences, from Bhutan and other South Asian
                           countries will be used to develop the rules and guidelines for implementation of this component.

                           Component C. Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation. This component would strengthen the capacity of the Ministry of Agriculture
                           and Forests (MOAF) to effectively coordinate implementation. This component would support: (i) project financial management, procurement and
                           procurement support to local communities as needed; (ii) mid-term and completion surveys that would provide project performance information at
                           the activity, output and outcome levels to cater to the requirements of the existing RGoB monitoring system, the PLAMS (Planning and Monitoring
                           System); (iii) preparation of case studies and best practice documentation to provide more qualitative insights on selected topics; and (iv) a
                           limited share of funds would be allocated for supporting targeted research of the critical farming constraints. The anticipated topics of such applied
                           research would include Integrated Pest Management (IPM); soil fertility and nutrient management; plant production management; quality seed
                           production technologies, conservation agriculture techniques; orchard development and reduction of post-harvest losses.

                            D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                           The project activities would be concentrated in 26 geogs of the six dzongkhags (Samtse, Ha, Chukkha, Dagana, Wangdue and Trongsa) are
                           located in the south-western and south-central regions of the country. The major constraints common to the proposed project area include: the
                           lack of access to markets resulting from inadequate road and transportation network; labor shortages; use of poor farming and natural resource
                           management practices; limited irrigation availability in spite of the abundance of spring and river water; and fragmented and small-scale farming
                           that hinders the realization of economies of scale required to engage in efficient marketing. Most of the targeted geogs are also adjacent to the
                           major economic hubs of Bhutan (Phuntsholing and Gelephu-Sarpang). The twenty-six geogs of the six dzongkhags include over 10,000
Public Disclosure Copy




                           households and a total population of over 60,000. The farming and production systems include a combination of crop, livestock and forestry
                           activities which sustain the livelihoods of the rural population in these areas. The proposed project area represents the poorest areas of Bhutan
                           which, chiefly because of their remoteness and predominantly subsistence-based agriculture, have been largely excluded from the country’s
                           mainstream development, despite its good agriculture potential and accounts for about one-sixth of the country’s total cultivable area.

                            E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

                           The Ministry of Agriculture and Forests has overseen a number of World Bank funded projects, including the Decentralized Rural Development
                           Project and the Sustainable Land Management Project and has been adequately applying environmental and social safeguard practices to
                           activities that are funded under these two projects. These include safeguard practices for farm roads, and other village infrastructure, and for
                           agriculture and forestry related investments supported under these two projects. Manuals and guidelines have been developed and are
                           consistently being applied across these two projects. Field staff and geog RNR staff in the project chiogs (villages) under the Sustainable Land
                           Management project have been trained in identifying potential environmental and social impacts and possible mitigation actions if and when any
                           potential social and environmental are identified through the village planning process. The proposed project would further train dzongkhag and
                           geog staff in the application of social and environmental safeguard policies.

                            F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

                           Malcolm A. B. Jansen (SASDI)
                           Chaohua Zhang (SASDS)
                           Drona Raj Ghimire (SASDI)
                           Hari Prasad Bhattarai (SASDA)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

                            Safeguard Policies                               Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01              Yes               This is applicable given the emphasis on management of natural resources
                                                                                              over large spatial territories. However, potential adverse environmental impacts
                                                                                              on human populations or environmentally important areas including forests,
                                                                                              grasslands and other natural habitats are expected to be very limited. An
                                                                                                                        environmental management framework will be developed to ensure all
                                                                                                                        environmental impacts are considered in planning, implementation and
                                                                                                                        monitoring of project activities. In terms of the farm road component, the
                                                                                                                        environment management framework would include provision for undertaking
                                                                                                                        environmental assessments for each identified farm road segment based on the
                                                                                                                        Environmental Friendly Road Construction guidelines that have been developed
                                                                                                                        by the Royal Government of Bhutan.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                        No

                                Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                 Yes                   The project envisages community and private forests and some limited
                                                                                                                        afforestation of degraded areas to curb land degradation. However, the project
                                                                                                                        will not engage in commercial forestry activities.
                                Pest Management OP 4.09                                            Yes                   The project might involve the procurement and use of pesticides on a limited
                                                                                                                        scale to enhance crop production in farmer agricultural lands. However, the
                                                                                                                        procurement and distribution of pesticides in Bhutan is well controlled through a
                                                                                                                        centralized system and there will be no procurement of pesticides classified as
                                                                                                                        Class Ia, Ib and II by WHO. Revised operational guidelines for the conservation
                                                                                                                        grant program would provide specific guidance on use of pesticides.
                                Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                             No

                                Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                      No

                                Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                                Yes                    The Project proposes to finance small, community-level infrastructure
                                                                                                                        investments, including irrigation and water harvesting/ management structures,
                                                                                                                        rural access roads, and community facilities (sale centers, packaging houses,
                                                                                                                        storage facilities etc). These investments have the potential of causing some
                                                                                                                        adverse social and economic impacts on a small number of affected households
                                                                                                                        by way of involuntary acquisition or donation of private land or use of
                                                                                                                        government or community land with livelihood dependence. The project will also
                                                                                                                        support agricultural and natural resource improvement interventions related to
                                                                                                                        nurseries, community drylands, community forests, as well as ecotourism in
                                                                                                                        legally designated national parks. Although, unlikely these interventions may in
                                                                                                                        rare cases result in relocation, or loss of shelter, assets, access to private
                                                                                                                        assets or community resources, loss of income sources or means of livelihood
                                                                                                                        (whether or not the affected persons must move to another location) etc.

                                                                                                                        The borrower will conduct a social impact assessment of the proposed project
                                                                                                                        components to identify the land requirement and potential adverse impacts of
                                                                                                                        proposed interventions, including those related to loss of land, assets, income,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        shelter, livelihoods, access to private assets and community resources. This will
                                                                                                                        include field visits, consultations and review of social safeguard lessons from
                                                                                                                        similar projects in Bhutan related to NRM, rural infrastructure, rural roads, land
                                                                                                                        management etc. Based on the identified impacts and the safeguard lessons,
                                                                                                                        the borrower will prepare suitable screening and impact mitigation measures,
                                                                                                                        including resettlement plans/frameworks and process frameworks as
                                                                                                                        appropriate. The social assessment will also identify and recommend special
                                                                                                                        measures to protect socially and economically vulnerable groups such as
                                                                                                                        women headed households and people living in extreme poverty.
                                Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                          No

                                Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                          Yes                    The project area covers existing irrigation network which draws water from
                                7.50                                                                                    rivers going through Bhutan's territory and then flow to India. Thus the project
                                                                                                                        triggers World Bank OP 7.50 (Projects on International Waterways). At the same
                                                                                                                        time the proposed investments under the project are only for renovation of
                                                                                                                        irrigation canals, and improvements of drainage infrastructure, which are not
                                                                                                                        expected to change the volume of extraction/discharge water or quality of water
                                                                                                                        of these rivers, but rather will lead to more effective irrigation and drainage of the
                                                                                                                        water. Thus the project implementation would improve the transboundary water
                                                                                                                        resources use and their quality. Based on mentioned, the project team would
                                                                                                                        seek an exemption from the Bank with regard to exception on the notification
                                                                                                                        requirement under Paragraph 7(a) of the Policy.
                                Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                              No



                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 27-Mar-2012



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
                              should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                              Environmental management framework will be developed by end March 2012.

                         IV. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:                  Name: Bekzod Shamsiev
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Name: Sanjay Srivastava (RSA)                                     Date: 12-Mar-2012
                            Sector Manager:                    Name: Simeon Kacou Ehui (SM)                                      Date: 30-Apr-2012
Public Disclosure Copy
