                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA3350
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-Jun-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 05-Jun-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Comoros                            Project ID:    P131659
                            Project Name:      KM-Electricity Sect. Recovery Proj(FY14) (P131659)
                            Task Team          Mustafa Zakir Hussain
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          03-Jun-2013                        Estimated   26-Sep-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTG1                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         General energy sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (65%), State-owned
                                              enterprise restructuring and privatization (35%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:       5.00           Total Bank Financing:                    5.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                       Financing Gap:                           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          0.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                                   5.00
                              Total                                                                                       5.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to contribute to the improvement in the electricity sector's
                           commercial and financial performance.
                            3. Project Description
                           The proposed Project includes the following three components:

                                                                        Page 1 of 4
                         Component 1: Assistance to the Electricity State Owned Enterprises Commercial and Financial
                         Performance Recovery. (Total Cost: US$3.50 million - IDA US$3.50 million). This component will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         include three related sub-components:
                         - Sub-component 1.a: Commercial and Financial Technical Assistance. The Project will finance
                         senior experts that will work with the current management to lead the commercial and financial
                         restructuring of the utilities. Considering the small size of the Comorian system, the permanent
                         presence of a relatively small number of senior experts is expected to go a long way towards
                         reinstating the basics of sound power utility management. Key senior experts are expected to be hired
                         once the Restructuring and Development Plan is finalized and accepted by the Comorian sector
                         authorities and the Bank. The senior experts will be in place for at least two years (preferably three
                         years) with the possibility of extension - and will initially support MA-MWE´s commercial and
                         financial divisions, reporting directly to MA-MWE´s Managing Director. Once the plan for the
                         recovery of MA-MWE is under implementation, and learning from that experience, the senior
                         experts could also review the situation at EDA (if requested).
                         - Sub-component 1.b. Commercial and Financial Performance Enhancement. This sub-component
                         will provide the required resources for the implementation of the state-owned enterprises´
                         commercial recovery. One of the key functions of the senior experts procured under Component 1a
                         will be to analyze the specific needs in terms of management systems for billing, accounting,
                         customer management, etc. and equipment and recommend the most appropriate ones for the utility.
                         This sub-component will complement the first by financing the acquisition of the recommended
                         systems and raising public awareness of the GoC’s reform plan. It will include four main activities:
                         •        Purchase of management information systems (MIS) and hardware.
                         •        Purchase of Network Metering Equipment.
                         •        Poverty and Social Impact Analysis (PSIA).
                         •        Communications and Awareness Campaign.

                         Component 2: Electricity Sector Governance. This component will finance technical assistance,
                         capacity building activities and studies related to key aspects of sector governance. Specifically, this
Public Disclosure Copy




                         component would provide support to the energy sector institutions (Vice-presidency in charge of
                         energy, department of energy, etc.) through the hiring of external experts and the provision of
                         training (including workshops) to perform key functions from the following: i) definition of an
                         energy policy including review of sector governance arrangements (i.e. appointment of MA-MWE
                         Board and management to make the accountability framework clearer) and its implementation; ii)
                         definition of a legal and regulatory framework and its implementation; and iii) development of
                         planning capacity (through, among others, the preparation of a generation expansion plan and to
                         provide the tools – training, capacity building, software, etc for investment decision making,
                         implementation).

                         Component 3: Project Management. This component would support the overall coordination,
                         management and monitoring functions of the Project carried out by a Project Implementation Unit
                         (PIU). It will also finance certain project preparation activities.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Island of Grande Comore, Island of Anjouan, Island of Moheli.

                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Paul-Jean Feno (AFTN1)

                                                                       Page 2 of 4
                            6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/         No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09              No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                The Project will not finance construction of new infrastructure and it will not lead to land
                              acquisition nor will it deprive people of access to their usual means of livelihood. The Project will
                              fund consultancies for improvement of commercial and financial recovery of the utilities, studies
                              for sector policy and the acquisition of electricity meters, management information systems,
                              hardware and software equipment in the commercial and technical areas, thus, no significant
                              adverse environmental or social impacts are anticipated.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                                NA
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                                NA
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                                NA
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.


                                                                         Page 3 of 4
                               NA
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
Public Disclosure Copy




                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
                                                                                             Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Mustafa Zakir Hussain
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Lucio Monari (SM)                           Date: 05-Jun-2013




                                                                      Page 4 of 4
