                                                                     INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                              APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSA746
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Jun-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                         China                                 Project ID:                      P125021
                              Project Name:                    Hunan Forest Restoration and Development Project (P125021)
                              Task Team Leader:                Jin Liu
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 29-Jun-2012                                  Estimated Board Date:            21-Feb-2013
                              Managing Unit:                   EASCS                                 Lending Instrument:              Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                          Forestry (100%)
                              Theme:                           Climate change (50%), Other environment and natural resources management (50%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                     Amount
                                   Borrower                                                                                                                35.20
                                   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                                   80.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                  115.20
                              Environmental Category:          B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              The PDO would be to enhance the resilience and environmental function of selected ice storm-affected ecological forest plantations in Hunan
                              Province by increasing forest species diversity and vegetative tree cover in those areas.

                              3. Project Description

                              In early 2008, southern-central China experienced an extreme ice storm. Hunan Province experienced the most severe damage with some 4.5
Public Disclosure Copy




                              million ha of forests or 35 percent of the provincial forest area affected. The proposed Hunan Forest Restoration and Development Project will
                              support the provincial Government's effort in restoring the damaged plantation sites, to prevent further forest degradation and rehabilitate the
                              ecological balance in the storm-affected landscapes.

                              The Government of China will borrow US$ 80 million IBRD loan to finance this project. The World Bank Loan would support forest restoration of
                              the estimated area of 58,900 hectares degraded forest lands and damaged forests identified by the local government as priority for forest
                              restoration, as well as the relevant technical support, monitoring and evaluation, institutional capacity building and project management.

                              It is expected that this project will be implemented over a period of six years from March 1, 2013 to March 1, 2019. The following components and
                              activities are proposed to be included:

                              A.           Component One: Reforestation and rehabilitation of damaged ecological forest plantations. It includes two subcomponents:

                              (a) The full reforestation of ecological forest plantations completely denuded by the ice storm. This reforestation would be achieved by reforesting
                              about 27,700 ha of forestland with various locally-adapted species mixed with conifer and indigenous broadleaf species.

                              (b) The rehabilitation of damaged ecological forest plantations, which would include:

                              (i) The supplemental reforestation of about 18,600 ha of damaged and partially denuded ecological forest plantations by inter-planting mixed
                              species of conifer and indigenous broadleaf species; and

                              (ii) the natural regeneration for about 12,600 ha of damaged ecological forest plantation where spontaneous germination of forest seedlings as well
                              as the sprouts from damaged stumps would be supported through silvicultural management measures and supplemented by some partial
                              replanting of mixes of conifer and broadleaf indigenous species in locations where natural regeneration is not taking place.

                              The project interventions envisaged under this component would result in the creation of rehabilitated multi-species ecological forest plantations
                              that would have multi-level structures (trees of different heights and ages) with an optimum canopy cover allowing them to be more resilient to the
                              effects of future natural disasters and to provide better soil and water conservation and other environmental functions.

                              B.           Component two: Institutional support and technology enhancement. It would finance five subcomponents:

                              (a) To upgrade two central nurseries in Taoyuan County and Suxian District and a provincial demonstration nursery in Ningxiang County, as well

                                                                                                                                                                       Page 1 of 5
                               as to improve the quality of seedlings throughout the project area. The proposed upgrading would: (i) increase the number of seedlings of species
                               and improve the quality of planting materials; and (ii) support the adoption of sound nursery management technologies.

                               (b) To establish and strengthen 22 farmer forest cooperatives for the purpose of reforesting, forest rehabilitating and long-term management of the
                               ecological forest plantations.

                               (c) To carry out an applied research, capacity building and knowledge dissemination program covering various areas and topics and to implement
Public Disclosure Copy




                               training and extension activities, which would help to introduce new and more adapted ecological forest plantation species, new plantation
                               technical models, as well as nursery management techniques. These activities would also upgrade the capacity of forestry staff in providing
                               technical services and extension to the project beneficiaries.

                               (d) To establish and implement the project’s progress, outcome, and impacts monitoring and evaluation system.

                               (e) To strengthen institutional capacity for project management offices at both provincial and county levels.

                               The implementation of the component would strengthen the institutional capacity for project management, improve the quality of planting material
                               and enhance the technologies used for reforesting and managing the ecological forest plantations.

                               4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                               The project activities would be implemented in 22 counties in Hunan Province. The project site/location selection was made in accordance with
                               the following criteria:
                               (a) Sites would only be made up of ecological plantation areas damaged by the 2008 ice storm;
                               (b) Private and collective ecological forest plantations would be included in the project only at the voluntary request of their land use right owners;
                               (c) All the sites to be selected would be free of claims and/or disputes and would be outside the boundaries of any natural forest, habitat and/or
                               cultural heritage site.

                               The project areas cover a large mountainous landscape that is traversed by a couple of rivers. The region is largely prone to water and soil erosion
                               mainly because of the steep slopes and the fact that the upper reaches of the Zijiang, Yuanjiang and other rivers have degraded forest cover and
                               vegetation. The rehabilitation of damaged forest plantations in those areas would help reduce soil erosion and water loses caused by water runoff,
                               as well as enhance the sustainability of water resource and improve its quality.

                               5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                               Zong-Cheng Lin (EASCS)
                               Yiren Feng (EASCS)

                               6. Safeguard Policies                            Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                               Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01              Yes              The explanations are detailed in the following section.
                               Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                      No
                               Forests OP/BP 4.36                               Yes
Public Disclosure Copy




                               Pest Management OP 4.09                          Yes
                               Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11           No
                               Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                    Yes
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12              No
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                        No
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP        No
                               7.50
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60            No


                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any potential l arge scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                    The Environmental Assessment (EA) and Social Assessment (SA) conducted during the project preparation have not identified any potential
                                  large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts. No involuntary relocation or land acquisition is expected under the project. There are also no
                                  archaeological and historical sites found. More specific assessment is summarized as the following:

                                  1. Environmental Assessment. The project is designed to enhance the resilience and environmental function of selected ice storm-affected
                                  ecological forest plantations in Hunan Province. It is expected to generate significant positive environmental impacts in the project areas.
                                  Negative impacts are unlikely to be generated and could occur only if the project is not properly designed and implemented. For example, poor
                                  plantation model design such as application of unsuitable planting materials and species, improper site selection and site preparation,
                                  uncontrolled use of pesticides, etc. However, such negative impacts are unlikely to materialize because Hunan Province has long-term
                                  experience in managing similar forestry projects and the detailed design for reforestation and forest rehabilitation has been carefully undertaken
                                  during project preparation. Environment risks will be mitigated and managed through the appropriate planting model selection and the
                                  safeguards measures proposed under the project, which are included in the project implementation plan.

                                  One Environmental Management Plan (EMP), including Environmental Protection Guidelines (EPG) and a Pest Management Plan (PMP) was
                                                                                                                                                            Page 2 of 5
                           prepared for the project, building on the experience of the previous forestry projects in China. The environmental monitoring plan is integrated
                           into the project’s overall M&E approach. The proposed mitigation measures have been integrated into the project implementation and
                           operational phases. The proper implementation of the mitigation measures would minimize the potential negative environmental impacts to an
                           acceptable level or even eliminate those impacts.

                           2. Natural Habitats. EA indicated that the proposed sites are ecological plantation areas damaged by the 2008 ice storm, which are not located
                           in or near any critical natural habitats. The site selection criteria also exclude such areas under the project. During project implementation,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           further site screening process will be undertaken for each of the candidate sites to confirm that no critical natural habitats or cultural heritage
                           exist in the project areas and the information about each site will be well documented. On-site screening and ex-post checking approach have
                           proven to be an effective tool in previous World Bank-financed forestry projects.

                           3. Forests. The project includes reforestation and rehabilitation of damaged ecological forest plantations. The project will use mainly local,
                           indigenous species and develop forest plantation models with significant environmental benefits. The plantation will be largely managed by
                           communities and villages and in their lands for which they have the land use rights. The plantations will keep the permanent forest cover for
                           generating the ecological functions. Only thinning that will promote the forest growth, healthy conditions and underground generation and
                           selected cutting for regeneration purpose will be allowed. The project does not entail conversion of natural forests and the introduction of any
                           invasive species. Communities will manage the improved forest plantations based on their interest and voluntary participation. Policy
                           requirements on plantation and community forests management have been integrated into the EMP.

                           4. Pest Management. Since the establishment and management of forest plantations require to use limited pesticides or herbicides, a Pest
                           Management Plan (PMP) has been developed based on the implementation experience from managing previous Bank financed forestry
                           projects in China. An integrated pest management (IPM) approach has been incorporated into the project design during preparation. The IPM,
                           including training and monitoring programs and budget plan, will be implemented during the project implementation period.

                           5. Physical Cultural Resources. The detailed site selection process and environmental screening confirmed that the project sites are not located
                           in or next to any known areas with physical, cultural, or natural relics and the results have also been confirmed by the Cultural Relics Bureau of
                           each proposed project county. In addition, the site selection criteria exclude such areas. A chance finding procedure for physical cultural resou
                           rces was included in the EMP.

                           6. Indigenous Peoples (IP). Several ethnic minority people reside in the project area, including Miao, Yao and Tujia people. The Miao and Yao
                           ethnic groups, who mainly live concentrated in 5 counties in the west and the south-west of Hunan Province, are identified as indigenous
                           people in accordance with OP4.10. During project preparation, the project SA was conducted by a social expert consulting team with a focus on
                           the Miao and Yao communities. Free, prior and informed consultation was carried out in these communities by the project entities and local
                           authorities with social expert team’s guidance. Based on the findings of the assessment, an Ethnic Minority Development Plan (EMDP) was
                           developed to ensure that the proposed project activities on ecological forest plantation restoration and rehabilitation are offered to the Miao and
                           Yao communities in the same way as to other project beneficiaries and that their participation would be on a voluntary basis.

                           7. Involuntary Resettlement. The project SA and the technical design confirmed that there are no any physical relocation and/or land
                           acquisitions under the project. All project activities would be undertaken on a voluntary basis. The project will only include those lands where
                           the land users agreed voluntarily to be included. The project has developed a Participatory Planning Manual (PPM) which was applied during
                           project preparation and will continue to be applied during the implementation period to ensure full voluntary participation of farmers and
                           communities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           8. Safety of Dams, International Waterways and Disputed Areas. The project will not finance construction or rehabilitation of any dams; there
                           are no project components involving international waterways; and the project sites are not located in any known disputed areas as defined
                           under the policy. No action is required under those policies.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                            The project has been assigned as an EA category B project in the World Bank's classification system. Overall, the Project is expected to
                           generate significant long term environmental benefits such as reducing water and soil erosion, promote forest sustainability and biodiversity
                           conservation, as well as make contributions to the reduction of GHG. The relevant monitoring activities on soil erosion reduction and other
                           ecological environmental impacts have been designed as part of the project monitoring plan.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                             The borrower conducted a detailed feasibility study for selecting the most appropriate reforestation and forest rehabilitation models, including
                           tree species selection, forest management models etc. The technical models designed during the project preparation would represent an
                           appropriate balance between technical and cost effectiveness and are environmentally and ecologically sound choices. Some project activities
                           were modified during preparation in order to increase the environmental benefits, such as reducing planting density to promote multi-story
                           canopies and adopting mixed forest structure to maximize the soil erosion reduction function and minimize pest and diseases occurrence rate.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                            and implement the measures described.
                            The project implementation agencies readily endorsed the principle of carrying out all project activities in accordance with the Bank safeguard
                           policies. The project agencies developed and would implement the EMDP, the EMP including EPG and PMP, as well as the PPM. The relevant
                           standards, requirements and procedures have been incorporated into the final project design and its implementation plan to guide the project
                           implementation. More specifically:

                           The project environmental assessment was carried out in accordance with the Bank’s operational Policy and local government regulation and
                           an EMP was prepared. The key potential negative impacts on the environment would include: (a) short-term impact to the ground vegetation
                           and potential temporary soil and water erosion due to site preparation for planting and (b) pesticide application on the planting site. If the
                           mitigation measures proposed in the EMP are implemented, the negative impacts will be minimized. The mitigation measures to address the
                           potential negative environmental impacts have been identified and included in the EMP as well as the technical design. The EMP also includes
                           institutional arrangement for EMP implementation, budget requirements for monitoring and training. For easier reference during implementation,
                           the operational procedures and the mitigation measures for each step of project activities are included in a stand-alone EPG. The EPG covers
                           the guidelines for the entire cycle of reforestation and forest rehabilitation activities stating from site selection, site preparation, species
                                                                                                                                                                   Page 3 of 5
                           selection, planting and tending management (including weed and soil loosening, fertilization, and pest control), fire prevention and control, to
                           long-time forest stand management and regeneration selective cutting. Good practice and procedure in the previous forestry projects in Hunan
                           were adopted in the Guidelines. A PMP was prepared for the project in accordance with OP4.09. The PMP covers preface, major pest issues,
                           pesticides management methods and their scope of application, and provided recommendations for different situations. It summarizes the IPM
                           approaches adopted by the project, and lists all chemicals that might be potentially needed for the project forest plantation management, which
                           fulfill the Bank’s requirements and within the World Health Organization’s recommended categories. The PMP also includes the institutional
                           arrangements for pesticides management, the relevant training program and monitoring program. The implementation of the training and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           monitoring programs has been budgeted as part of the project cost.

                           The project social assessment was also carried out. Because of the presence of Miao and Yao ethnic minority groups in the project areas, the
                           Bank OP/BP 4.10 was triggered. The project PMO invited ethnologists/sociologists from Hunan Academy of Social Science and the Southern
                           Industrial University conducted project SA with a focus on the Miao and Yao ethnic minority communities. The project social assessment report
                           (SA report) was prepared to inform the project designers of the critical social impacts that might caused by the project. Therefore, the social
                           concerns have been appropriately addressed in the project design. Moreover, The EMDP would also help to mobilize additional government
                           resources and social services for the development of village infrastructure in these ethnic minority communities. Through the implementation of
                           the EMDP, the project would provide an opportunity for both the restoration of damaged ecological forest plantations and for the socio-
                           economic development of the ethnic minority communities.

                           Hunan Province has participated in four previous Bank-supported forestry projects and has demonstrated excellent institutional capacity in
                           project management, including implementation of the World Bank's safeguards policies. All of the previous forestry development projects
                           required the preparation and implementation of EMP, EPG and PMP, which have proven to be effective tools in mitigating the potential negative
                           impacts to the environmental condition. The implementation agencies are also familiar with the Bank's social safeguards policies through the
                           implementation of the Sustainable Forestry Development Project, in which the Community Consultation and Participatory Manual as well as
                           EMDP were developed and implemented successfully.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                            on potentially affected people.
                             Key stakeholders are the local governments, individual households, forest farms, farmer forest cooperatives, village groups and communities
                           in 22 counties of Hunan Province, including the Miao and Yao ethnic minority communities. The project has established a broader participation
                           mechanism throughout the project area. A PPM has been prepared to guide the project design and implementation on the ground. The PPM
                           requires a three-step process to secure local villages and farmers’ voluntary participation in the project, and their preference in technical design
                           would be taken into consideration. These steps include: (a) the dissemination of detailed information on project reforestation and forest
                           rehabilitation activities in all project villages; (b) the establishment of a two-way communication process between households and county PMOs
                           on the selection of plantation models and tree species; and (c) a process of formal application and contracting between the participating villages
                           or households and the county project management offices for project participation.

                           During project preparation, a detailed consultation and participatory design process has been carried out in all project villages and key
                           stakeholders. More than 26,000 individual households were interested in the project and would participate in and benefit from the project by
                           various operational and management arrangements on a fully voluntary basis.

                           More specifically, in ethnic minority communities, led by project SA team, extensive project information dissemination and consultation
                           campaign were conducted and intensive socio-economic survey fieldwork was carried out in the project Miao and Yao communities. Around 24
Public Disclosure Copy




                           village conferences and 46 focus group meetings were held and 558 farmers attended the meetings; around 40 key village informants and 149
                           rural leaders were interviewed. In addition, 180 Participatory Rural Assessment (PRA) paradigms and tables were drawn and 522 questionnaire
                           sheets were collected. Through the intensive PRA fieldwork and extensive consultation, all these Miao and Yao villages and communities fully
                           understood the potential risks and opportunities associated with the projects, and expressed their enthusiasm interest and broad support to the
                           project activities.

                           The project safeguard documents have been disclosed in Hunan provincial PMOs, 22 project county PMOs and county libraries, as well as
                           Hunan Forestry Bureau website on April 20, 2012. The Documents have been also disclosed at Bank InfoShop on May 23, 2012.

                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                               12-Apr-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                           20-Apr-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                            23-May-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                           Directors
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                               12-Apr-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                           20-Apr-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                            23-May-2012
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                            Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                               12-Apr-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                           20-Apr-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                            23-May-2012

                                                                                                                                                                   Page 4 of 5
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                            disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                            C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                              Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?              Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                            OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                              If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or SM? Are            Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              PMP requirements included in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                              Management Specialist?
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                              If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and approved by    Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                              Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include provisions for       Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              certification system?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?              Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language      Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for   Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?              Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard    Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same        Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Task Team Leader:                    Jin Liu
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:     Name:                                                                    Date:
                            Sector Manager:                      Name Mark R. Lundell (SM)                                                Date: 29-Jun-2012




                                                                                                                                                               Page 5 of 5
