                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA2653
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-May-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 07-May-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Mozambique                         Project ID:    P125120
                            Project Name:      Greater Maputo Water Supply Expansion Project (P125120)
                            Task Team          Luiz Claudio Martins Tava
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          30-Apr-2013                        Estimated   25-Jul-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTU1                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Water supply (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Urban services and housing for the poor (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       178.00                Total Bank Financing: 178.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                              Financing Gap:          0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                           0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                178.00
                              Total                                                                                      178.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective (PDO) is to increase access to clean water for residents in the
                           Greater Maputo Area.
                            3. Project Description
                           The proposed Project finances investments defined as part of the overall Greater Maputo Area
                           (GMA) Master Plan for Water Supply, finalized in April 2011. A detailed feasibility study and

                                                                       Page 1 of 11
                         preliminary design study were undertaken in 2011 and 2012, respectively, to determine the
                         appropriate sites and specifications of the abstraction point, the water treatment works and related
                         infrastructure. It was ultimately determined that the optimum phasing of infrastructure investments,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         taking into account the up-front costs of major works and the slower growth in revenues resulting
                         from new connections, involved the laying of main pipelines capable of transmitting 120,000 m3 of
                         treated water per day from an existing water supply source, and the construction of a 60,000 m3/day
                         treatment plant during a first phase of investments. Such phasing allows later construction of an
                         additional 60,000 m3/day treatment plant during a second phase of the investment program, while
                         taking advantage of significant savings in the cost of works and substantial reduction of social and
                         environmental impacts for the laying of the entire transmission pipeline during the first phase. The
                         Project consists of four components:

                         Component A includes goods and civil works to construct the abstraction point for 60,000 m3/day of
                         raw water from the existing Corumana Dam reservoir, piping to transmit 120,000 m3/day raw water
                         from the abstraction point to the water treatment plant, a water treatment plant with a treatment
                         capacity of 60,000 m3/day, approximately 93 km of trunk pipeline with a transmission capacity of
                         120,000 m3/day, distribution reservoirs, and ancillary work. These investments will enable the
                         abstraction, treatment, and transport of water to the existing Machava water distribution center,
                         located at the Maputo water supply network's northwestern point.

                         Component B includes goods and civil works to install approximately 100,000 new connections and
                         associated meters in Greater Maputo (Matola and several peri-urban areas), which will be defined
                         during project implementation. In addition, the component will install up to 300 kilometers of
                         distribution network to serve the new connections. Water supplied to the Machava distribution
                         center can be distributed in the local network as well as to the Tsalala distribution center for the
                         Tsalala network. The distribution networks in Tsalala and Machava have been extended, and there is
                         likely to be significant demand for new service connections in both networks. However, service
                         connections financed under component B may be located at any location in the Greater Maputo
                         network. This component is complemented by a parallel Dutch-financed program to install
Public Disclosure Copy




                         distribution centers and primary networks in the areas receiving new and rehabilitated connections,
                         approximately 20,000 new and rehabilitated connections, and associated household meters. The
                         Dutch-financed program will prepare a separate EIA for their project, which will be benchmarked
                         against Dutch EIA requirements and World Bank Safeguards.

                         Component C will provide technical assistance to FIPAG, including (i) supervision of project works
                         and implementation of Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) and Resettlement Action Plans
                         (RAPs); (ii) preparation of Phase II of the program to increase the amount of water available to the
                         GMA to meet residential demand to 2025, including technical assistance for engineering, safeguards,
                         and economic analyses; (iii) consulting services to support the preparation of a follow-up project in
                         the largest secondary cities; (iv) consulting services to FIPAG to support project implementation,
                         including support for AdeM’s transition in 2014; (v) financial and technical audits; and (vi) capacity
                         building and training.

                         Component D is a capacity building activity that will provide resources for operating expenses and
                         technical assistance to the Conselho de Regulacao de Aguas (CRA). This includes support for the
                         expansion of the regulatory framework and oversight, particularly in the peri-urban areas, and
                         reviews of the structure and form of subsidies for low-income customers and of financing means to
                         extend water and sanitation services to the urban poor. The component will also provide goods,



                                                                     Page 2 of 11
                         operational support, capacity building and training, and technical assistance to CRA to address
                         specific issues and constraints.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis (if known)
                         Intake site: The feasibility study analyzed two alternatives for the raw water intake: (i) existing
                         intake works at the Corumana Dam; and (ii) construction of a new weir downstream of the dam on
                         the Incomati River. The study confirmed that, while the two options have similar investment costs,
                         the Incomati weir option would have significant environmental impacts, considerably higher risks
                         with respect to flooding and silting, and higher operational costs. In addition, the site of the proposed
                         Incomati weir lies on a wide flood plain, and there are consequently much higher engineering risks
                         associated with this alternative. Therefore, the existing intake works at Corumana Dam were chosen
                         as the preferred design.

                         Location of the water treatment works and trunk pipeline route: The feasibility study reviewed three
                         possible locations for the water treatment works, and assessed whether pumping to the Machava
                         distribution reservoir should be in one or two stages. A financial analysis narrowed the options down
                         to two; and a subsequent multi-criteria evaluation led to a recommendation to place the water
                         treatment works on a 10-ha site approximately 3 km northwest of the village of Sabie, which would
                         allow treated water offtakes to be built into the distribution pipeline once Phase 2 is implemented in
                         order to serve nearby communities. A 1-ha site along the trunk pipeline corridor will be acquired
                         south of the village of Pessene to construct control tanks. The trunk pipeline corridor is about 93 kms
                         in length, and follows existing road access for most of the distance. For survey purposes, the
                         pipeline corridor was assumed to be 30 m wide in rural areas and 16 m wide in urban areas, although
                         construction will require a minimum width of 3.2 m in urban areas and as much as 12 m in rural
                         areas.

                         Terminus in Maputo: The feasibility study reviewed the existing water distribution system in Maputo
                         and determined that (i) additional water was most needed at the Machava distribution reservoir; and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (ii) transmission to and from the Machava reservoir minimized operational costs relative to other
                         distribution centers. Moreover, there is considerable water distribution infrastructure in the vicinity
                         of the Machava reservoir that can be extended to additional un-served properties. The Machava
                         distribution centre includes ample land already owned by FIPAG; hence future expansion could
                         occur without the need for land acquisition or environmental disruption. Machava is connected to the
                         Greater Maputo network, so water supplied directly from the project could be re-distributed
                         elsewhere in the network. At present, practically all the water supplied to the Greater Maputo area is
                         pumped from the Umbeluzi Treatment Works and, consequently, any problems with this source
                         would put the whole of the supply to Maputo at risk. In 2001 and 2006, severe flooding damaged and
                         restricted operations and access to Umbeluzi Water Treatment Works for a number of days. The
                         provision of water to Machava from the project would provide a measure of security and operational
                         flexibility to the Greater Maputo supply system, as well as provide for additional new connections.

                         A future phase is anticipated to have no change on project footprint. The main trunk pipeline is sized
                         to transport the additional 60 m3/day of water envisioned for Phase 2, and the water treatment plant
                         has been sized to allow for expansion to Phase 2. Financing for this future Phase will be determined
                         at a later stage.

                         Location of Component B works: Location of the proposed expansion of the distribution system and
                         new connections service area, although likely to be in the northern area of Greater Maputo, will be


                                                                       Page 3 of 11
                         determined during project implementation. FIPAG will coordinate and identify the designated areas
                         that will receive Bank- and Dutch-financed service connections once the Dutch project has
                         completed its design and environmental assessment work.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Harvey D. Van Veldhuizen (OPSOR)
                         Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS)

                         6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             An Environmental and Social Impact
                         BP 4.01                                           Assessment was disclosed on March 12, 2013 at
                                                                           InfoShop.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No              There are no sensitive or critical natural habitat
                                                                           areas along the proposed alternative corridors for
                                                                           the pipelines and the water treatment plant.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09            No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No               Almost all of the civil works for the project will
                         BP 4.11                                           occur within existing road rights-of-way or on
                                                                           land that has already undergone substantial
                                                                           human modification (e.g., at the dam site, and
                                                                           adjacent the urban area of Moamba). Moreover,
                                                                           the presence of physical cultural resources is not
                                                                           expected in the project area. As per standard
                                                                           practice, surveys for physical cultural resources in
                                                                           the project footprint will be carried out as part of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                           the baseline studies for the draft ESIA, and civil
                                                                           works contracts will include chance finds
                                                                           procedures.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     Yes             Based on preliminary feasibility work, it appears
                         4.12                                              that involuntary resettlement and adverse effects
                                                                           on people's livelihoods due to the taking of land
                                                                           can be avoided by minor shifts in location of
                                                                           project facilities. This will be examined further
                                                                           during final project engineering designs. FIPAG
                                                                           has experience with preparation of RAPs and
                                                                           Resettlement Policy Frameworks (RPFs) in other
                                                                           Bank financed projects, and has prepared a RAP
                                                                           during project preparation which provides
                                                                           information for the most number of people that
                                                                           will be impacted by the project. The number of
                                                                           impacted may be significantly lower, however,
                                                                           depending on further decisions on the location of


                                                                   Page 4 of 11
                                                                               project facilities during project design and
                                                                               implementation.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          Yes               Because Safeguards-related work for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               completion of the Corumana Dam, including
                                                                               requirements of the Dam Safety policy (OP 4.37),
                                                                               is already being done as part of the Water
                                                                               Resources Development Project (WRDP,
                                                                               P107350), that aspect of Safeguards work will not
                                                                               beduplicated as part of the preparation of the
                                                                               GMWSEP; rather, Safeguards documents
                                                                               prepared for the Corumana Dam have been
                                                                               disclosed by the Bank and will be cross-
                                                                               referenced in the Bank project documents for the
                                                                               GMWSP.
                            Projects on International          Yes               The Corumana Dam is located in Mozambique
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                               on the Sabíe River which flows from South
                                                                               Africa into Mozambique and is a tributary to the
                                                                               Incomati River, an international waterway shared
                                                                               by South Africa, Swaziland and Mozambique.
                                                                               Mozambique is the downstream riparian.
                                                                               Cooperation among the riparians is governed by
                                                                               the Tripartite Interim Agreement for Co-operation
                                                                               on the Protection and Sustainable Utilization of
                                                                               the Incomati and Maputo Watercourses.
                                                                               Mozambique has carried out riparian notifications
                                                                               under the National Water Resources
                                                                               Development Project (P107350). Compliance
                                                                               with OP 7.50 and the riparians' no-objections
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               were effectuated through the Tripartite
                                                                               Agreement mechanism.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               Extensive feasibility studies have already been done to examine alternative water supply options
                              for Maputo. The preferred source of water supply is from the completed Corumana Dam on the
                              Sabie River. Under WRDP completion of the Corumana Dam (which began operations in 1989)
                              will require the installation of spillway gates, for which the dam was originally designed and
                              constructed, as well as some other minor works. Because Safeguards-related work for the
                              completion of the Corumana Dam, including requirements of the Dam Safety policy (OP 4.37), is
                              already being done as part of the Bank-financed Water Resources Development Project (WRDP
                              [P107350]), this will not be duplicated as part of the preparation of the GMWSP. Mozambique
                              has carried out riparian notifications under the WRDP in compliance with OP 7.50. Contracts


                                                                       Page 5 of 11
                         were signed for the Technical Services and Dam Safety review (June 2010) as part of project
                         preparation for WRDP. The ESIA and EMP for WRDP were disclosed locally and at the
                         InfoShop on April 11 and April 28, 2011, respectively. And these informed ESIA for GMWSP
Public Disclosure Copy




                         which was disclosed on March 12, 2013.

                         The project is expected to have no significant adverse impact on protected, critical, or significant
                         areas of natural habitat. The preferred site for the water treatment works consists of scrub brush
                         and grasses, and has no significant habitat value. As the site consists of very thin soils, there are no
                         agriculture activities at the site. The site is a part of a very large expanse of public land which is
                         subject to "open range" grazing under the administrative control of the local Chef de Pos. Closure
                         and fencing of 10 ha of such land for the water treatment plant will have no significant adverse
                         impact on such free-range grazing practices, which occur over a very large area. Most of the
                         landscape crossed by the trunk pipeline is sparsely occupied brush or open savannah with scattered
                         farm plots (machamba), until reaching the peri-urban areas of Maputo. It is expected that almost
                         all of the civil works for the trunk pipeline will occur along or within existing road, railroad, or
                         powerline rights-of-way (ROWs). In a few locations, the trunk pipeline will cross wetland areas
                         found elsewhere in the project area, almost all of which are seasonal or riparian, and many of
                         which are disturbed by human activity and free range grazing practices. Botanical surveys have
                         indicated there are no unusual plant assemblages, sensitive species, or significant habitat value of
                         these wetlands. Construction will temporarily disturb small areas of these wetlands, and they are
                         expected to quickly revegetate and recover when construction disturbance ends. The project is not
                         expected to have a significant adverse impact on these seasonal wetlands.

                         In addition to construction-related impacts, key issues of concern at the water treatment plant will
                         be: transport, handling, and storage of chemicals used in the treatment process; and appropriate
                         management and disposal of sludges. The proposed technology for the water treatment works will
                         be conventional, incorporating pre-oxidation, re-mineralization, coagulation, flocculation,
                         sedimentation, filtration and disinfection. The chemicals employed in the process will be lime (or
                         sodium bicarbonate for pH correction), aluminum sulfate and polymer for coagulation, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         chlorine for disinfection. Sludge from the process will be dried on site and either used as a soil
                         amendment or disposed of safely on site. The planned treatment technology is used widely in
                         Mozambique.

                         The pump station, water treatment plant, and control tank locations have been selected to avoid the
                         need for resettlement or loss of livelihoods. The trunk pipeline does not cross densely populated
                         areas and successfully avoids or minimizes impacts on households except in the village of Matola
                         Gare and the immediate vicinity of the Machava Distribution Center. For most of the distance, the
                         ROWs for the roads where the pipeline will be laid are sufficiently wide for pipeline installation
                         and are not encroached upon by fences, structures, road-side stands (kiosks), or machamba. For
                         initial survey purposes, a pipeline corridor width of up to 30 m was used in rural areas, and up to
                         16 m in urban areas. Preliminary analysis indicates 30 houses are located completely within the
                         surveyed pipeline corridor; however, it is expected that most if not all can be avoided upon final
                         selection of the centerline of the pipeline by the construction contractor. Most impacts on
                         households will occur only during construction, and are limited to structures such as fences and
                         storage sheds. The most significant adverse social impacts for construction activity in the preferred
                         pipeline corridor will occur in the Matola Gare-Machava area which is very densely populated.
                         Within about 2 km of the Machava Distribution Center, kiosks have encroached into the electric
                         line and road ROWs that the trunk pipeline will follow in an effort to minimize more adverse
                         impacts on households. These kiosks have been built directly under the power lines, and encroach

                                                                     Page 6 of 11
                          on the road ROW in two particular areas, involving up to about a dozen small businesses in each
                          location. Either the pipeline will need to be installed within the roadway in these two short areas,
                          requiring temporary road closure for two or three days, or the kiosks will need to be moved back
Public Disclosure Copy




                          from their current location under the powerline. As the trunk pipeline approaches the last few
                          hundred meters to the Machava Distribution Center, it will be installed within current unpaved
                          roadways in this neighborhood. By doing this, it is possible to avoid affecting houses, but likely
                          will require temporary removal of related household structures such as fences or storage sheds.
                          This also will require the temporary closing of the short distance of neighborhood road leading up
                          to the Machava Distribution Center. A RAP has been prepared to address these potential impacts
                          on households and kiosks.

                           With respect to Component B, as part of the World Bank-financed Water Services and
                           Institutional Support Project (WASIS P104566]), FIPAG prepared and disclosed a Resettlement
                           Policy Framework (RPF) and a Generic Framework EMP for Construction Works for use in
                           essentially identical civil works in other cities in Mozambique where FIPAG operates. Almost all
                           of the works for local distribution systems have occurred within existing streets and roadways, and
                           result in only a very short-term disruption of traffic movement lasting no more than a day at any
                           one point along the road. Supervision of the WASIS project has demonstrated that this type of
                           civil works has minimal environmental and social impacts, there has been no need for use of the
                           RFP in the expansion of service areas, and that the Generic Framework EMP for Construction
                           Works has been appropriately implemented by FIPAG as part of the ongoing WASIS project.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            The Environmental and Social Impact Assessment prepared for the project includes a summary
                           description of Phase 2 of Maputo's water supply expansion investments (of which this project is
                           Phase 1) and its likely impacts. The key components of Phase 2 (additional water treatment,
                           pumping, and storage capacity) will be built on the land parcels obtained for Phase 1, which have
                           been acquired to accommodate both Phases 1 and 2. The trunk pipeline built for Phase 1 will also
Public Disclosure Copy




                           be used to deliver water from Phase 2. The incremental, cumulative environmental and social
                           impacts of Phase 2, therefore, are expected to be negligible, because they will occur within the
                           fenceline of Phase 1 facilities.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            Key alternatives considered included: the location of the water treatment plant near the
                           Corumana Dam or at a site near Moamba, and the final delivery point to an existing distribution
                           center at Machava, or to a smaller distribution center at Tsalala, both located northwest of the
                           urban core of Maputo. The latter alternatives (delivery of treated water to either Machava or
                           Tsalala) required different pipeline routes from the water treatment plant to their respective
                           destination. The ESIA evaluated three alternative pipeline corridors. Design engineers identified
                           routes that travel along the outskirts of the villages of Sabie and Moamba in an effort to reduce
                           impacts on households. The no-action alternative is not an option, as the residents of Maputo need
                           a reliable water supply, and many residents in poorer and peri-urban areas of Greater Maputo have
                           no ready access to clean water.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            Since its establishment in 1998, FIPAG has been directly involved with the implementation of
                           several projects financed by the World Bank and other development partners. The fiduciary,


                                                                     Page 7 of 11
                          safeguard, and monitoring and evaluation systems used by FIPAG are mainstreamed within the
                          agency and are acceptable to the World Bank. Adequate staffing capacity and procedures exist
                          within FIPAG to manage environmental and social risks of the GMWSP. A strong record of
Public Disclosure Copy




                          experience exists with Safeguard aspects of projects with the World Bank and other international
                          and bilateral donors, as well as host country environmental regulations. The project will be
                          implemented by the Maputo Water Supply Department (MWSD), a department of FIPAG
                          established in 2007 to manage the European-financed Maputo Water Supply Project. The staffing
                          of the MWSD includes nine professional FIPAG employees and is supported by two international
                          technical advisors.

                          An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) has been prepared for the GMWSP, and
                          on December 22, 2012 was disclosed in draft at FIPAG HQ as well as at offices of both
                          municipalities and other local authorities' offices. The first invitation notice to public meetings was
                          issued December 22, 2012, and a second on January 4, 2013. Final ESIA was disclosed on March
                          12, 2013. A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) has been prepared for the pipeline corridor from the
                          water intake to the water treatment works, and from the water treatment works to Machava
                          Distribution Center. This will include addressing the relocation of businesses (kiosks) that have
                          established themselves along the right of way near the Machava distribution center.

                          As noted above with respect to Component B, as part of the World Bank-financed WASIS, FIPAG
                          prepared and disclosed a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and a Generic Framework EMP
                          for Construction Works for use in essentially identical civil works in other cities in Mozambique
                          where FIPAG operates. Supervision of the WASIS project has demonstrated that this type of civil
                          works has minimal environmental and social impacts, there has been no need for use of the RPF in
                          the expansion of service areas, and that the Generic Framework EMP for Construction Works has
                          been appropriately implemented by FIPAG as part of the ongoing WASIS project. These two
                          existing documents will also serve Component B of the GMWSP.

                           Component C of the project will be implemented by FIPAG, which is also the implementing
Public Disclosure Copy




                           agency for Components A and B; Component D will be implemented by CRA, the water regulator.
                           CRA currently implements two components under WASIS and, as is the case with FIPAG, is
                           familiar with World Bank rules and requirements. No adverse impacts are expected from
                           Components C or D.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Few people will be directly impacted by the civil works, as the water treatment plant has been
                           sited on a vacant piece of land and the trunk line routing has made every effort to locate works
                           along road, electric, and railroad ROWs that have not been encroached upon. The most significant
                           adverse social impact will be on adjacent households in the Matola Gare and Machava area, and
                           kiosks occupying the powerline and road ROW near the Machava Distribution Center; these
                           kiosks will need to be either set back, or temporarily disrupted during the brief period the trunk
                           pipeline is being constructed in the powerline ROW or in the road in this area. For the majority of
                           households located within the pipeline corridor, impacts are expected to be limited to temporary
                           removal of fencelines or other non-residential structures such as storage sheds.

                          In the ESIA phase, during the first three weeks of May 2012, leaders and members of the seven
                          affected communities (organized villages or neighborhoods) were consulted through focus group
                          discussions to identify and assess impacts of the project.


                                                                     Page 8 of 11
                           Four rounds of consultation were carried out on the draft RAP, as required by regulations, the final
                           round of which coincided with the public consultation on the draft ESIA
Public Disclosure Copy




                           After careful reflection and in consultation with the interested parties it was decided that the public
                           meetings to consult on the findings of the ESIA/ESMP and hold the fourth consultation on the
                           RAP in Matola, Machava, Moamba and Sabie would be carried out in the places, dates and times
                           listed below:

                           Location: Matola:
                           Venue: Teachers Training Institute - City of Matola
                           Date: January 8, 2013
                           Time: The meeting was scheduled to start at 8 and ended about two hours later.

                           Location: Machava
                           Venue: Machava Bedene Primary School in the neighborhood of Machanga Bedene-Headquarters
                           Date: January 8, 2013
                           Time: the meeting was scheduled to start at 2 p.m. and ended about two hours later.

                           Location: Sabie
                           Venue: Meeting room of Cofamosa, in the Village of Sabie
                           Date: January 9, 2013
                           Time: the meeting was scheduled to start at 08 h 30 and finish about two hours later. Due to
                           changing the timing of the meeting for the Moamba district, the Sabie meeting was rescheduled to
                           start at 1 pm.

                           Location: Town of Moamba District
                           Venue: Meeting room of the Government District in the town of Moamba
                           Date: January 9, 2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Time: the meeting was scheduled to start at 2 p.m. and end about two hours later. For reasons of
                           internal coordination and to ensure the availability of district and local authorities, the meeting for
                           the Moamba district was rescheduled to start at 11 a.m.

                           Two main methods were used to invite the public to attend meetings, namely: (i) public
                           announcements and (ii) direct invitations.

                           As a whole, the public consultation process allowed all interested and affected parties to be
                           informed about the project, as well as to register their concerns and contributions for the
                           mitigation of negative project impacts and the maximization of positive project impacts. The
                           public consultation also fostered a healthy relationship between the project owners, the authorities
                           and the local population.

                           The ESIA describes the process of public participation undertaken and presents its key findings
                           and contributions.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?


                                                                       Page 9 of 11
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      07-Feb-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   12-Mar-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      19-Mar-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Mozambique                                                       12-Dec-2012
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      13-Feb-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   11-Mar-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Mozambique                                                       09-Jan-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                          Bank?
                          Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                          Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]


                                                                    Page 10 of 11
                             If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                             Has the RVP approved such an exception?                          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Luiz Claudio Martins Tava
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Cary Anne Cadman (RSA)                          Date: 06-May-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Rosemary Mukami Kariuki (SM)                    Date: 07-May-2013




                                                                      Page 11 of 11
