                                                                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                             CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                             Report No.: AC5999
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Nov-2011

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        Philippines                             Project ID:                       P119343
                              Project Name:                   The Cebu Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) Demonstration Project (P119343)
                              Task Team Leader:               Ajay Kumar
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 15-Jun-2012                                   Estimated Board Date:             14-Feb-2013
                              Managing Unit:                  EASPS                                   Lending Instrument:               Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                         General transportation sector (40%), Public administration- Transportation (40%), General finance sector (20%)
                              Theme:                          Infrastructure services for private sector development (25%), Urban services and housing for the poor (25%),
                                                              Climate change (25%), G ender (25%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                        Amount
                                   Borrower                                                                                                                   15.00
                                   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                                      90.00
                                   FRANCE French Agency for Development                                                                                       25.00
                                   Climate Investment Funds                                                                                                   25.00
                                   Local Sources of Borrowing Country                                                                                          0.00
                                   Financing Gap                                                                                                               0.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                     155.00
                              Environmental Category:         B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              B. Project Objectives
Public Disclosure Copy




                              The Project Development Objectives are to: (i) improve passenger mobility and access in project corridors in Cebu City by providing an alternative
                              means of transportation that is safer, more secure, more efficient, and generates fewer emissions; and (ii) to demonstrate effective public private
                              partnership arrangements in Cebu City which is the Philippines' first BRT.

                              C. Project Description

                              Key elements / results:
                              -        Reduction in average public transport origin to destination travel times between select origin-destination pairs;
                              -        Reduction in average energy consumption and GHG emissions (per passenger-km and in absolute terms);
                              -        Reduction in the number of traffic accidents along project corridors;
                              -        Qualitative improvement in public transport convenience, comfort, safety, and security.

                              Key components:

                              1. Detailed BRT System Design, including: (i) preparation of detailed operating plans; (ii) detailed traffic management plans; (iii) integrated public
                              transport and land use plans including a high-level scheme for integrating public transport in general and the BRT in particular into the citywide
                              urban and transport plans; as well as detailed site plans for development in the vicinity of proposed station and terminal area; and (iv) a traffic
                              safety plan.

                              2. BRT Implementation - physical investments in busways, terminals, stations, depots, control systems, ITS and fare collection equipment and
                              software, the development of a feeder route system, and pedestrian and commuter access including sidewalks, bikeways and street lighting. It
                              would also finance investments in side streets to manage traffic diversion during the construction period.

                              3. Operationalizing the Institutional/Organizational Arrangements for ownership, management and operation of the BRT and its ancillary services
                              and related capacity development - This includes expanding the functions of existing institutions and/or the establishment of new ones to manage
                              implementation, procurement, operation, regulatory oversight that will require new legal, administrative and procedural mechanisms to manage
                              and operate the BRT in Cebu.

                              4. Support in the implementation of National Environmentally Sustainable Transport Strategy (NESTS) - Institutional development to strengthen the
                              capacity of transport officials from the Department of Transport and Communications (DoTC) and other major cities in transport planning,
                              regulation, monitoring and administration; and particularly in planning for, and implementing, NESTS and the National Transport Plan (2011-2016).
                            D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                           The demonstration project has an estimated length of 16 kilometers from Bulacao in the southwest of the city to Talamban in the north east of
                           Cebu City. As part of the pre-feasibility, route options were analyzed through the Central Business District and an optimum route was determined
                           relative to patronage, physical opportunity, integration and overall deliverability. Through options analysis grounded in an understanding of locally
                           derived users needs, physical assessment of the route, consultation and an understanding of demand, a form of BRT has been defined for Cebu
                           that consists of a median system operating a physically segregated bus corridor with median stations for part of the corridor while operating in
Public Disclosure Copy




                           mixed traffic for some sections.

                           The proposed bus corridor traverses urbanized, mixed use (residential, commercial, and institutional) areas of Cebu City. The pre-feasibility study
                           and corridor plan for a Demonstration Bus Rapid Transit Project (June 2010) proposed a two phase implementation for the project: first phase to
                           operate between Bulacao and Ayala Mall (10 km) and the second phase to operate between Ayala Mall and Talamban (6 km).

                           The section between Bulacao and Ayala Mall is mostly a dual 3-lane road with sidewalks and requires minimal Right of Way acquisition. The
                           section between Ayala Mall and Talamban, on the other hand, is partly constrained by a two lane road. Given the demonstration nature of this
                           project and the need to illustrate benefits of a BRT system as an integrated approach, the DoTC and Cebu City Government (CCG) have
                           recommended proceeding with providing an exclusive transitway for buses between Bulacao and Ayala Mall while extending bus operations to
                           Talamban in the shared ROW, with prioritized access to buses at intersections. This approach would minimize adverse environmental and social
                           impacts while demonstrating a successful integrated approach to a BRT system.

                           Following O.P. 4.12 the project will minimize land acquisition as much as possible through traffic engineering interventions in the densely
                           populated and commercialized portions of the corridor. Resettlement planning will include identification of linked projects on the corridor and the
                           project#s area of influence. An assessment of the resettlement impacts will be done on these linked projects and activities. Due diligence in the
                           form of tracer studies will be undertaken for those linked activities that would be implemented during feasibility studies, detailed design, and
                           implementation. Safeguard issues will be considered for components with city wide implications, such as providing technical advice on urban
                           transport planning, procurement and installation of an updated area-wide traffic control system and intersection improvements. The potential
                           impact on land use as a result of implementing the National Environmentally Sustainable Transport Strategy (NESTS) will be documented. For
                           social impacts other than those arising from real property taking, a social management plan will be prepared.

                            E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

                           Under the Philippine institutional structure for provision of road-based public transport, the responsibility for provision of road transit service --
                           planning, regulation, investment, and implementation -- falls under the jurisdiction of the national government, specifically, the Department of
                           Transportation and Communications (DOTC); and provincial, metropolitan, and local government entities do not have the legal authority to develop
                           road-based public transport. There is currently no entity within Cebu City with a specific mandate for transportation and there is no formal
                           framework for urban passenger transport. At the Cebu metropolitan level, the Metropolitan Cebu Development Council (MCDC) is mandated to
                           formulate development plans, prepare programs and projects, and coordinate/monitor the implementation of programs and projects that address
                           problems and concerns affecting Metro Cebu. MCDC is composed of the Provincial Governor of Cebu and the Mayors of the different cities and
                           municipalities in the province. MCDC has no institutional or legal powers and resources. MCDC defines the coverage of Metro Cebu for planning
                           purposes only.

                           Recognizing the weak institutional capacity at the city level, the CCG has set up a Technical Working Group (TWG) to coordinate activities on the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           BRT project in Cebu City. The TWG will harmonize functions and membership of the multiple city entities and provide a forum for coordination and
                           supervision at the city-level of project activities. The Group will have representatives of DoTC, DPWH, and the city government. The CCG has
                           also set up a Project Management Office (PMO) to address the day-to-day operation for the project. The Office will set up an environmental unit
                           with full time staff to address environmental, social issues, and communications, public outreach and intergovernmental relations. The capacity of
                           the environmental unit will be strengthened to ensure that they are familiar with the Bank and country's safeguard policies and are able to
                           implement, monitor, and report the environmental and social mitigating measures. Technical assistance will be provided to the unit through on-the-
                           job trainings, seminars and workshops to enable the implementing agency to build up their skills to conduct an adequate environmental impact
                           assessment and to manage resettlement and the mitigation of other social impacts.

                           The risks related to valuation will be mitigated through detailed design of an independent property appraiser knowledgeable and experienced in the
                           use of international valuation standards. The project will institute a grievance redress mechanism for safeguards and other social concerns. It will
                           contract the services of an independent external monitoring agent to assess the quality of resettlement implementation and flag any resettlement
                           related issues for resolution by the implementing agencies.

                            F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

                           Simon Peter Gregorio (EASIN)
                           Maya Gabriela Q. Villaluz (EASPS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                         Safeguard Policies Triggered                                      Yes           No           TBD                                             Explanation
                         Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                                 ✖                                   The project will involve upgrading and/or construction of dedicated
                                                                                                                                 bus lanes and other related infrastructure. The most significant
                                                                                                                                 adverse direct impacts will be related to: (i) localized environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 impacts and potential damages to private property and communities
                                                                                                                                 due to construction activities (traffic disturbance, noise, safety, air
                                                                                                                                 pollution); (ii) management of the health and safety of BRT workers,
                                                                                                                                 commuters, pedestrian and non-motorized transport (NMT) during
                                                                                                                                 construction and operation; (iii) opening up of new areas identified
                                                                                                                                 for the resettlement of families residing in the road right of way and
                                                                                                                                 the potential economic affect on small business during construction
                                                                                                                                 and operation of the BRT; and (iv) interaction of workers with the
                                                                                                                                 local community.

                                                                                                                                 An Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and Environmental
                                                                                                                                 Management Plan (EMP) will be prepared to ensure that any
                                                                                                                                 adverse environmental impacts that may be generated by the
                                                                                                                                 project are addressed. These will lay out detailed plans for
                                                                                                                                 mitigation, monitoring and reporting of all identified impacts and will
                                                                                                                                 address institutional responsibilities, policy, legal, and administrative
                                                                                                                                 framework, cost and financing, and monitoring. The description of
                                                                                                                                 environmental issues will be developed based on alignment sheets,
                                                                                                                                 which will include information on: location of all project-related
                                                                                                                                 development sites and general layout and extent of facilities at
                                                                                                                                 project-related development sites, flow diagrams of facilities/
                                                                                                                                 operations, design basis, size, capacity, pre-construction activities;
                                                                                                                                 construction, schedule, facilities and services; operation and
                                                                                                                                 maintenance activities. An Environmental code of practice (ECoP)
                                                                                                                                 which also contains a Grievance Redress Mechanism, will be
                                                                                                                                 detailed in the environmental management plan and be presented to
                                                                                                                                 the communities during public consultation. The ECoP will be
                                                                                                                                 included as appropriate in the bidding documents. The EIA will
                                                                                                                                 include comprehensive information on public consultation process.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                                      ✖
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                               ✖
                         Pest Management OP 4.09                                                          ✖
                                                                                                                        ✖
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                                                                  The EIA will closely assess the various alternative alignments to
                                                                                                                                 determine any possible cause of disturbance to historical areas such
                                                                                                                                 as architectural land marks and other cultural property which may
                                                                                                                                 need to be mitigated. During construction, the landscape of the sites
                                                                                                                                 may also be affected and structural damage to old structures may
                                                                                                                                 result due to vibrations and excavation of adjacent areas. The EA
                                                                                                                                 will provide for the mitigating measures needed to address such
                                                                                                                                 disturbances or the handling of chance finds.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                                    ✖                      The National Commission on Indigenous People has reported no
                                                                                                                                 ancestral claims over the proposed project corridor. The initial
                                                                                                                                 scoping showed no community of indigenous peoples residing along
                                                                                                                                 the corridor.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                                 ✖                                   Involuntary resettlement and land acquisition is expected to arise
                                                                                                                                 from two sources: (1) widening of the ROW to accommodate the
                                                                                                                                 median transit way and (2) linked projects on the corridor and on the
                                                                                                                                 feeder roads. The linked projects will include bus ways, terminals,
                                                                                                                                 stations, depots, feeder roads, sidewalks, pedestrian viaducts, and
                                                                                                                                 alternate routes during construction. The project will seek to
                                                                                                                                 minimize these impacts through feasible design interventions and
                                                                                                                                 mitigation.

                                                                                                                                 A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) and Social Management Plan will
                                                                                                                                 be prepared to include a census of affected people, socio-economic
                                                                                                                                 survey, estimates of replacement value including contingency
                                                                                                                                 budget, estimate of timing on when people are likely to be moved,
                                                                                                                                 and Grievance Redress Mechanism. In addition, the RAP will also
                                                                                                                                 specify the procedures needed for verifying the estimated
                                                                                                                                 replacement rate before actual resettlement takes place. Direct
                                                                                                                                 social impact of the project other than those arising from land
                                                                                                                                 acquisition such as loss of livelihood by displaced jeepney drivers
                                                                                                                                 and operators will be addressed in a Social Management Plan.



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                            Safeguard Policies Triggered                                      Yes           No           TBD                                             Explanation
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                                        ✖
                            Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                                        ✖
Public Disclosure Copy




                            7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                                            ✖

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                           A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Jun-2012
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
                              should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                Environmental and Social Plans - June 2012

                         IV. APPROVALS
                            Signed and submitted by:
                            Task Team Leader:                                Name: Ajay Kumar                                                                                      Date: 15-Nov-2011
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                 Name: John R. Butler (RSA)                                                                            Date: 01-Dec-2011
                            Comments:
                            Sector Manager:                                  Name: Mark C. Woodward (SM)                                                                           Date: 16-Nov-2011
                            Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                             form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
