                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC1588

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Feb-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 01-Apr-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Chad                            Project ID:       P132617
                            Project Name:      Chad Education Sector Reform Project Phase 2 (P132617)
                            Task Team          Marie-Helene Cloutier
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          25-Mar-2013                     Estimated         31-May-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTEW                           Lending           Specific Investment Loan
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Primary education (80%), Secondary education (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for all (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        15.00               Total Bank Financing:           15.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                             Financing Gap:                   0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           0.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                   15.00
                              Total                                                                       15.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed Project Development Objectives are to (i) improve the pupil-to-permanent classroom
                           ratio in targeted basic schools and (ii) increase allocated and engaged learning time in targeted
                           primary and secondary schools.
                           C. Project Description
                           Project activities would be structured around four main components.
                         Component 1: School Infrastructure and Furniture (Preliminary estimated costs: US$4.5 million)

                         This component would finance the construction of 100 classroom blocks, latrines and wells and the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         supply of desks and chairs to furnish the new classrooms. Constructions will be limited to existing
                         schools, which already have at least one permanent classroom, and thus no land will be acquired.
                         Two blocks of latrine will be constructed for every classroom which will ensure that latrines are
                         available for boys, girls and teachers. The first objective of this component would be to improve the
                         pupil-to-permanent classroom ratio in targeted schools, which would be a direct consequence of the
                         constructed classrooms. Furthermore, this component would aim to increase the allocated learning
                         time by reducing the need to cancel classes, start the school year late, or finish it early because of
                         weather-related issues.

                         Component 2: Teaching Capacity and Means (Preliminary estimated costs: US$4.5 million)

                         In order to deliver quality teaching, teachers must have adequate content knowledge and pedagogical
                         skills so as to transmit the appropriate information and use as much of the time spent in the
                         classroom to effectively engage students in relevant learning activities. Furthermore, the availability
                         of appropriate teaching and learning material is likely to facilitate quality education. In Chad, most
                         CTs in primary and lower secondary schools, which represent the majority of the teaching force, are
                         poorly trained and thus likely to have deficient pedagogical skills and content knowledge. In upper
                         secondary schools, although equipped with good content knowledge, teachers often have poor
                         pedagogical skills. Furthermore, textbooks and specialized facilities are scarce. This component
                         would finance the following activities: (i) in-service training of primary community teachers and
                         upper secondary teachers; and (ii) the reproduction and distribution of textbooks in primary schools
                         and the equipment of specialized facilities (computer rooms, libraries, and laboratories) in upper
                         secondary schools. Equipment of specialized facilities will be limited to secondary schools which
                         have available rooms to receive the equipment and thus will not require construction and thus no land
                         will be acquired. However, rooms will need to be rehabilitated.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 3: School-Based Management (Preliminary estimated costs: US$2.5 million)

                         This component would support interventions aimed at improving school management and
                         strengthening the education system’s accountability to the community through the transfers of
                         additional resources to community schools in the form of small grants and public dissemination of
                         grant-financed activities and/or schooling outcomes. It would aim to provide the community with
                         means to improve the quality of education in their school, including increasing teachers’ presence
                         and time on task. The component would be implemented on a pilot basis targeting a limited number
                         of schools and their impact would be rigorously assessed.

                         Component 4: Strengthening Institutional Capacity and Management (Preliminary estimated costs:
                         US$3.5 million)

                         In addition to strengthening key capacities in the Ministère de l'Enseignement Primaire et de
                         l'Education Civique (MEPEC) and the Ministère de l'Enseignement Secondaire (MES) to effectively
                         implement, monitor, and evaluate the project (including carrying out the impact evaluation of pilot
                         activities), the component would place a special emphasis on supporting teacher management and
                         inspection capacities of the ministries to promote a rational use of teachers. This component would
                         include four main subcomponents, which include: (i) activities to improve overall teacher
                         management and strengthen the accountability system; (ii) piloting of an alternative mechanism for
                           paying CTs subsidies; (iii) improvements in and expansion of the responsibilities and activities of
                           inspectors and pedagogical advisers; and (iv) capacity building in project management and
                           monitoring and evaluation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project expects to cover a limited number of regions. The exact location of the schools to be
                           constructed or rehabilitated is not yet known.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The borrower's institutional capacity for safeguard policies remains weak despite the implementation
                           of PARSET by the Ministry of Education. This project was designed in the same way and prepared
                           and ESMF and EMP to comply with OP/BP 4.01. The level of implementation was weak due mainly
                           to the lack of ownership of the whole chain of the Education sector. The Previous project did not
                           have any large scale negative impact but the capacity was not created. To ensure this ownership and
                           avoid the weaknesses identified during the previous phase, the Implementing Agency (IA) will hire a
                           part-time consultant responsible to implement the project EMP. Appropriate trainings will be
                           organized to create capacity inside the Ministry in charge of Education and also for the Ministry of
                           Environment. The project will also receive guidance from the Bank’s environmental and social
                           specialists in the Project team during the preparation and implementing phases. More support may be
                           required to ensure appropriate safeguard policies are in place with regards to the social risks (mainly
                           elite capture and political interference) associated to the project. The Government will update,
                           disclose (in-country and at the Bank infoshop) prior to appraisal the existing ESMF and EMP. The
                           World Bank team will ensure that sufficient resources are provisioned for the safeguards instruments
                           implementation.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Lucienne M. M'Baipor (AFTCS)
                           Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (AFTN3)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             This policy is triggered due to potential negative
                           BP 4.01                                              impacts that might occur under activities to be
                                                                                financed in component 1. These impacts are
                                                                                likely to be small-scale and site specific typical
                                                                                of category B projects. At this stage of project
                                                                                preparation, the locations for the schools, water
                                                                                points and Latrines are not known, thus the
                                                                                Environmental and Social Management
                                                                                Framework (ESMF) of the previous Education
                                                                                project will need to be updated, reviewed,
                                                                                approved and disclosed (in-country and at the
                                                                                Bank infoshop prior to appraisal. As the project
                                                                                expects to purchase some equipment for
                                                                                laboratories, the ESMP will provide specific
                                                                                guidance on this to avoid the use of prohibited
                                                                                                                                 and hazardous products in these schools'
                                                                                                                                 laboratories.
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       TBD                           The project is not expected to be implemented
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 in or near natural habitats, but this will be
                                                                                                                                 confirmed prior to appraisal.
                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No                            The project does not involve forests or forest
                                                                                                                                 management.
                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No                            The project does not involve the use of
                                                                                                                                 pesticides or pest management schemes.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   TBD                           The project is not expected to affect or involve
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         physical cultural resources, but this will be
                                                                                                                                 confirmed closer to appraisal.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
                                                                                                                                 area.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            The schools will be rehabilitated or built in
                                 4.12                                                                                            public sites. No land acquisition will be required
                                                                                                                                 and the project will not finance works which
                                                                                                                                 could lead to involuntary resettlement and/or
                                                                                                                                 loss of access to resources and livelihoods. The
                                                                                                                                 project will ensure that all land where schools
                                                                                                                                 are rehabilitated are belonging to the state and
                                                                                                                                 have no encroachers.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            N/A

                                 Projects on International        No                                                             N/A
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             N/A
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Mar-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The specific studies and their timing will be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Marie-Helene Cloutier

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                                          Date: 18-Feb-2013
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Peter Nicolas Materu (SM)                                                                                            Date: 01-Apr-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
