                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                   Report No.: ISDSA1259
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Oct-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Lebanon                             Project ID:    P131202
                            Project Name:      LB: Mobile Internet Ecosystem Project (MIEP) (P131202)
                            Task Team          Victor Mulas
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          27-Sep-2012                         Estimated   11-Dec-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     TWICT                               Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector:         Information technology (80%), Telecommunications (20%)
                            Theme:          Education for the knowledge economy (70%), e-Services (30%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                               Financing Source                                                      Amount
                              Borrower                                                                          6.40
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                             6.40
                              Total                                                                            12.80
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective is to strengthen innovation and entrepreneurship in the Lebanese
                           Mobile Internet Ecosystem.
                            3. Project Description
                           The project will strengthen innovation and entrepreneurship in the Mobile Internet Ecosystem
                           through three components targeting the specific needs of this industry, in order to develop
                           international competitiveness. Component 1 increases entrepreneurial skills and practical industry
                           training of the Lebanese talent pool to attract it to this industry. Component 2 creates the instruments
                           for the industry to interact and develop innovation networks to increase its maturity and global
                           competitiveness. Component 3 assesses Lebanon competitive position in ICT-enabled industries to
                           identify areas where improvements are needed, and eventually help the government implement the
                           necessary reforms. In addition, the project will support the complementary functions of project


                                                                         Page 1 of 5
                         management (Component 4). The project will create a Mobile Innovation Hub (“MiHub?) which will
                         act as a focal point of the industry, serving as intermediary and catalyzer of innovation among all the
                         stakeholders of the Ecosystem. The MiHub will manage and coordinate the activities of Components
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 and 2. The project is structured along four main components as described below:

                         Component 1: Skills development and attraction of talent. (US$ 3.50 million)

                         This component increases entrepreneurial skills and practical industry training of the Lebanese talent
                         pool to address the identified skills-gap of university graduates and industry needs and attract this
                         talent pool to this industry. The component targets both the community of entrepreneurs, software
                         developers and university graduates, and its main goals are to attract a sufficient number of members
                         of these communities to the mobile internet industry and to provide these communities with
                         sufficient skills, capacity, and knowledge to develop mobile internet start-up projects.

                         The subcomponents financed under this component are the following: (a) a series of Mobile Internet
                         Competitions (MICs) with a structured skills and capacity-building program, which will include a
                         training program to address mobile internet programming and entrepreneurship and problem-solving
                         skills, and a mentorship and international exchange program for entrepreneurs; and (b) a university-
                         industry platform, where all universities in Lebanon can participate in a mobile internet industry
                         internship program and in a learning module consisting of co-creation (university students-industry)
                         of mobile internet projects.

                         Component 2: Strengthening and growth of mobile internet industry. (US$ 5.80 million)

                         This component creates the instruments for the industry to interact and develop innovation networks
                         to increase its maturity and global competitiveness. The component will finance the following
                         subcomponents: (a) creation and financing of operations during the course of the project of the
                         Mobile Innovation Hub (MiHub) with a mandate focused on serving as catalyzer of industry
                         innovation, focal point of the industry, providing a forum for cooperation and building of synergies,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and on managing the activities of Component 1 and 2, (b) creation of industry clusters with other
                         vertical industries (e.g., media, advertising, design, banking, etc.), and establishment of a testing
                         facility (living lab) and project development platform to test mobile internet prototypes and provide
                         access to the MiHub community to project development within international networks of open
                         innovation; and (c) a structured promotion campaign, including brand image, to develop
                         entrepreneurship culture in this industry and attract talent and domestic and international attention to
                         the emerging mobile internet industry in Lebanon.

                         Component 3: Enhancement of mobile internet enabling environment (US$ 1.00 million)

                         This component will provide an assessment of Lebanon competitive position in ICT-enabled
                         industries to evaluate the potential of the country to use mobile internet and other ICT platforms to
                         increase its competitive position regional and internationally. The assistance will assess the current
                         Lebanese environment for ICT-enabled services and will develop a road map and recommendations
                         for the expansion of ICT-enabled services to key competitive industries to enhance Lebanon
                         competitiveness. These recommendations will serve to foster the growth of the mobile internet
                         industry and expansion throughout vertical industries and will include enabling environment targeted
                         reforms and other policy actions. In addition, the results of this study will allow the project to
                         identify more focused actions, particularly in the links with vertical industry, during the project live.
                         The component will also fund follow-up technical assistance to implement these recommendations

                                                                       Page 2 of 5
                         and reforms after consultation with stak eholders and government and consensus or strategic
                         direction on implementation of specific lines of action and reforms. These reforms will allow the
                         ICT industry and the mobile internet industry in particular, to further grow and expand throughout
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the Lebanese economy providing support and reinforcement to the activities under Components 1
                         and 2.

                         Project management (US$ 1.50 million)

                         This component finances data collection on indicators to measure project progress and results and
                         strengthens the Financial Management Team’s (FMT) management capabilities. More specifically,
                         this component will fund the baseline studies (indicators) and surveys of the mobile internet industry
                         in Lebanon for project impact measurement. It will also finance the salaries and training for the
                         Financial Management Team (FMT) personnel, including procurement and financial management
                         training, as well as consultants to support the FMT along with standard project management costs
                         such as project coordination, procurement, financial management, monitoring & evaluation,
                         communication, office equipment, incremental operating costs, and audits.

                         Contingency (US$ 1.00 million)
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)


                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists


                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        No
                          BP 4.01
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                          BP 4.11
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
                          4.12
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                          Projects on International           No
                          Waterways OP/BP 7.50




                                                                      Page 3 of 5
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential l arge scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                N/A
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                                N/A
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                                N/A
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                                N/A
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                                N/A
                           B. Disclosure Requirements Date
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:

                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
                           ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?




                                                                      Page 4 of 5
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Victor Mulas
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Alan G. Carroll (SM)                      Date: 16-Oct-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 5 of 5
