                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA4344
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Aug-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-Aug-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Tanzania                          Project ID:    P126361
                            Project Name:     Kihansi Catchment Conservation and Management Project (P126361)
                            Task Team         Jane A. N. Kibbassa
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         15-Aug-2013                       Estimated   18-Sep-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    AFTN3                             Lending     Technical Assistance Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            GEF Focal
                                              Biodiversity
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):        Forestry (50%), General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (40%),
                                              General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Biodiversity (40%), Water resource management (30%), Other environment and
                                              natural resources management (20%), Environmental policie s and institutions
Public Disclosure Copy




                                              (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      24.28           Total Bank Financing:               0.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                       Financing Gap:                      0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                    Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                    18.30
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                      5.98
                              Total                                                                                 24.28
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Global Environmental Objective(s)


                                                                     Page 1 of 10
                         The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to enhance biodiversity conservation in the
                         Kihansi catchment. The project will complement as well as assist on-going efforts of key resource
                         regulatory authorities to conserve critically endangered and highly endemic plant and animal species
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and their habitat in the Kihansi catchment.
                         3. Project Description
                         The project will comprise of three components:

                         Component 1: Institutional Capacity Building for the Management of the Kihansi Catchment (US
                         $1.07 million).

                         This component comprises of two subcomponents:

                         Subcomponent 1.1: Operational guidelines for conducting Environmental Flow Assessment (US$
                         0.68 million). The focus of this subcomponent is the integration of environmental flow assessment
                         into the Integrated Water Resource Development and Management Planning (IWRDMP) Framework
                         at the planning level in the Rufiji River basin and will serve as a pilot cutting edge practice for river
                         basin planning under WSDP. The key activities to be supported will be (i) Developing operational
                         guidelines and procedures to conduct Environmental Flow Assessment for purposes of adequately
                         addressing downstream impacts of water resource infrastructure in future EIAs and for
                         mainstreaming guidelines and procedures into other catchment and sub-basin plans; and (ii)
                         Developing and implementing a communication strategy for improving and broadening the
                         understanding of water and environmental linkages in the Rufiji River basin.

                         Subcomponent 1.2: Sustainable financing plan for the Kihansi catchment (US$0.39 million). The
                         focus of this subcomponent is to develop options for a sustainable financing mechanism for ensuring
                         the long-term conservation and management of the Kihansi catchment. Two key activities will be
                         supported under this subcomponent: (i) Valuation of ecosystem services in the Kihansi catchment.
                         As part of this activity an economic analysis of water use of the Lower Kihansi Hydropower Plant
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will be conducted to establish revenue generated for TANESCO as a result of the additional base-
                         load generated from additional 5.0 - 5.5m3/s of water granted to TANESCO in 2003 under the final
                         water right, and; (ii) Preparation of a financing plan for the Kihansi catchment. The concepts of
                         payment for environmental services and benefit sharing opportunities between upstream
                         communities and TANESCO will be explored.

                         Component 2: Conserve endangered species in the Kihansi catchment (US$ 4.61 million).

                         This component focuses on operational level interventions in the Kihansi catchment to ensure that
                         the natural habitats knowledge base for the ecosystems in Kihansi is improved, and that the
                         catchment can be managed sustainably over the long term. Timely flow of water of sufficient
                         quantity and quality is essential to the conservation of endangered plant and animal species in the
                         catchment, the long-term economic sustainability of the Lower Kihansi Hydropower Plant, and
                         providing water for other downstream users. This component comprises of two sub-components:

                         Subcomponent 2.1:Species and habitat conservation (US$ 3.12 million). Key activities supported
                         under this subcomponent will include: (i) supporting the continuation of the reintroduction and
                         monitoring of the Kihansi Spray Toad (KST) in the Kihansi Gorge; (ii) mapping and monitoring of
                         other endangered plant and animal species (wild coffee and 1-3 potentially new butterfly species)
                         which are endemic to the Kihansi catchment; and (iii) development and implementation of the

                                                                       Page 2 of 10
                         Kihansi Catchment Management Plan (KCMP) which will identify, map and prioritize biodiversity
                         rich hotspots, important water source areas, destructive land use practices, and illegal water
                         abstractions as well as gazette and protect biodiversity hotspots and important w ater source areas in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the Kihansi catchment. This subcomponent will include ecological monitoring of key ecological
                         indicators, conservation of critical habitat, an assessment of the population dynamics of the
                         reintroduced KST in the Kihansi gorge, support for the maintenance of a captive assurance
                         population, and the in situ control and mitigation of chytrid fungus and other diseases. A multi-
                         pronged strategy will be adopted to control and mitigate chytrid fungus in the Kihansi Gorge which
                         will include: (i) allowing natural selection to select for individuals that are resistant to chytrid fungus
                         and other diseases; (ii) isolating bacteria on the KST which inhibit chytrid fungus and inoculating
                         released animals with the bacteria; (iii) manipulating the density of the KST in enclosures; and (iv)
                         treating individuals with anti-fungal agents. Information on the taxonomic status and geographic
                         distribution of species as well as the population viability of endangered and endemic species will
                         provide critical inputs to the KCCMP. Additional descriptions of these activities are provided in
                         Annex 2.

                         Subcomponent 2.2: Community Conservation and Livelihood (US$ 1.49 million). This
                         subcomponent will focus on community conservation and livelihood activities to support the
                         implementation of KCMP. These activities will include (i) implementing pilot investments through
                         participatory planning in 14 upstream villages in Integrated Pest Management (IPM) and in land use
                         practices which enhance water quality and quantity in the Kihansi catchment; and (ii) provision of
                         training to local communities in IPM and appropriate land use practices, and to key staff in relevant
                         sectors in ecological monitoring and assessment, valuation of ecological services, and the sharing of
                         best practices in endangered species conservation among national and international CSO’s, and water
                         resources and environmental law enforcement. Pilot investments will include training in the use,
                         timing, and application of pesticides, terracing, mulching, intercropping, the planting of insect trap
                         crops, soil stabilizing grasses and shrubs, native species woodlots, honey production, poultry
                         keeping, fruit trees, and the marketing of fruit. These pilot activities will be promoted as alternatives
                         to traditional valley-bottom cultivation and farming in or near critical water sources areas.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Demonstration plots in the form of farm field schools will be established in the 14 upstream villages,
                         where communities participate and learn both the theory and practice of soil and water conservation,
                         IPM and appropriate agricultural practices. As part of the training provided to local communities the
                         project will identify barriers to accessing larger economic markets and will identify activities for
                         local community that can reduce these barriers. While the training of local communities is
                         specifically targeted at households living in close proximity to important water source areas and
                         biodiversity hotspots, the farm field schools will reach through demonstration plots a much larger
                         population (approximately 3000 households) residing in the Kihansi catchment.


                         Component 3. Project Management (US$0.30 million).

                         This component focuses on project coordination at national, district and community levels. It will
                         support the implementing entities including NEMC and the Ministries for Water, Energy, Rufiji
                         Basin Water Board, and LGAs with day-to-day project implementation and provision of basic project
                         management support including, procurement, financial and environmental management and
                         monitoring and evaluation.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)


                                                                        Page 3 of 10
                         The project area is located in the Eastern Arc Mountains, which stretch from southern Kenya through
                         southern and central Tanzania. As a result of the extensive threats facing the Eastern Arc forests and
                         their exceptionally high concentration of endemic species, the Eastern Arc has been identified as one
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of the 34 most threatened ecosystems worldwide - one of the so-called global biodiversity hot spots.
                         The project will encompass the Kihansi ecosystem comprising of the Kihansi River, its catchment
                         and the Kihansi Gorge. The catchment covers a total area of 1,551 km2 with a population of 80,000
                         people, spreading in three districts namely Kilombero (Morogoro region), Mufindi and Kilolo (Iringa
                         region).
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Helen Z. Shahriari (AFTCS)
                         Ann Jeannette Glauber (AFTN3)

                         6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The project will support implementation of sub-
                         BP 4.01                                             catchment conservation management plans and
                                                                             reintroduction of the Kihansi Spray Toad. An
                                                                             Environmental and Social Assessment (ESIA) has
                                                                             been prepared to identify and propose mitigation
                                                                             measures to address potential adverse impacts
                                                                             that may be generated by the project’s
                                                                             investments and activities. The ESIA includes an
                                                                             Environmental and Social Management Plan
                                                                             (ESMP) outlining specific mitigation and
                                                                             management measures that will be implemented
                                                                             to offset any identified impacts. A screening form
                                                                             and checklist have been prepared as part of the
                                                                             ESIA to assist in the evaluation of the project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             activities related to protection of water sources
                                                                             and biodiversity hotspots so that unforeseen
                                                                             adverse impacts can be avoided, reduced and/or
                                                                             properly mitigated in a timely manner and in line
                                                                             with the requirements of OP 4.01.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         Yes              The project will support: continuation of the
                                                                             reintroduction and monitoring of the Kihansi
                                                                             Spray Toad (KST), an endemic species in its the
                                                                             natural habitat in Kihansi Gorge; monitoring of a
                                                                             new coffee and potentially 1-3 new butterfly
                                                                             species; and, identification and conservation of
                                                                             biodiversity hotspots. The ESIA and ESMP
                                                                             outline appropriate mitigation measures in order
                                                                             to ensure all adverse impacts are addressed
                                                                             appropriately and in line with the requirements of
                                                                             OP 4.01 and OP 4.04.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                  Yes              Activities under the catchment management plan
                                                                             may involve planting of indigenous plants as a
                                                                             catchment protection measure of woodlots for



                                                                     Page 4 of 10
                                                                               erosion control. The ESIA and ESMP provide the
                                                                               analysis of potential impacts and define
                                                                               mitigation measures to address any such adverse
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               impacts.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09            Yes               Community conservation and livelihood
                                                                               interventions may include subsistence agriculture.
                                                                               The project will promote the use of integrated
                                                                               pest management approaches and promote
                                                                               measures to reduce reliance on synthetic chemical
                                                                               pesticides. An Integrated Pest Management Plan
                                                                               (IPMP) has been prepared. The IPMP has also
                                                                               addressed potential impacts from the use of
                                                                               antifungal drugs for treatment of chytrid fungus
                                                                               on the reintroduced populations of KST.
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No                N/A
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No                N/A

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     Yes              The project may entail restriction of livelihood
                            4.12                                               and other activities to selected critical habitats
                                                                               and water sources. Therefore, consistent with OP
                                                                               4.12, a Process Framework has been prepared to
                                                                               manage any implications for communities relying
                                                                               on resources in these areas.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No               N/A

                            Projects on International        No                  N/A
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  N/A
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The project will encompass the Kihansi ecosystem comprising of the Kihansi River, its
                              catchment and the Kihansi Gorge. The catchment covers a total area of 1,551 km2 with a
                              population of 80,000 people, spreading in three districts namely Kilombero (Morogoro region),
                              Mufindi and Kilolo (Iringa region). The project area is located in the Eastern Arc Mountains,
                              which due to the extensive threats facing the Eastern Arc forests and their exceptionally high
                              concentration of endemic species, has been identified as one of the 34 most threatened ecosystems
                              worldwide - one of the so-called global biodiversity hot spots.

                             Overall project impact will be positive since the GEF incremental investments will be directed
                             towards improving the conservation of biological diversity in the Kihansi catchment. Currently,
                             many sensitive areas in the catchment are used on a seasonal basis by local communities for


                                                                       Page 5 of 10
                         subsistence agriculture (e.g. maize, vegetables), resulting in significant negative impacts to the
                         quality of water in the Kihansi Gorge. In order to address this impact, the proposed project will
                         include sub-catchment management plans intended to improve soil and water conservation and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         crop husbandry practices in the catchment. These activities may include: promotion of best
                         agricultural practices, such as terracing on communities own farms, contour bands, mulching,
                         planting of soil stabilizing grass, shrubs and indigenous species woodlots, honey production,
                         poultry keeping, and fruit trees. As part of efforts to reduce existing sources of pollution and
                         degradation to the watershed, the project will promote integrated pest management approaches and
                         measures to reduce reliance on synthetic chemical pesticides. Pilot activities (including
                         demonstration plots) on integrated pest management plan will also be implemented.

                         However, through support to identification of priority biodiversity hotspots and important water
                         source areas for protection within the catchment, there is potential for negative socio-economic
                         impacts associated with improved levels of management of selected critical micro habitat and
                         important water sources. The management strategies may entail reduced access and levels of
                         exploitation and increased areas off-limits to hunting, farming, harvesting, and other uses.
                         Therefore, as per OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement a Process Framework has been prepared,
                         approved and disclosed before appraisal. The Process Framework establishes the process for how
                         to involve potentially affected communities in planning and implementation of the project while at
                         the same time it identifies how the affected communities will be assisted in restoring their
                         livelihood.

                         The project also provides support to the conservation of endemic species in the watershed. The
                         project supports the ongoing reintroduction of, captive-bred Kihansi Spray Toads (KST) back to
                         the species’ natural habitat. These KST have been bred in captive breeding facilities in zoos in the
                         US (Toledo, Ohio, and New York), at the University of Dar es Salaam, and at the Kihansi research
                         facility. Reintroduction back into their native habitat at Kihansi Gorge is being done using a
                         combination of enclosures and free release. (To-date about 4,000 individuals have been released
                         into the wild). Following several test trials, researchers have found that the chyrtid fungus which is
Public Disclosure Copy




                         has spread worldwide resulting in steep declines in local amphibian populations, is present in
                         Kihansi Gorge and poses a threat to the ongoing reintroduction activities.

                         As such, the KST program includes trials of different methods for controlling the impact of chytrid
                         fungus, including biological controls and treating individuals with antifungal agents (in line with
                         the national IPM framework). The ESIA that was carried out to evaluate potential impacts to non-
                         target species in the catchment of the reintroduction program has established that since only
                         selected animals in the enclosure will be bathed in a small container containing an antifungal
                         compound and the bathing solution will be transported out of the gorge after animals are treated
                         the impact of fungicides on the environment in the gorge ecosystem will be negligible.

                         Additionally, the project supports conservation of wild coffee and butterfly species and host plants
                         in other portions of the watershed. Specifically, these coffee and new butterfly species are located
                         in the montane forests on the slopes of the Gorge (and not found in the spray wetlands that are
                         home to KST). Thus the potential impact of proposed interventions related to the KST impacting
                         the coffee or butterfly species is unlikely.

                         Impacts from these activities with their mitigation measures, will be defined in the Process
                         Framework, IPMP together with Environmental and Social Impact Assessment report, which will
                         be disclosed in Country between June 24 and 28, 2013.

                                                                    Page 6 of 10
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            In case project activities are not adequately implemented indirect and/or long term negative
Public Disclosure Copy




                           impacts on biodiversity in the catchment could be significant. It is expected that this will not
                           happen.

                           Potential impacts on the socio-economic environment due to improved management of important
                           water sources and critical biodiversity hotspots is expected to be short term.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             There are no feasible project alternatives.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment has been carried out, including an
                           Environmental Management Plan. Also a Process Framework have been prepared for execution
                           during the implementation phase of the Project. The Process Framework establishes the process
                           for how to involve potentially affected communities in planning and implementation of the project
                           while at the same time it identifies how affected communities will be assisted in restoring their
                           livelihood, as a consequence of lost access to traditional natural resources.

                          The institutional capacity in country to ensure that key ESIA-related functions including review of
                          the ESIA and site-specific EAs, environmental monitoring, compliance
                          (auditing) and enforcement, or management of preventive and remediation measures for the
                          Project was assessed during the design stage of this Project and others that are ongoing.
                          Environmental assessments in Tanzania are at present guided by the Environmental Management
                          Act of 2004 (EMA), which endorse the preventive approach to environmental management and
                          established an environmental impact assessment framework/system and procedure, giving
Public Disclosure Copy




                          responsibility to the National Environment Management Council (NEMC) to ensure compliance
                          with laid down environmental impact assessment procedures in planning and execution of
                          development projects. This Project will be executed by NEMC on behalf of the Vice President’s
                          Office.

                          The main implementing agency, the National Environmental Management Council (NEMC) has
                          adequate in-house capacity to supervise, monitor, and guide the implementation of safeguard
                          policies amongst the other implementing sectors and departments. The key implementing sectors
                          which include Ministries of Water, Energy and Minerals, and Natural Resources and Tourism,
                          have functional Environmental Management Units which will be coordinated by NEMC to ensure
                          compliance with Safeguards Policies. At LGA level, District Environmental Management officer
                          (DEMO) will supervise the implementation of safeguards activities at community level through
                          the Village Environmental Committees.

                          The project envisages strengthening the project implementing entities by providing training for its
                          operation officers mainly at LGA and community levels to ensure systematic implementation and
                          monitoring of environmental and social issues. Monitoring of the implementation of mitigation
                          plan will be integrated with the project’s overall design, budget, and M&E. The ESMP will
                          become part of the M&E manual of the Project Implementation Manual (PIM) and
                          annual work plans.


                                                                    Page 7 of 10
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Key stakeholders are found at national, district and catchment levels, including Water User
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Associations, Village Environmental Committees, farmers, local government authorities,
                           ministries of environment, water, agriculture, natural resources and energy, civil society, academic
                           institutions and others. Consultations with key stakeholders were carried out during the
                           preparation of the ESIA, IPMP and Process Framework. Interviews and meetings were arranged
                           with officials and representatives of various stakeholders groups including ministries, departments
                           and agencies at the national and district levels, civil society organizations, academic institutions
                           and community representatives mainly from villages with potential protected areas. Field visits
                           were made to Kihansi catchment, surrounding areas and districts headquarters aiming at having
                           direct interviews with selected stakeholders and consultative meetings with some community
                           members.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         11-Jul-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      05-Aug-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Tanzania                                                            31-Jul-2013
                           Comments: The ESIA report was disclosed on NEMC website - www.nemc.or.tz on July 31,
                                         2013.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         28-Jul-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      05-Aug-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Tanzania                                                            05-Aug-2013
                           Comments: The Process Framework was disclosed on the National Enviroment Management
                                         Council's website - www.nemc.or.tz on August 2, 2013
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         11-Jul-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      05-Aug-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Tanzania                                                            05-Aug-2013
                           Comments: The IPMP was disclosed on the National Environment Management Council's
                                         website -www.nemc.or.tz on July 31, 2013
                         Technical Assistance Project
                         For a TA project which will finance the preparation of a specific safeguards instrument, please
                         indicate type of document disclosed, if any.




                                                                     Page 8 of 10
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?




                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Jane A. N. Kibbassa
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Magdolna Lovei (SM)                         Date: 15-Aug-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 10 of 10
