                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC2953

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Mar-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 28-Mar-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Ghana                            Project ID:      P144140
                            Project Name:       GH eTransform Ghana (P144140)
                            Task Team           Mavis A. Ampah
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           28-May-2013                      Estimated        30-Jul-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      TWICT                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          General information and communications sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):           e-Government (50%), e-Services (25%), Managing for development results
                                                (25%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     78.00                      Total Bank Financing:         78.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                                 Financing Gap:                   0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                             0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                   78.00

                              Total                                                                          78.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a     No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           11.    The Project Development objective of eTransform Ghana is to improve efficiency and
                           coverage of government services through ICT, and enhance ICT-enabled entrepreneurship.

                           12.     The interventions are expected to lead to more efficient and transparent targeting and use of
                           limited public resources. They would improve the delivery of public and private sector services,
                         especially in rural and underserved areas. They would promote trust in payment systems, and
                         enhance confidence in electronic commerce and financial transactions. They would also lead to
                         diversified employment opportunities, and a more integrated and coordinated public sector that is
Public Disclosure Copy




                         able to make better policies and do more to respond to citizens’ needs using trusted and open data.
                         C. Project Description
                         The proposed project is expected to be structured along four major components to reflect (a)
                         government’s efforts to develop more coherent and robust foundation for e-government (b) scaled
                         use of ICT to transform priority areas of development; (c) enabling environment conducive to e-
                         government applications; and (d) Project management support. Details on components are given
                         below:

                         Component 1 – Common services and Infrastructure for Electronic Government (US$64.5 million) -
                         This component will develop shared systems, processes and information for use across government,
                         and facilitate a trusted exchange for government-to-citizen (G2C) services and business-to-citizen
                         (B2C) services. Specific activities will include:

                         i)      Electronic Repository of Citizen Identity and Passport Information (e-ID and ePassport, US
                         $50 million) – The component will support the development of a consolidated system for national
                         electronic identity (e-ID) and an electronic registry for passport information (e-Passport).

                         National e-ID systems help establish the identity of citizens and offer a more secure, robust
                         mechanism for government and businesses to engage with citizens. With e-ID, government can target
                         beneficiaries and more efficiently offer services to citizens using electronic delivery channels.
                         Businesses can authenticate customer identity, and develop and offer new products and services
                         through internet or mobile phones. Citizens can gain access to a larger universe of online applications
                         and services that can be used more securely in a variety of industries and public services. e-ID can
                         have potential linkages with downstream applications to support a host of public and private services,
                         including travel documents (such as passports), driver’s license, taxation, voter registration, financial
Public Disclosure Copy




                         accounts, health records, immunization records, etc.

                         The National Identification Authority (NIA) of Ghana is responsible for developing and managing a
                         comprehensive National ID system and issuing cards to Ghanaian citizens. To date, they have had
                         some minimal success, resulting in the proliferation of different ID systems under multiple
                         institutional structures. The multiplicity of ID systems is making it challenging for government
                         agencies, businesses and financial institutions to properly authenticate citizens and their personnel
                         data. This, in turn is contributing to the limited and high cost of doing electronic business in Ghana.
                         The inefficient ID system is also challenging the Government’s ability to offer targeted services and
                         generate revenue. The Government is requesting support from the World Bank to develop a more
                         robust electronic identification system which would serve as the primary form of identity for all
                         Ghanaians. The e-ID system would host linkages with and be interoperable with the disparate ID
                         systems that currently exist in Ghana. The development of the e-ID system would entail an upgrade
                         of the operational procedures used in identification, both within NIA and in downstream agencies
                         looking to authenticate citizens for the delivery of public or private services. Project funds will
                         support institutional strengthening and capacity building for developing, operating and maintaining a
                         state-of-the-art e-ID system. Project funds will also support an identity management system with
                         public key infrastructure (such as biometrics for authenticating citizens at e-ID service centers) to
                         enable authentication of online or mobile users.
                         To link e-ID with the issuance of passports, the Government is also requesting support for a new
                         ePassport system to improve the efficiency and security of people traffic at the country’s borders.
                         The current system for passport continues to be analogue, and lacks the requisite digital and security
Public Disclosure Copy




                         features to support globally interoperable applications. The system does not conform to the standards
                         of International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO). The project will therefore support the use of
                         advanced passports such as a chip-embedded passport system which can facilitate biometric
                         comparison at domestic and international borders and improve security and trust of Ghanaian
                         identification systems. The ICAO requires all countries to have such biometric features by 2015.

                         ii)     Digitized Government Data (US$10m) – Digitizing data is often a first step to making
                         information-based services online, and, where applicable, to launch open data. Automated processes
                         and information systems may be incomplete when vast archives continue to be left in paper form,
                         and the citizen is unable to access data is electronically at their convenience. Government has
                         requested the support of World Bank to digitize information from selected government agencies such
                         as Births and Deaths registry, Registrar General’s Department (RGD), and Ghana Revenue
                         Authority. Digitized information can go a long way to improve interoperability across government
                         agencies (such as between Births and Deaths registry and e-ID system in order to verify the identity
                         of Ghanaians), upgrade workflow, and achieve business continuity in government agencies by
                         securely retaining important electronic records. Project funds will support scanning, indexing and
                         management of paper records into searchable and re-usable electronic databases. The digitization
                         program is expected to be extended to medical and educational records based on need. The work will
                         build on earlier support from the Rockefeller Foundation which trained and employed disadvantaged
                         youth to digitize the first batch of RGD records through an Impact Sourcing Program. Ten regional
                         innovation centers, built under eGhana project, may serve as possible venues for carrying out or
                         administering the digitization work. Partnerships with business process outsourcing centers may be
                         explored to provide additional business opportunities for small and medium IT companies. There is
                         also opportunity to use this process to create opportunities for a large number of Ghanaian youth to
                         get connected to platforms like Samasource, oDesk, CloudFactory etc. which might provide them
                         with enduring opportunities for income and skills development through Microwork.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         iii)     Electronic Service Delivery Platform for Mobile, Online and Payment Applications (US
                         $3m): The project will support the development of online and mobile applications at scale for
                         selected government services so that citizens nationwide can apply for services online or via mobile
                         phones, check status of their accounts or applications, and pay for services electronically. Project will
                         build on pilot e-service applications conducted under current eGhana project. Pilot e-services have
                         included: (a) content management application for hosted services on online portals; (b) payment
                         gateway to enable electronic payments for online services; (c) electronic form application to collect
                         citizen information electronically; and (d) application to electronically manage documents. Several
                         government agencies including the following have shown an interest to deliver electronic services:
                         Ministry of Food and Agriculture, Ministry of Employment and Labor Relations, Ministry of Water
                         Resources, Works and Housing, Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development, Ministry of
                         Tourism, Ghana News Agency, Ghana Investment Promotion Center, SSNIT, National Health
                         Authority and Public Service Commission.

                         Component 2 – Transformational Applications (US$25 million) – This component will be aimed at
                         transforming the efficie ncy and outreach of service delivery in selected government agencies and
                         sectors. State of the art technology relevant to Ghana will be used to simplify administrative and
                         business processes within and between agencies. The component will focus on improving the
                         outcomes of the priority sectors of Health and Education, but will also allocate funds to complete e-
                         government applications for 3 agencies and departments for which have the procurement packages
                         have been completed under the eGhana Project. Details of this component are as follows:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         iv)     Improvements in Health and Education service delivery using ICT (US$10 million) –
                         Government considers investments in and impact of these two sectors so closely intertwined as
                         drivers of poverty alleviation and critical to achieving the Millennium Development Goals that they
                         must be considered together.

                         In the area of health, the project will focus on: i) improvi ng management and tracking of health
                         information at major hospitals, polyclinics and health service providers in Ghana using management
                         information systems, mobile-based feedback channels and mobile health applications; ii) extending
                         outreach of medical services to rural and peri-urban areas using low-cost technologies, mobile-based
                         remote tracking and improved training of healthcare professionals; iii) improving communications
                         between rural and urban healthcare professionals, and collaboration between Ghana’s Medical
                         Professionals and counterparts abroad; and iv) providing basic information on health information in
                         local languages to citizens via the web/mobile etc. in order to help improve basic health, hygiene,
                         reproductive health etc. in cooperation with local NGOs already working on mHealth and neo-natal
                         services. ICT can help address challenges in the health sector including in the following ways: (a)
                         health information systems and electronic health records; (b) disease and emergency tracking; (c)
                         efficient supply of pharmaceutical and critical life-saving drugs; (d) point of care diagnostics and
                         remote patient monitoring; (e) remote data collection and surveillance; (f) public health awareness
                         and education using mobile or email broadcast; (g) health behavior change using ICT-enabled public
                         education campaign; (h) nutrition management using online and mobile applications; (i) emergency
                         medical services with national calling number for medical emergencies and ambulance dispatch; and
                         (j) telemedicine and ICT-equipped community workers (US$5million)

                         Under education, the objective is to upgrade the quality of teachers and improve educational content
                         for students and teachers. The project will therefore: i) leverage the Tertiary Institutions
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Connectivity Program currently being developed under eGhana to create a National Research and
                         Education Network (NREN) to provide collaborative learning opportunities (with national and
                         international players), develop possible educational content, and improve educational, technical and
                         medical research; ii) use low-cost and climate-friendly technologies to improve teacher training and
                         student learning; and iii) increase access to distance education opportunities and open education
                         resources. (US$5million)

                         v)      Improvements in National Procurement, Parliamentary and Judicial Processes using ICT (US
                         $15 million)

                         Under the eGhana Project, extensive preparatory work has been completed for the launch of selected
                         e-government applications to improve National Procurement, Parliamentary and Judicial processes.
                         The e-Procurement, e-Parliament and e-justice Projects are respectively focusing at increasing
                         transparency, coordination and competition in the public procurement process; improving the
                         transparency, accessibility, accountability, and effectiveness in the Parliamentary processes; and
                         improving the efficiency of the country’s legal system. Under the eTransform project, support will be
                         given to develop electronic applications for improving related operating processes; increase the
                         transparency and reliability of government activities; and ensure citizen participation in the go
                         vernance processes.
                         Component 3 Enabling Environment for Digital Ghana US$7m – policies and regulations to promote
                         electronic delivery of services using shared platforms, transformational applications, and a
                         transparent, secure and open environment. These include:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         i)       policies and regulations for electronic commerce and electronically managing citizen data for
                         identification, passports, health, education, immunization and related applications;
                         ii)      policies and activities for fostering entrepreneurship development in key technology areas e.
                         g. climate change, smart cities, and mobile services. Opportunity to collaborate with private sector on
                         an IdeaFAB that could be located in the Kofi Annan Center of Excellence, GIMPA, or the Kwame
                         Nkrumah University of Science and Technology or some similar institution for identifying future
                         opportunities in emerging technologies and innovation and leveraging digital platforms.
                          iii)    policies and regulations for cybersecurity and privacy of data, transactions, signatures
                         contracts and related provisions for electronic applications and services, This sub-component could
                         include a detailed study on safeguarding digital infrastructures forGhana which could lead to
                         recommendations on policies, laws, regulations, institutions, partnerships and investments that would
                         be needed for ensuring a safe cyber security environment in Ghana. This would have important
                         implications for future investment flo ws into the country.
                         iv)      provide capacity building support for innovation hubs, including iHubs and Living Labs, in
                         collaboration with infoDev, to promote ICT-enabled entrepreneurship and innovation in Ghana;
                         v)       provide institutional strengthening and capacity building support for government agencies
                         involved in the ICT applications under eTransform project; and
                         vi)      support policies and regulations for open data and innovative analytics methods (such as big
                         data analytics) to gather government data, make information public, promote engagements with the
                         private sector, civil society and academia; and develop government capacity to gain insights and
                         intelligence from public data. Government of Ghana, through NITA, has initiated a portal with some
                         100 datasets and an open data application. More public datasets are expected with the proliferation of
                         new e-government applications and electronic service delivery. NITA expects to establish a central
                         platform for open data. Project resources will support initiatives including (a) availability of
                         additional datasets for open data ; (b) upgrade of any shared facilities such as portal and related
Public Disclosure Copy




                         applications; and (c) institutional capacity building.

                         Component 4 – Project Management Support – US$5.0million

                         The MoC will serve as the Project executing agency and will have overall responsibility for the
                         management of the project. The MoC has had extensive experience in implementing the eGhana
                         through a dedicated Project Implementation Unit, complemented by core group of consultants from
                         the National IT Agency (NITA) and the ITeS Secretariat who have managed the day-to-day
                         implementation and supervision of the e-Government and ITES components as well the financial
                         management, procurement, disbursement, monitoring and evaluation, progress reporting and
                         communication functions. It is expected that the new project will leverage the expertise of some of
                         these experts. The World Bank will work with the Ministry to assess the requisite expertise for the
                         eTransform project
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Ghana

                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                               Ministry of Communications has received assistance from external consultants on safeguard issues.

                               F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                               Moses Yao Duphey (AFTN3)
                               Beatrix Allah-Mensah (AFTCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                                 Safeguard Policies                                                Triggered?                    Explanation (Optional)
                                 Environmental Assessment OP/                                      No
                                 BP 4.01
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No
                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 10-May-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Launch April 5, 2013
                                      Complete Draft May 10, 2013
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Mavis A. Ampah

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Cary Anne Cadman (RSA)                                                                                               Date: 27-Mar-2013
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Randeep Sudan (SM)                                                                                                   Date: 28-Mar-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
