INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA647
b  Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Feb-2012
0
1 1. BASIC INFORMATION
U)    1. Basic Project Data
0
0
.U,
Q      Country:               Africa                       Project ID:             P122776
.      Project Name:         Central African Backbone - APL4 - Gabon (P122776)
Task Team Leader:      Michel Rogy
Estimated Appraisal Date: 23-Jan-2012               Estimated Board Date:   22-Mar-2012
Managing Unit:        TWICT                         Lending Instrument:     Adaptable Program Loan
Sector:               Telecommunications (60%), General information and communications sector (20%), General industry and trade
sector (20%)
Theme:                 Regional integration (50%), Infrastructure services for private sector development (40%), Regulation and
competition policy (10%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Financing Source                                                                      Amount
Borrower                                                                                 51.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                   58.00
Total                                                                                   109.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Is this a Repeater project? No
2. Project Objectives
The development objective of the proposed project is consistent with the PDO for the CAB Program: To contribute to increase geographical reach
and usage of regional broadband network services and reduce their prices in the territory of the Republic of Gabon.
3. Project Description
0
As for previous APLs, CAB4 GB will include a customizable set of activities which have been grouped under three broad headings or components.
Component 1 - Enabling environment - This component will include the following activities: Technical Assistance (i) to promote and implement
0     Open Access Regime & PPP for international and for national connectivity, (ii) for the review, improvement and development of the telecoms and
03 information laws, (iii) to strengthen capacity of key stakeholders and provide policy and regulatory capacity building, (iv) to support the increase of
broadband access including rural access as well as further liberalization in Gabon including the regulatory regime for ISPs and reaping the
Q
a     broadband benefits of digital switchover, (v) to support the establishment of an Internet Exchange Point (IXP) and to implement a management
policy for Internet domain names and (vi) to assist in defining an e-government strategy and action plan leveraging new connectivity.
Component 2 - Connectivity - This component will include the following activities on the basis of an open access and PPP structure so as to
leverage private sector investment: (i) financing a share of GoG's $15 million contribution (consortium fee) for participating in the ACE submarine
cable (ii) financing a terrestrial fiber optic link Libreville - Franceville - Bakumba - Lekoko / Border with Congo to interconnect with the Congolese
link Dolisie - Mbinda (already financed under CAB3 CG) and additional links within the first phase of roll out of a national backbone and (iii) finance
the setup of an Internet Exchange Point (IXP) and of an interconnection point to access the national backbone capacity.
Component 3 - Project Management - This activity will (i) finance required social and environmental studies, part of the implementation,
monitoring and capacity building, (ii) provide support needed to strengthen the capacity of GoG to implement CAB4 GA, including upgrading an
existing Project Implementation Unit (PIU) (see below), hiring dedicated staff to work on the project to complement existing project staff (such as
technical advisor), covering office equipment and some operating costs, trainings on Bank's project cycle and procurement and FM guidelines of
Bank funded projects and (iii) finance audits, monitoring and evaluation (M&E) including appropriate actions to support efficient data collection, and
communication.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)
APL 4 will deal exclusively with the Republic of Gabon. For the international ACE connectivity, the final site of the landing station in Libreville is
known and the specific civil works identified. For the national backbone Libreville - Franceville - Bakumba - Lekoko / Border with Congo and the
additional terrestrial fiber link from Lekoni to Koulamoutou via Franceville, the exact sites and paths for civil works are not yet known.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Lucienne M. M'Baipor (AFTCS)
Bienvenu Rajaonson (AFTEN)
Page 1 of 4


﻿6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01  Yes
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        Yes
Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No
Pest Management OP 4.09            No
0
O      Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11  Yes
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      Yes
0      Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12  Yes
.U     Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No
Q
a      Projects on International Waterways OP/BP  No
7.50
0..    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60  No
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant andlor irreversible impacts:
International connectivity via the ACE submarine cable landing in Libreville. As the ESMF and ISIA indicate, no major negative impact of the
ACE cable is expected at the outset: the small environmental disturbances caused by laying and connecting cable from the shore in Libreville to
a submarine fiber optic cable are not expected to have any perceptible effect on the quality of the coastal waters of the Atlantic Ocean or on the
marine environment, including fisheries and other marine species. For the cable and associated equipment onshore, there will be overall
moderate to low negative environmental and social impacts. The number of Project-Affected People (PAPs) is 13, as the project has negative
impacts on the living environment, mobility and livelihoods of some people located along the road between the shore and the landing station.
National backbone connectivity (Phase 1) via a terrestrial fiber optic link. The terrestrial fiber optic link is expected to follow major railway tracks
or roads already in place, and the project connection at the border with Congo will not lead to social conflicts because the borders between the
two countries have been clearly delineated and materialized. Negative environmental and social impacts of the project come mainly from the
laying of the fiber (excavation and crossing human settlements, fields, forests, rivers, etc.). The negative environmental impacts of the project
resulting from the work will mainly concern: soil erosion (due to the unstable nature of soils), the risks of water pollution and degradation, loss of
vegetation due to deforestation to clear the right-of-way, risks of pollution and degradation of rivers, etc. The significant negative social impacts
will mainly concern the acquisition of land for the construction of infrastructure, the disruption of life setting, the occupation of private lands, the
possible destruction of crops, the deforestation of woodlands, the risk of encroachment on areas of indigenous peoples and the sacred forests,
the risk of disruption of cultural areas during the excavation, the risks of accidents during the work, the risks of disruption of networks of dealers
(water, telephone, electricity), etc. The accurate estimate of the number of people who will be affected is not feasible at this stage of the study.
However a rough estimate could be made according to the planned route. For the whole railway route, the number of people likely to be
0
0        affected by the implementation of fiber optic cable is estimated at 250, while along the terrestrial road the number is 200. Land requirements
are estimated at 100 ha for the railway line and 80 ha for the terrestrial road. Interviews with different categories of Indigenous People players
(leaders, women, and youth) show that the project has a lot of support; however, Indigenous Peoples have expressed broader concerns about
0        being marginalized on development activities in the country.
0
.U     2. Describe any potential indirect andlor long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
Q         In light of the provisions made under the project for environmental and social management, potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to
the planned activities are not anticipated.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
The project alternatives have focused on minimizing the impacts of the cable, both from the sea to shore and over the terrestrial route. The
ESIA identifies minimal to moderate impacts of the cable coming on shore and being placed along the terrestrial RoW. The ESMF includes: i)
Mitigation of impacts of the fiber laying, including environmental guidelines for contractors and Environmental, Health and Safety guidelines; (ii)
Measures in case of archaeological discovery; (iii) institutional strengthening measures; (iv) strengthening technical measures; (v) Monitoring
and Evaluation of the CAB4 GA activities; (vi) informing stakeholders involved in the implementation of the CAB4 GA and public awareness;
(vii) institutional responsibilities for environmental monitoring; (viii) institutional arrangements for implementing the CAB4 GA ESMF; (ix)
recommendations for implementation. The total cost of activities is estimated at 220,000,000 XAF (440,000 US$).
The RPF includes guidance for preparing socio-economic surveys, a census of people and assets, and appropriate eligibility and entitlement
frameworks. All in all, the overall cost of resettlement can be estimated at 170,000,000 XAF (340,000 US$), based on estimates of affected
populations and areas required for the implementation of projects.
The IPPF outlines capacity building and infrastructure building mitigation measures, including: (i) consultation about and participation in project
activities; (ii) advocacy and information for parents about the benefits of registering births; (ii) selection and implementation structures of literacy
or mass education in the villages of Indigenous Peoples; and (iii) staffing of the four villages in sets of 16 KVA in order to feed from 40 to 50
households and Action for the promotion of ICTs for young indigenous people in four villages situated along the main road Franceville-
Lastourville. The total cost of activities is estimated at 196,400,000 XAF (392,800 US$).
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
and implement the measures described.
Page 2 of 4


﻿International connectivity via the ACE submarine cable landing in Libreville. As the Marine Survey has been performed, the final site of the
landing station is known and the specific civil works identified, the Borrower prepared and consulted upon an Environmental and Social Impact
Assessment (ESIA), an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) and an Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (ARAP) for the
cable and any associated equipment that will be laid from the junction with the main cable through territorial waters and onto the national
shores to the landing station in Libreville.
National backbone connectivity (Phase 1) via a terrestrial fiber optic link. Because the exact nature and location of investments may not be
0.       determined up front, the borrower prepared and consulted upon an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), a
0        Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF). Once the final path for the terrestrial fiber
a      foreseen alongside existing railway tracks and roads and the final location of the associated technical sites are chosen and the specific civil
works identified, the Borrower will prepare and consult upon an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) as well as a Resettlement
Action Plan (RAP) or an Abbreviated RAP whichever will be appropriate and an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP). These safeguard documents
0
0        will be prepared as part of project implementation but before the terrestrial fiber optic link is laid.
.U,
Relevant provisions of the safeguard documents will be included in the Project Implementation Manual. Since the Program will involve PPP
schemes, appropriate technical clauses will be prepared and included in the biddings/binding documents for the Private Entity when necessary,
to ensure the execution of agreed environmental and social safeguards measures and implementation of the recommendations in the
instruments. Appropriate capacity building followed by periodic joint review will be addressed to selected companies along with the duration of
their respective contract.
The Steering Commission in charge of providing overall technical and operative guidance, direction and coordination during project
implementation, and will have fiduciary and governance oversight on the project (in which the Line Ministry in charge of Ecology and
Sustainable Development is being represented), and will bear overall responsibility for the compliance of safeguards activities to National and
Bank Policies for CAB4 GB. To this end, the Steering Commission will sign a Memorandum of Understanding ("protocole d'accord") with the
Line Ministry in charge of Ecology and Sustainable Development, which will carry out periodical external monitoring of the implementation of
environmental and social safeguards measures.
The implementation and supervision of activities related to safeguards for CAB4 GB will be done as part of the overall project implementation
by the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) CN TIPPEE in conjunction with the Line Ministry in charge of Ecology and Sustainable Development
Ann Environment and Social Safeguards Focal Point (Point Focal Environnement et Social (PFES)) will be recruited and will be in charge of
coordinating the implementation, the monitoring (control and audit) of social and environmental aspects and be an interface between the
project, local authorities and other stakeholders.
To ensure successful implementation of the project safeguard measures, capacity of the PIU CN TIPPEE as well as of the Line Ministry
MCPEN, the ANINF and of the Line Ministry in charge of Ecology and Sustainable Development will be strengthened. To ensure effective Bank
support, the PIU CN TIPPEE will prepare and update reports on the implementation of the safeguards instruments prepared under CAB4 GB
before Bank supervision missions.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders for consultation include current inhabitants (where applicable), the Line Ministry in charge of Ecology and Sustainable
Development), the Line Ministry MCPEN, the ANINF, businesses and civil society. Stakeholders were interviewed in the project target areas
0.       during field visits made by the consultants working on the environmental and social safeguards. All the key actors, called to play a part in this
0        process, have been consulted and informed. The potentially affected persons have been consulted as well.
The safeguards documents (ESIA, ESMP, ARAP) for the international connectivity were reviewed and cleared by the World Bank on December
o)       29, 2011. Submission for public disclosure in the Bank InfoShop was made on January 4, 2012 and documents were disclosed publicly in local
0
05 language in the country on January 31, 2012.
o        The safeguards documents (ESMF, RPF, IPPF) for the National backbone connectivity (Phase 1) were submitted in draft version to the Bank on
December 27, 2011 and comments have been provided by the Bank's environmental and social safeguards team on January 4, 2012.
Submission for public disclosure in the Bank InfoShop was made on January 24, 2012 for ESMF and RPF and on January 30, 2012 for IPPF
and all documents were disclosed publicly in local language in the country on January 31, 2012. Once the final path for the terrestrial fiber
foreseen alongside existing railway tracks and roads and the final location of the associated technical sites are chosen and the specific civil
works identified, the Borrower will prepare and consult upon an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) as well as a Resettlement
Action Plan (RAP) or an Abbreviated RAP whichever will be appropriate and an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) which will be then publicly
disclosed in local language in the country as well as in the Bank InfoShop.
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  23-Jan-2012
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                              31-Jan-2012
Date of submission to InfoShop                                               24-Jan-2012
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors
Resettlement Action PlanlFramework/Policy Process
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  23-Jan-2012
Page 3 of 4


﻿Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                31-Jan-2012
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                 24-Jan-2012
Indigenous Peoples Development PlanlFramework
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                  Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                    25-Jan-2012
0        Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                31-Jan-2012
a        Date of submission to InfoShop                                                 30-Jan-2012
If the project triggers the Pest Management andlor Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
0      disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Auditior EMP.
0
.U)    If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?  Yes [ x ]  No [  ]  NA [
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) natural  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [ X]
habitats, does the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts on  Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA [
cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and approved by  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [ X]
the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the  Yes [ X ]  No [  ]  NA [
plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?  Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA [
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language  Yes [  No  NA[
that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
0
0        Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for  Yes [ x  No  NA[
a)      the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
U)       Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?  Yes [ x]  No [  ]  NA [
0
__       Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard  Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA [
o        impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
o        Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same  Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA [
been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?
Ill. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader:           Michel Rogy
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                    Date: 20-Feb-2012
Sector Manager:             Name Doyle Gallegos (SM)                                  Date: 20-Feb-2012
Page 4 of 4


