                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC765

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 31-Jul-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Lao People's Democratic                      P130512
                                                                           Project ID:
                                               Republic
                            Project Name:      Lao PDR Second Trade Development Facility Project (P130512)
                            Task Team       Richard James Lowden Reco
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       10-Sep-2012                        Estimated        04-Dec-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: EASPT                               Lending          Technical Assistance Loan
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector:            General industry and trade sector (50%), Other domestic and international trade
                                               (25%), Public administration- Industry and trade (25 %)
                            Theme:             Trade facilitation and market access (30%), Regional integration (25%), Export
                                               development and competitiveness (25%), Legal institut ions for a market
                                               economy (10%), Other Private Sector Development (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           0.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                    3.00
                              Trust Funds                                                                  9.00
                              Total                                                                       12.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed project development objective is to support the implementation of Government's trade
                           and integration priorities outlined in the 2012 DTIS Action Matrix/Roadmap, and in particular to
                           contribute to improved export competitiveness and diversification of exports, focusing outside the
                           natural resource sectors.
                           C. Project Description
                         The proposed operation is a follow-on to the First Trade Development Facility, with a deepened
                         focus on addressing the binding constraints to increased Lao integration into the regional and
                         multilateral trading system. A highly selective approach has been taken with the identification of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         activities to be financed under the project, with a reduced scope allowing for a fuller engagement in
                         selected areas. A number of feasible activities have been excluded from the project to ensure a
                         focused operation with transactions costs minimized to the extent possible.

                         The project includes three main technical components, described below. The Trade Facilitation and
                         the Trade Policy and Regulations components provide for follow-through implementation in existing
                         areas under TDF-1 where existing implementation teams are moving to a second generation set of
                         reforms. In contrast, the Diversification and Competitiveness component provides for a new
                         engagement reflecting the increasing challenges that Lao PDR is facing in this area. Activity design
                         is closely informed by the large amount of country trade-related analytical work that has been
                         undertaken by the Bank and other donors.

                         (A) TRADE FACILITATION, TRADE POLICY AND REGULATIONS (Estimated cost: US$
                         4.5-6.5 million)
                         This component, which builds on the success of trade facilitation and trade policy activities under
                         TDF-1, will consist of a number of inter-related activities aiming to improve transparency,
                         predictability and lower compliance costs associated with border agencies. Trade facilitation
                         activities will focus primarily on inter-agency coordination and supporting the trade facilitation
                         agenda of non-customs agencies. Investments financed under this component will be closely linked
                         to and complement customs reform and modernization efforts including the ongoing Customs and
                         Trade Facilitation Project, and the proposed Lao National Single Window Support Program financed
                         by the World Bank. The trade policy aspect of the project will focus on the provision of essential and
                         continued technical assistance in support of WTO accession related efforts, but increasingly shifting
                         to a “beyond WTO? focus on implementation and follow-through of commitments at both the WTO
                         and ASEAN level, including a strong emphasis on private sector engagement.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (i)       Trade Facilitation Strategy/Action Plan implementation and national single window
                         integration
                         Capacity building of the National Trade Facilitation Secretariat (reaching across multiple border
                         agencies), and support to effective secretariat services and private sector participation in the trade
                         facilitation agenda. To include continued support to the operations of the Lao Trade Portal/National
                         Trade Repository (to ensure compliance with both GATT Article X and ATIGA Article XIII), but
                         focusing on the next phase of integration of the Portal into a Lao National Single Window. To also
                         include specific risk based approaches and support to border agencies as part of movement towards a
                         Lao National Single Window (consistent with the ASEAN Single Window).

                         (ii)     Non tariff measures review and rationalization
                         Activities to support efforts on simplification and harmonization of non tariff measures, including
                         reviews of NTM regulatory objectives, consideration of alternative means of achieving NTM policy
                         goals, compliance with international norms and support to business process re-engineering and re-
                         structuring.

                         (iii)   Trade in goods
                         Beyond WTO implementation of commitments as well as scaled up work on regional integration
                         within ASEAN (ATIGA), including regulatory reform, technical capacity for negotiations, inter-
                         agency coordination, impact analyses, implementation and dissemination of commitments. Activities
                         to also improve understanding of preference utilization, negotiating capacity and private sector
                         compliance with Rules of Origin.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (iv)    Trade in services
                         An expanded program of work in services trade, similarly focusing on implementation of
                         commitments beyond WTO, with ASEAN members (AFAS), including technical capacity,
                         coordination, impact analyses and dissemination. A key focus will be on the movement of labor/
                         natural persons, including linkages to the proposed skills and productivity activities under the
                         Diversification and Competitiveness component.

                         (B) DIVERSIFICATION AND COMPETITIVENESS (Estimated cost: US$ 3.0-4.5 million)
                         This component will include a new set of activities aiming to support improved private sector
                         capacity to compete in international markets, focusing on the non natural resources sector. Activities
                         will adopt a “making markets work better for the poor? approach, aiming to facilitate more effective
                         participation of small and medium sized enterprises in the international economy, and in particular
                         support to women’s economic empowerment.

                         (i)      Challenge facility / private sector matchinggrants fund
                         A enterprise/export competitiveness challenge fund to facilitate increased export discovery and
                         survival in the private sector through direct 50:50 matching grants at the enterprise level. Grants will
                         be open access and provided to finance business development activities that support increased
                         current or future diversification and competitiveness. Complementary business development support
                         will be provided to small and medium sized enterprises. Building off the marketplace model piloted
                         by the Adolescent Girls Initiative/STEPS program, a gender window will also be included to
                         facilitate increased participation by young entrepreneurs, in particular women.

                         (ii)    Business membership organizations and public-private dialogue
                         A technical assistance facility to support capacity development and service upgrading among sectoral
Public Disclosure Copy




                         business membership organizations, as well as efforts to build capacity in public private dialogue and
                         advocacy.

                         (iii)   Skills and productivity / better factories
                         Building on the success of the Garments Skills Development Centre established under TDF-1,
                         resources will be provided to further develop skills and productivity improvement activities in export
                         manufacturing including a factory improvement initiative in line with “better factories? approaches
                         focusing on improved working conditions and premium market access in the manufacturing sector.

                         (iv)     Investment facilitation
                         Pilot activities to support the implementation of the new unified Investment Law, focusing on
                         business process reform and restructuring of the enterprise registration process for general (non-
                         concessional) investments. To include the establishment of an Investment Portal (using a similar
                         approach to the successful Trade Portal) as part of efforts to improve transparency and predictability
                         around investment/enterprise establishment procedures.

                         (C) MAINSTREAMING AID FOR TRADE (Estimated cost: US$ 2.5-3.5 million)
                         This component will provide for support to the next generation of work to further develop Lao
                         PDR’s “aid for trade? governance framework as part of efforts to move to a full program based
                         approach.
                           (i)      Program based approach
                           Development of the Lao aid for trade governance framework, through investment in the IF National
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Implementation Unit, support for trade-related inter-agency coordination, communications and
                           secretariat services to the Trade and Private Sector Development Working Group. To also include the
                           operation of a program-based results monitoring framework to manage the implementation of the
                           2012 DTIS Action Matrix/Roadmap.

                           (ii)     Research and policy analysis, coordination and network infrastructure
                           A scaled up trade-related research and policy program to further develop institutional capacity on
                           trade related research and analysis, and to inform activities across the 2012 DTIS Action Matrix/
                           Roadmap. To also include support to network and communications infrastructure across trade-related
                           agencies. Links will be established with broader efforts to build statistical capacity in government,
                           including via the proposed Statistics for Results Program.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the             safeguard
                           analysis (if known)


                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Project does not have any safeguard issues since it will only finance consulting services, goods,
                           training and workshops. The project will not finance any civil works or any other activities that will
                           have environmental implications. Given the nature of the project it also has no impact on social
                           safeguards such as Involuntary Resettlement and Indigenous Peoples.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Satoshi Ishihara (EASTS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         No              No safeguard policies are triggered.
                           BP 4.01
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No              No safeguard policies are triggered.

                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No              No safeguard policies are triggered.

                           Pest Management OP 4.09              No              No safeguard policies are triggered.

                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No              No safeguard policies are triggered.
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No              No safeguard policies are triggered.

                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       No              No safeguard policies are triggered.
                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No              No safeguard policies are triggered.

                           Projects on International            No              No safeguard policies are triggered.
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             No safeguard policies are triggered.
                                 7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Aug-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      None foreseen.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Richard James Lowden Reco

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan (RSA) Date: 01-Aug-2012
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Saiyed Shabih Ali Mohib (SM)          Date: 04-Jul-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
