                                                                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                            CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSC627
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Mar-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                       China                                   Project ID:                      P126817
                              Project Name:                  Guanxi Laibin Water Environment Project (P126817)
                              Task Team Leader:              Paul Procee
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 17-Dec-2012                                  Estimated Board Date:            25-Apr-2013
                              Managing Unit:                 EASCS                                   Lending Instrument:              Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                        Flood protection (90%), Wastewater Collection and Transportation (10%)
                              Theme:                         City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (100%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                  Financing Source                                                                                                      Amount
                                  Borrower                                                                                                                 80.00
                                  International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                                    80.00
                                  Total                                                                                                                   160.00
                              Environmental Category:        B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              B. Project Objectives

                              The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to support priority investments to reduce flooding risk and water logging in selected areas
                              of Laibin City. The project will help catalyze an integrated approach to flood risk management and drainage in LaibinCity combining structural and
                              non-structural measures. The separation of drainage and wastewater collection systems will also help improve the operation of the wastewater
                              treatment and reduce water pollution.

                              C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Based on the overall strategy to improve the water and environmental management in Laibin City, this project will help expand and improve the
                              drainage and flood protection systems in the city. In addition, the separation of sewage and drainage systems will help reduce water pollution. The
                              city is facing challenges with water pollution, flood and droughts, and an integrated approach is required to address these issues comprehensively.

                              Project Components. The proposed Bank supported project will have the following four interrelated components:

                              Component 1: Improving River Flood Management: This component is focused on reducing the vulnerabilities of people to floods. The component
                              will foster an integrated and sustainable approach to reducing by flood risks and combine investments in the development and protection of water
                              resources and wetlands, construction, strengthening and protection of river embankments in high flood-risk areas, construction of sluice gates,
                              pumping stations, and rubber dams of multiple functions and dikes along existing river banks. The component will also pilot innovative approaches
                              to improve natural drainage and reduce urban runoff (e.g. increase vegetation cover, porous asphalt, water reuse).

                              Component 2: Improving Urban Drainage. This component will help reduce localized inundations and water logging in selected areas of Laibin City
                              by improving the drainage system and separating the drainage and sewage networks. The component will finance subprojects to expand drainage
                              networks, interceptors and pipelines, pumping stations. The separation of drainage and sewage system will help increase loading and treatment
                              rates at the existing wastewater treatment plant. The project will also help improve sanitary conditions and reduce clogging of the drainage network
                              at certain critical areas by reducing waste entering the system.

                              Component 3: Technical Assistance and Capacity Building for Integrated Urban Environmental Management: This component is closely linked to
                              the infrastructure investments under component 1 and 2. At one hand, the component will support the city to build its understanding and capacity
                              to sustain project and other capital investments through coordinated investment strategies and proper asset management programs that ensure
                              resources are allocated for the operation and maintenance of facilities and infrastructure. Secondly, the component will help the city developing
                              strategies, that combined with the proposed infrastructure investments will reduce flood risks in the city. Options being discussed with the city
                              include the preparation of: (i) flood hazard and risk maps, (ii) flood forecasting and emergency response systems; and (iii) land use plans and
                              protection of floodplains in new development areas. During project preparation, the team will work closely with Laibin City authorities to identify
                              priority areas for support. (Note: this component is still being discussed with the client and a detailed budget and activities will be ready by
                              appraisal).

                              Component 4: Project Management and Supervision. This component includes: (a) project management (including M&E); (b) consultancy services
                           for engineering design review and construction supervision; and (c) the supervision of the implementation of environmental management and
                           resettlement action plans.

                            D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                           The project will be implemented in urban and peri-urban areas of Laibin City. Laibin is located in central Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region
                           (Guangxi) in southern China. The City district has a population of 300,000 people, while the entire county has a population of 2.3 million in 2010.
                           Two rivers flow through the city, the Hongshui and Beizhijiang Rivers. Mountains, hills and river valleys make up the main types of landforms of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           city, and its terrain slopes downward from the north to the south. Plains and mesas constitute the flat and broad central region of the city where the
                           project is located.

                           Laibin City is situated in the subtropical monsoon climate, and the tropic of cancer passes through the south of the city proper. It enjoys moderate
                           weather and boasting sufficient rainfall. The average temperatures during the hottest July and the coldest January are respectively 28.6C and
                           10.9C (83.5 and 51.6F). Average precipitation is around 1,344mm of which over 70% of the annual rainfall is concentrated between June and
                           August. The project will be in the Xingbin District featuring with flat terrain.

                            E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

                           Laibin has established a Project Leading Group, chaired by the vice mayor, and a project management office to supervise the preparation and
                           implementation of the project. The Laibin City Project Management Office (LPMO) has no experience with Bank funded projects and needs to built
                           its capacity and systems to adequately and effectively manage and supervise the Bank's Safeguards Policies and Procedures and prepare all the
                           required documentation during project preparation and implementation. Qualified and experienced consultants will be hired to prepare the
                           Environmental Assessment and Environmental Management Plans according to the Bank and national guidelines. The Bank team will continue
                           provide training on Bank’s safeguard policies to the client during preparation and strengthen its institutional capacity for environmental and social
                           safeguards supervision and monitoring.

                           The Hohai University and Guangxi Financial College will be responsible for preparing the social side of the project, with assistance from local
                           government authorities, who have some experiences on World Bank financed project. However, the project will be mainly managed by city
                           government itself, so close cooperation with and assistance from Hohai University on social safeguard preparation and implementation should be
                           ensured.

                            F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

                           Songling Yao (EASCS)
                           Feng Ji (EASCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

                            Safeguard Policies                               Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01              Yes                Physical investment of the project related to Component 1 and Component 2.
                                                                                              Adverse environmental impacts of these activities during construction are
                                                                                              expected to mainly include noise, dust, spoil disposal, and disturbance to traffic
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              and local communities. These impacts are moderate and localized and can be
                                                                                              readily managed by applying good construction practices. During operation
                                                                                              phase, the impacts are associated with performance of waste collection,
                                                                                              treatment and disposal facilities. However, these adverse impacts can be
                                                                                              minimized by proper siting, design, and use of proven technology. Given the
                                                                                              type, location, sensitivity, and scale of the project and the nature and magnitude
                                                                                              of its potential environmental impacts, the task team proposes a Category B for
                                                                                              this project.

                                                                                              In accordance with the requirements of the Bank and Chinese EA regulation, an
                                                                                              EA and EMP will be prepared for the project. The EMP will include (in addition to
                                                                                              the standard requirements in Annex C – Environmental Management Plan of
                                                                                              OP4.01):
                                                                                              (i)         Chance Find Procedures;
                                                                                              (ii)        Environmental Codes of Practices (ECOP) for (a) extension and
                                                                                              rehabilitation of sewerage and drainage networks, construction of sewage
                                                                                              interceptors; (b) construction and rehabilitation of pumping stations; (c)
                                                                                              construction of sluice gates, rubber dams; (d) installation of water reuse facilities.
                                                                                              The ECOPs are to address general construction-related impacts from the
                                                                                              facilities/activities financed under the project, and will be included in bidding
                                                                                              documents;
                                                                                              (iii)       Site-specific mitigation measures, both for construction and
                                                                                              engineering design;
                                                                                              (iv)        Management measures to address broader social impacts that are not
                                                                                              directly related with involuntary resettlement such as traffic management for
                                                                                              transport of construction materials ;
                                                                                              (v)         Monitoring and supervision arrangements;
                                                                                              (vi)        Institutional arrangements for the implementation of the EMP by
                                                                                              different contractors;
                                                                                              (vii)       Remedial measures in case of non-compliance by the contractors;
                                                                                              (viii)      In the event that locations of some project components are unknown
                                                                                                                        by appraisal, the EMP will include siting criteria and approval process for these
                                                                                                                        sites.
                                Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                        No                     The project is mainly in the city’s urban and peri-urban area disturbed by
                                                                                                                        intensive human activities. The project will not convert, degrade or restore any
                                                                                                                        natural habitats or critical natural habitats.
                                Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                 No                    The project will not finance activities that would involve significant conversion or
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        degradation of critical forest areas or related critical natural habitats as defined
                                                                                                                        under the policy.
                                Pest Management OP 4.09                                            No                     The project will not lead to purchase nor use of pesticides. This policy is not
                                                                                                                        triggered.
                                Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                             No                    Based on the available information, no physical cultural resources will be
                                                                                                                        affected by the project. Chance-find procedures will be included in the EMP.
                                Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                      No                     The IP screening by the TT social development specialist and the social team
                                                                                                                        found there are only two Zhuang villages in the project area. The TT realized
                                                                                                                        that they are totally living within the peri-urban area of Laibin, have the same
                                                                                                                        customary cultural, economic, social and political institutions as that of the
                                                                                                                        dominant society, and so they don’t meet the IP definition in the OP 4.10.
                                                                                                                        Therefore the OP 4.10 is not triggered. A note will be prepared on how the
                                                                                                                        absence of Indigenous People was determined.
                                Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                                Yes                   Activities related to rainwater store, flood control, wastewater collection, solid
                                                                                                                        waste collection, green belt construction, etc, under the Component I and II
                                                                                                                        entail resettlement actions such as land acquisition, household relocation.

                                                                                                                        The draft FS roughly identified direct resettlement impacts including relocation of
                                                                                                                        425 households with 2126 persons, 186 ha permanent land acquisition and 58
                                                                                                                        ha temporary land acquisition. A RP is to be prepared to address these impacts.

                                                                                                                        In addition, installation of sewer, rainwater collection pipe, facilities related to
                                                                                                                        solid waste treatment, etc. would need land use or resettlement, not clear at this
                                                                                                                        stage, so a RPF is to be prepared also.

                                                                                                                        Some activities like Chengbei WWTP, Solid Waste Treatment facilities, etc. will
                                                                                                                        be reviewed in the due diligence review process done by the RP.

                                                                                                                        Given the project needs much involvement from the citizens, especially in sewer
                                                                                                                        and solid waste components, the project preparation specially develops a
                                                                                                                        participation plan.
                                Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                          No                    The project will not finance construction or rehabilitation of any dams as
                                                                                                                        defined under this policy.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                          No                     Not applicable.
                                7.50
                                Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                              No                     Not applicable.



                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Nov-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
                                  should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                    EA and EMP will start after the next preparation mission in March 2012, draft final report to be completed by pre-appraisal in October 2012
                                    and final report at appraisal in December 2012.

                         IV. APPROVALS
                                Task Team Leader:                                Name: Paul Procee
                                Approved By:
                                Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                 Name: Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan (RSA)                                                           Date: 02-Apr-2012
                                Sector Manager:                                  Name: Paul Kriss (SM)                                                                                 Date: 02-Apr-2012




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
