                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA5357
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Jul-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-Aug-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Uzbekistan                        Project ID:    P144856
                            Project Name:     Improving Pre-primary and General Secondary Education Project (P144856)
                            Task Team         Janssen Edelweiss Nunes T
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         12-Aug-2013                       Estimated   04-Nov-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    ECSH2                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General education sector (59%), Pre-primary education (41%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for all (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         49.90               Total Bank Financing:         0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                              Financing Gap:                0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                  0.00
                              Education for All Supervising Entity                                                     49.90
                              Total                                                                                    49.90
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed Project would benefit both pre-primary institutions and general educational secondary
                           schools located in rural areas across the country. The Project Development Objectives (PDO) are to
                           increase access of children aged 3-6 to quality early childhood care and education and to improve
                           conditions for better learning outcomes of students of general educational secondary schools.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                      Page 1 of 9
                         The proposed Project would be aligned to the Education Sector Plan for the Republic of Uzbekistan
                         2013-2017. The Project is to be implemented over a period of three years, between 2014 and 2017,
                         and would be financed by a Global Partnership for Education (GPE) grant of USD 49.9 million in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         form of an investment operation. The proposed Project is organized around three components, as
                         described in the next paragraphs, which relate to the following key dimensions of investments:
                         access to quality early childhood education opportunities and learning conditions for students of
                         general secondary education.

                         Component 1 - Improving Access to Quality Early Childhood Education Opportunities (Estimated
                         cost: US$20.7 million). The objective of this component is to improve access to early learning
                         opportunities and quality pre-primary education in rural areas of Uzbekistan. The implementing unit
                         of this component would be MoPE’s Department of Pre-School Educational Institutions. By the end
                         of the Project, it is expected that the ECCE enrollment rate of children aged 3 to 6 in rural areas
                         would increase from 8.5 percent to 13.1 percent.

                         Subcomponent 1.1 – Developing More Flexible and Efficient Early Childhood Care and Education
                         (ECCE) Service Provision. This subcomponent would finance the development of more flexible
                         forms of ECCE service provision, which include a half-day school readiness program for children
                         aged 5 to 6 and early literacy promotion activities targeting families with children aged 3 to 6. The
                         implementation of the half-day model would be supported by the subcomponent 1.2 and would
                         benefit 50,000 children aged 5 to 6, by the end of the Project. The implementation of the early
                         literacy promotion activities would benefit 420,000 children over the duration of the Project.

                         Designing a Half-day School Readiness Program - this subcomponent would finance technical
                         assistance (TA) to develop and implement a flexible model of a half-day year-round ECCE program,
                         which would allow the GoU to expand access to quality pre-primary education with a focus on
                         promoting school readiness (not only childcare) for children aged 5 and 6. International evidence
                         suggests that children can benefit from high-quality ECCE programs that operate for as little as 15
Public Disclosure Copy




                         hours per week, yielding increases in school readiness at entry to primary school. The proposed half-
                         day structure requires fewer public resources per child than the standard full day program
                         implemented by MoPE. The cost savings would result from the following: (i) use of a shift model of
                         two half-day sessions, thus reducing staff salary requirements; (ii) reduced infrastructure
                         requirements as napping spaces are no longer necessary; and (iii) fewer meals during the school day.

                         The development of a half-day program would build on current flexible models of child-centered
                         ECCE. In Uzbekistan, 15,624 children, concentrated in three regions, were enrolled in half-day
                         ECCE programs in 2010, some of which have received partial funding support from UNICEF. Many
                         of the schools offering the half-day model have based their approach on the national full-day Bolajon
                         curriculum, which was designed to guide a child-centered pre-primary program. The proposed half-
                         day model would use the Bolajon as well. However, this would require an adaptation of Bolajon,
                         including a teacher-friendly summary of its key concepts, child-centered education approaches, as
                         well as lesson plans and teaching strategies to support teachers in their daily work.

                         Communication Campaigns - to promote participation in the half-day model and early literacy
                         activities as well as ECCE more generally, this subcomponent would finance the development and
                         implementation of communication campaigns. Such campaigns would focus on the critical role of
                         parents, as children's first teachers, in providing stimulating early childhood environments and
                         promoting learning in the home. International evidence suggests that when children have experience


                                                                      Page 2 of 9
                         with literacy in the home environment, they enter primary school with higher levels of school
                         readiness. Reading in the home is limited in Uzbekistan: analysis of 2006 MICS data shows that
                         while 71 percent of parents engaged in some limited early learning activities in the home, only 43
Public Disclosure Copy




                         percent of children aged 0 to 59 months had access to children's books. In addition, many parents are
                         not aware of the benefits to enrollment in high-quality ECCE and are unlikely to elect to enroll their
                         children in center-based ECCE programming if their children do not need full-time daycare. Analysis
                         of the 2006 MICS data showed that 42 percent of parents with children aged 3 to 6 reported “no
                         reason to attend” as the reason why their children were not enrolled in ECCE, indicating that
                         awareness of the benefits of ECCE is low and also that the current full day model does not meet their
                         needs.

                         The campaigns would raise awareness on engaging in responsive speech and activities with children
                         from birth, reading to very young children in the home, participating in a half-day ECCE program
                         that focuses on learning, and other relevant issues. Options to reach parents with these messages
                         include: national television (including the newly-established Bolajon channel), radio, printed
                         magazines and pamphlets, and community events. Potential partners include the Makhalla
                         Committees and the Women’s Committee at the local level, which are already trusted and efficient
                         sources of information to reach parents.

                         Assessment of Flexible and Efficient ECCE Models - this subcomponent would also finance studies
                         to assess the implementation of flexible models supported by the Project. These studies should draw
                         conclusions to MoPE on the effectiveness of flexible ECCE provision, which is crucial for the
                         purposes of sustainability of the Project. Examples of key aspects of the flexible models to be
                         analyzed in these studies include: (i) school readiness for children enrolled in the new half-day
                         model; (ii) early reading activities in the home for children and families that participate in the
                         storybook distribution; and (iii) classroom activities of teachers receiving training in the half-day
                         model. The ECCE flexible models studies would be carried out at different stages of project
                         implementation, as appropriate.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Subcomponent 1.2 – Implementing Quality Early Childhood Education Opportunities. This
                         subcomponent would support activities to improve the quality of pre-primary education, by
                         providing teaching and learning materials (TLM), furniture and equipment to existing pre-primary
                         education institutions where the half-day ECCE programs would be held as well as promoting early
                         literacy activities. Additionally, this subcomponent would finance training activities for pre-school
                         teachers and master trainers to deliver the half-day model. By the end of the project, it is expected the
                         50,000 children aged 5 to 6 would attend the half-day program, in 1,220 existing pre-primary centers
                         located in rural areas of Uzbekistan.

                         Early Reading Program – a nationwide distribution of storybooks to parents of young children would
                         be supported under the implementation of a targeted program to engage children aged 3 to 6, who are
                         not enrolled in formal ECCE and live in rural areas, in early reading in the home. The parents and
                         children to benefit from this program would be identified as part of the TA supported by the previous
                         subcomponent. Mobilizing parents to participate in community and group activities has been shown
                         to be a successful strategy to increase parental engagement in children’s early learning and to provide
                         parents with the skills they need to support their children's development.

                         Project funds would finance the distribution of storybooks to parents of young children and support
                         weekly story time hours. Storybooks would be chosen for the targeted age group with ample
                         illustrations, simple story lines, large print, appropriate amount of text and durable construction.

                                                                       Page 3 of 9
                         Teachers would lead regular story time hours with children not enrolled in ECCE and their parents at
                         pre-primary centers participating in the half-day model. Each family would receive a set of
                         storybooks (at least 3 books) per child. By the end of the Project, it is expected that 280,000 parents
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of young children (around 420,000 children aged 3-6) would receive the storybooks and would be
                         engaged in the early reading initiative.

                         Implementing the Half-day School Readiness Program - this subcomponent would finance the
                         implementation of the half-day model in the neediest 1,220 existing pre-school education institutions
                         located in rural areas , through the purchase and distribution of TLM, furniture, outdoor and indoor
                         recreation equipment; pre-primary teachers would also be trained to deliver the flexible model. The
                         physical status of facilities provides visible signs of quality to parents, and enrollment rates are
                         positively correlated with well-maintained facilities. In Uzbekistan, only 34 percent of ECCE
                         facilities are rated as fully equipped, which may deter parents from enrolling their children. Pre-
                         primary education institutions would be selected to implement the half-day model based on objective
                         criteria designed to target schools in underserved areas most in need of investment. All pre-primary
                         education institutions to benefit from the half-day model shall have their physical infrastructure
                         repaired by the GoU using the State or local budget, prior to the distribution of any materials.

                         In each pre-primary school, an existing classroom would be outfitted to provide the half-day model
                         with TLM, equipment and furniture (1,220 classrooms, in total). In order to minimize the potential
                         for parents with children enrolled in full day programs to question or resent the provision of new
                         high-quality materials to half-day model students only, some additional TLM, equipment and
                         furniture would be distributed to at least other 1,220 classrooms, in the same group of selected
                         schools, aside from those where the half-day model would be implemented. The Project would phase
                         in the implementation of the half-day model, providing inputs to 300 schools in the 2014-2015
                         school year and the remaining 920 schools in the 2015-2016 school year.

                         This subcomponent would support the purchase and distribution of outdoor and recreation equipment
                         that all children at the selected pre-primary centers can access. Children need safe places to play and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         promote the exploration of their world. The outdoor recreation equipment could also be used by
                         children enrolled in the full day program at ECCE centers where the half-day model is offered. It is
                         estimated that 62,000 children of selected centers would benefit from improved environments, in
                         addition to the 50,000 children of the half-day model.

                         Improving the Quality of Pre-Primary Teachers – in Uzbekistan, all teachers are required to meet
                         minimum qualifications of three years’ vocational training. In practice, 77 percent of pre-primary
                         teachers have specialized vocational training and 22 percent had a university degree as qualifications
                         to teach children in the full day program in 2010 . The half-day model would require the knowledge
                         of some different teaching methodologies, including child-centered approaches and holistic early
                         childhood development. Additionally, teachers should be able to implement the half-day Bolajon
                         curriculum and engage parents in early reading activities. Similar innovative ECCE approaches in
                         other settings have successfully provided teachers with the skills they need to teach a school
                         readiness class with a limited amount of pre-service training and ongoing in-service training and
                         mentoring.

                         This subcomponent would finance the training and ongoing mentoring of the half-day model
                         teachers, as well as learning group exercises (learning circles). Existing pre-primary teachers would
                         be trained through a cascade model and would receive ongoing mentoring throughout the Project.
                         First, 60 master teachers (cascade trainers) would receive two days of training at the Central Institute

                                                                       Page 4 of 9
                         for Teacher Training and Retraining named after A. Avloniy, in: effective ways to deliver training
                         material; interactive activities to engage participants; and background on the half-day Bolajon
                         curriculum. The master teacher trainers shall be selected from the group of lead teachers and others
Public Disclosure Copy




                         with experience as training facilitators. They would be responsible for training 2,440 teachers (one
                         for each shift of the half-day model, at all 1,220 centers) at the regional teacher training institutes for
                         pre-primary education. The training of the half-day teachers would be up to a week in duration, and
                         would include child-centered pedagogy, the role of school readiness, methods for engaging parents in
                         early learning, and effective methods for reading aloud. All training activities would be phased to
                         accommodate implementation of the half-day model in 300 centers (600 teachers) in the first project
                         year, and 920 centers (1,840 teachers) in the second project year.

                         Additionally, 100 existing methodologists would become mentors to half-day model teachers and
                         would also receive two days of training at the central level (at A. Avloniy) in child-centered
                         pedagogy, classroom observation, and mentoring techniques. Highly effective methodologists would
                         be selected to be mentors, and they would be responsible for providing continuous support to half-
                         day teachers. Each mentor would support about 25 half-day pre-primary teachers through feedback
                         on classroom practices provided during school visits financed by the Project. The mentors would also
                         facilitate periodic learning circles, in geographic clusters, so that half-day model teachers can
                         exchange best teaching practices, become aware of successful strategies to overcome challenges, and
                         receive guidance from their mentors. Moreover, each methodologist would receive a laptop to
                         facilitate overall monitoring of ECCE, as well as feedback to half-day teachers (for those
                         methodologists who are also mentors).

                         Component 2 - Improving Conditions for Better Learning Outcomes in General Educational
                         Secondary Schools (Estimated cost: US$23.2 million). The objective of this component is to improve
                         conditions for better learning outcomes in general educational secondary schools located in rural
                         areas, by supporting training activities for teachers and school managers and increasing the
                         availability of adequate equipment and teaching and learning materials. By the end of the proposed
                         Project, it is expected an increase in the percentage of general educational secondary schools located
Public Disclosure Copy




                         in rural areas that meet minimum school standards, which include requirements for teaching and
                         learning materials, furniture and ICT equipment.

                         Subcomponent 2.1 – Supporting Training Programs for Teachers and School Managers. This
                         subcomponent would support the professional development of education personnel with
                         improvements to training conditions at all 16 in-service training and retraining institutions, revision
                         of training modules and attestation procedures, and development of information systems for
                         education personnel and training institutes. The implementing unit of this subcomponent would be
                         the Main Department for Organizing Activity of Educational Establishments. By the end of the
                         Project, it is expected that 192 master trainers and 300,000 teachers and school managers (of pre-
                         primary and general secondary education schools) are trained in advanced areas of education
                         management and teaching.

                         Improving Conditions of Teacher Training and Retraining Institutes - project funds would be used to
                         better equip all 16 central and regional teacher training and retraining institutes, in order to improve
                         existing training conditions for education personnel, which include teachers, methodologists, school
                         principals and pedagogical staff. Each institute would benefit from the e stablishment of a training
                         resource center and would have current classrooms upgraded into multimedia lecture rooms. The
                         equipment provided by the proposed Project would allow for modern instruction, facilitate research
                         by trainees and trainers, and provide orientation in Information and Communication Technologies

                                                                        Page 5 of 9
                         (ICT) equipment that is used at the school level.

                         TA to Prepare Training Programs and Deliver Training Activities - the content and management of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         in-service training would also be improved under this subcomponent, which would build on the
                         experiences financed by the Basic Education Project (BEP). To update courses most in demand and
                         address gaps in existing courses, training modules would be developed in several advanced areas
                         such as: education management; pedagogic techniques; ICT; inclusive education; foreign language
                         teaching; and distance learning. To implement these modules, trainers at the 16 institutes would
                         become qualified in each of the advanced areas, and print and digital materials (including videos
                         examples of best practices in the classroom) would be produced and shared. In addition, TA would
                         be provided to support the attestation of teachers and school managers. The regulatory framework for
                         training and attestation would be revised to achieve three major objectives: (i) align required
                         intervals for training and attestation; (ii) allow education personnel more choice in training module
                         subjects; and (iii) promote flexibility in the delivery of training to include seminars, workshops, and
                         distance learning.

                         Development of Training Management Information System - this subcomponent would also support
                         the development of the following training-related information systems: (i) virtual library; (ii) teachers
                         and principals training management system; and (iii) inclusive education system. The virtual library
                         would create a network so that digital materials can be shared between 16 teacher training institutes,
                         four pedagogical universities, and one pedagogical library. To facilitate planning of training and
                         salaries, the teachers and principals training management system would replace the current paper-
                         based system with multiple records to create digital profiles with information on qualifications,
                         training, and attestation. Lastly, an inclusive education system would store data on special needs
                         students to let teachers know about their educational requirements.

                         Subcomponent 2.2 - Supporting the Implementation of Minimum School Standards. Funds of this
                         subcomponent would be used to finance the implementation of minimum school standards for
                         general educational secondary schools offering grades 5 to 9, which are located in rural areas. In
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Uzbekistan, the concept of school standards includes requirements for teaching and learning
                         materials, furniture and ICT equipment. Through the proposed Project, schools would be provided
                         with adequate ICT equipment for computer labs and digital TLM. The implementing unit of this
                         subcomponent would be the Department for Organizing the Material Technical Support of
                         Educational Institutions. By the end of the Project, it is expected that 2,000 rural general educational
                         secondary schools offering grades 5-9 meet minimum school standards.

                         This subcomponent would complement the GoU’s and donor’s efforts to provide general educational
                         secondary schools with adequate teaching and learning resources, materials and aids, which would be
                         purchased upon completion of any necessary improvements in schools’ infrastructure to be financed
                         using State or local budget funds. This is to be done in full alignment with the priorities of the
                         Education Sector Plan for Uzbekistan (ESP) and in coordination with education projects or initiatives
                         supported by other donors also focused on equipping schools with teaching and learning resources.
                         General educational secondary schools would be selected to benefit from this subcomponent based
                         on objective criteria designed to target schools in underserved areas most in need of investment.

                         Component 3 – Strengthening the Capacity to Monitor the Education System (Estimated cost: US$6
                         million). This component would support activities aimed at strengthening the students’ assessment
                         system and supporting project day-to-day management. A lean Project Management Team would be
                         established to support the existing structures for project implementation within MoPE. By the end of

                                                                       Page 6 of 9
                         the Project, it is expected that the results of students’ assessments in Mathematics and native
                         language for grades 4 and 9 are analyzed and publicly disseminated.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Subcomponent 3.1 – Strengthening the Education System Monitoring Capacity. This subcomponent
                         would support the strengthening of the existing capacity to monitor the education system, which is
                         one of the major responsibilities of MoPE’s Main Department of Development of the Education in
                         General School. Project funds would be used to build capacity on education quality monitoring as
                         well as to improve existing management information systems. Additionally, this subcomponent
                         would finance the purchase of ICT equipment for all 14 province education departments, 194 district
                         education departments and MoPE. In addition, 832 users of these management information systems
                         would be trained using project funds.

                         Standardized Assessment of 4th and 9th Graders - to monitor learning outcomes, another round of
                         standardized students assessments in Mathematics and native language for grades 4 would be
                         financed. Students of grade 9 would also participate in the third round of the assessment. These
                         assessments would enable decision-makers to identify the strengths and weaknesses of the education
                         system, based on results of sample-based national standardized tests and build on BEP experiences.
                         Technical assistance would be provided by the proposed Project to strengthen the existing capacity to
                         develop and conduct these tests as well as to analyze and disseminate their results.

                         Subcomponent 3.2 – Project Management. This subcomponent would finance the following
                         activities: technical assistance to strengthen MoPE’s capacity to implement the proposed Project;
                         project audits; and operational and staffing costs of the Project Management Team.

                         As the implementation would rely primarily on the existing structure of MoPE and the proposed
                         activities to be financed by the Project are part of the everyday work of its staff, a Project
                         Management Team would be set up to support the day-to-day management of the Project. A team of
                         five local consultants would be hired using project funds for this purpose including a Project
                         Coordinator, a Procurement Specialist, a Financial Management Specialist and a Monitoring and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Evaluation Specialist. A translator would be also hired using project funds. Additionally, six local
                         consultants would be hired to technically support the implementation of the proposed activities -
                         three for the Component 1, two for the Component 2 and one for the third Component.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The activities under this project will be implemented country-wide.

                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists


                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        No
                          BP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No




                                                                       Page 7 of 9
                            Pest Management OP 4.09           No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                N/A
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                                N/A
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                N/A
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                                N/A
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                                N/A
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                            N/A
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas




                                                                      Page 8 of 9
                             Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the             Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             international aspects of the project, including the procedures to
Public Disclosure Copy




                             be followed, and the recommendations for dealing with the
                             issue, been prepared
                             Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the OP?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project            Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Janssen Edelweiss Nunes T
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:         Name: Alberto Rodriguez (SM)                         Date: 15-Aug-2013




                                                                         Page 9 of 9
