                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC660

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Mar-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 02-Apr-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Congo, Democratic Republic                       P128887
                                                                           Project ID:
                                              of
                            Project Name:     DRC Forest Investment Program (P128887)
                            Task Team       Jean-Christophe Carret
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       23-Sep-2013                       Estimated        05-Aug-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: AFTN1                              Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                              Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Forestry (50%), Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (30%),
                                              General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20 %)
                            Theme(s):         Climate change (50%), Environmental policies and institutions (20%), Land
                                              administration and management (20%), Biodiversity (5%), Ru ral policies and
                                              institutions (5%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     36.90                   Total Bank Financing:           0.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                              Financing Gap:                  0.00
                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                    0.00
                              Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                               36.90
                              Total                                                                      36.90
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) aims at promoting sustainable forest management around
                           Kinshasa, more specifically in the Plateau district of the Bandudu Province and in the Kinshasa
                           Province itself, while improving the livelihood of rural communities and testing innovative
                         mechanisms for forest management that contribute to reducing emissions from deforestation and
                         forest degradation in the targeted project area.
                         C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1- Promotion of community-based natural resources management in the Plateau District.

                         Component 2 – Promotion of Private Sector Engagement in REDD+
                         a)      Promotion of woodfuel plantations
                         b) Promotion of efficient biomass energy transformation and use in Kinshasa

                         Component 3 – Small Grants to promising REDD+ initiatives

                         Component 4 – Project management, monitoring and knowledge management
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Project location:

                         Component 1 will be implemented in the Plateau District of the Bandundu Province.

                         Component 2 will be implemented in areas around Kinshasa, more specifically in the Bas Congo
                         province and the Bateke Plateau. Specific land areas where agroforestry will take place will only be
                         known during project implementation. The promotion of improved cooking stoves will be targeted at
                         the urban population of Kinshasa (Component 2b). Support to improved charcoal-making techniques
                         (Component 2b) is expected to be focused on the Bateke Plateau.

                         Component 3 is a small grant facility open to proposals from stakeholders in key sectors and
                         geographic areas to be determined during project preparation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Salient physical characteristics:

                         Out of DRC’s total population of over 65 million, more than 8 million live in Kinshasa. Kinshasa and
                         its surrounding areas are subject to a hot and humid tropical climate. Soils are mainly sandy with low
                         to medium agricultural potential. Vegetation is mostly degraded savanna with some remaining forest
                         tracts (especially on the slopes along the Congo River and its affluents). Further north in the
                         Bandundu Province areas of savanna-forest mosaic remain.

                         Deforestation rates in the Project intervention area (mainly in the Plateau District) are well above the
                         national average and mainly driven by shifting cultivation in riparian forests and shrubby savannas
                         and processing of residual biomass into charcoal for the Kinshasa market.

                         The Bombo-Lumene Hunting Reserve (“Domaine de Chasse?) is the only protected area in the
                         project zone, and no activities will be undertaken inside this protected area. It is expected that the
                         promotion of agroforestry and improved cook stoves will reduce fuelwood collection pressure on this
                         Hunting Reserve.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The Government of the Democratic Republic of Congo is more familiar with the Bank’s Safeguard
                         Policies based on experience with other Bank-funded projects across different sectors. The Ministry
                           of Environment, Nature Conservation and Tourism (MECNT), which will oversee implementation of
                           the Project, has prior experience with the Bank’s Safeguard Policies and a variety of safeguard
                           instruments, including an Environmental and Social Management Framework that was finalized in
Public Disclosure Copy




                           2009 in preparation for an investment project in the forestry sector. MECNT is further overseeing the
                           launching and carrying out of a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) as part of
                           DRC’s REDD+ readiness preparation process. The SESA will inform the formulation and
                           development of DRC’s National REDD+ Strategy and is intended to identify opportunities for
                           maximizing the positive social and environmental impacts of the REDD+ Strategy, as well as
                           avoiding, and if this is not possible mitigating and/or compensating any adverse impacts from the
                           implementation of the REDD+ Strategy. A key aspect of the SESA process is the participatory and
                           inclusive stakeholder consultation process that will support broad stakeholder involvement in the
                           overall design of the REDD+ Strategy.
                           The capacity of the Government, and specifically of the MECNT, to address safeguard issues will be
                           further strengthened as part of the SESA process as well as during project preparation for this
                           Project. Nevertheless, capacity levels at the Government level remain low and need continued
                           strengthening.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Hocine Chalal (AFTN1)
                           Antoine V. Lema (AFTCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             An Environmental and Social Management
                           BP 4.01                                             Framework (ESMF) will provide guidance on
                                                                               managing environmental and social risks under
                                                                               Components 2 and 3. An Environmental and
                                                                               Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               prepared for the community-based natural
                                                                               resource management activities in the Plateau
                                                                               District to be supported under Component 1.
                                                                               Both of these documents will be prepared,
                                                                               consulted upon, and disclosed before appraisal.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         Yes             The Project will operate in natural habitats, but
                                                                               will not include activities that involve
                                                                               significant conversion or degradation of natural
                                                                               habitats. Instead, the Project activities are
                                                                               designed to reduce pressures on natural habitats
                                                                               as well improve their conservation.
                                                                               Agroforestry activities will be promoted in
                                                                               degraded savanna lands. Potential impacts and
                                                                               proposed mitigation measures will be included
                                                                               in the ESMF and ESIA.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  Yes             The project will operate in forested areas, but
                                                                               will not involve conversion or degradation of
                                                                               critical forest areas. The Project will however
                                                                               finance agroforestry and plantations in non-
                                                                 forested or previously converted and degraded
                                                                 areas. Agroforestry activities under the Project
                                                                 will be designed to prevent and mitigate
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 potential threats to biodiversity, including
                                                                 threats related to the introduction of invasive
                                                                 species. Potential impacts and proposed
                                                                 mitigation measures will be included in the
                                                                 ESMF and ESIA. Forest management plans may
                                                                 also be prepared during project implementation.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           TBD   The Project will invest in agroforestry activities,
                                                                 and support to intensification of agriculture.
                                                                 Activities may thus require pest management
                                                                 activities. In that case, an Integrated Pest
                                                                 Management Plan (IPMP) would be prepared,
                                                                 consulted upon, and disclosed before appraisal
                                                                 to ensure that environmentally friendly methods
                                                                 for pest control are applied, such as biological
                                                                 control, cultural practices, and the development
                                                                 and use of varieties that are pest and disease
                                                                 resistant or tolerant. The IPMP will also
                                                                 provide guidance on the safe selection, handling
                                                                 and disposal of pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   Though it is not anticipated that the project will
                         BP 4.11                                 have negative impacts on any such sites, the
                                                                 existence of any such sites and the
                                                                 corresponding need to trigger this policy will be
                                                                 determined once the Environmental and Social
                                                                 Impact Assessment (ESIA) is completed. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 relevant policies and procedures will be
                                                                 presented in the Environmental and Social
                                                                 Management Framework.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     TBD   An Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework
                                                                 may be prepared, depending on the final target
                                                                 area of the project to be determined during
                                                                 preparation. Area-specific Indigenous Peoples
                                                                 Plans (IPP) will be prepared and implemented in
                                                                 case IP communities are present in the areas
                                                                 targeted by project activities.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   The Project does not entail any physical
                         4.12                                    resettlement. However, the development and
                                                                 implementation of local land use plans may
                                                                 reduce the access to natural resources for some
                                                                 households. A Resettlement Policy Framework,
                                                                 and if deemed applicable, a Process Framework,
                                                                 will provide guidance for determining how to
                                                                                                                                 address any potential incomes or livelihood
                                                                                                                                 displacement impact.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            N/A
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The project will not affect international
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             N/A
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Sep-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The following safeguard instruments are expected to be prepared during the preparation phase: i)
                                      an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), ii) a Resettlement Policy
                                      Framework (RPF), possibly including a Process Framework (PF), and iii) an Integrated Pest
                                      Management Plan (IPM) (to be determined). Depending on the target area of the project and in
                                      case of the presence of Indigenous People in such target areas, also iv) an Indigenous People
                                      Planning Framework (IPPF) would be prepared. An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
                                      for the Plateau District will also be prepared. These safeguard documents will be consulted upon
                                      and disclosed by the Government of the Democratic Republic of Congo, and by the World Bank’s
                                      Infoshop prior to appraisal of the Project.

                                      A Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) is currently under preparation as part of
                                      DRC’s REDD+ readiness preparation process. The SESA aims to identify opportunities for
                                      maximizing the positive social and environmental impacts and avoiding, or if that is not possible
                                      mitigating and/or compensating for adverse impacts from the implementation of REDD+. While
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      the SESA is financed with separate funding provided by the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility
                                      (FCPF), the scope of the SESA will cover DRC’s overall REDD+ Strategy, and as such, the pilot
                                      activities and investments to be implemented under the FIP. The team in charge of the REDD+
                                      SESA will therefore prepare the ESMF and other framework tools for the planned activities under
                                      the Forest Investment Program.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Jean-Christophe Carret

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                                          Date: 02-Apr-2013
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Magdolna Lovei (SM)                                                                                                  Date: 04-Jan-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
