                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA3047
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 30-Mar-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 31-Mar-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Lao People's Democratic                      P128854
                                                                            Project ID:
                                               Republic
                            Project Name:      Lao Public Financial Management Project (P128854)
                            Task Team       Leah April
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       25-Mar-2013                          Estimated   28-May-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: EASPT                                 Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector:            Central government administration (100%)
                            Theme:             Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (90%), Other
                                               accountability/anti-corruption (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     24.00                       Total Bank Financing:       22.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                                  Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                    22.00
                              Lao PDR - Free-standing Trust Fund Program                                    2.00
                              Total                                                                        24.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           The objective of the new PFM Project (PFMP) is to (i) further strengthen the quality of information
                           on budgetary allocations, (ii) improve compliance to budget execution and treasury management
                           procedures, (iii) enhance the timeliness, reliability, coverage and quality of reports and financial
                           statements (iv) strengthen external oversight of the allocation and use of public resources.



                                                                       Page 1 of 5
                         3. Project Description
                         Component A: Enhancements to Core Budget and Treasury Management Policies and Procedures
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This overarching component aims to support the Ministry of Finance’s efforts to bring further
                         improvements to its core budget preparation, execution, reporting and accounting systems at the
                         central, provincial and district level. These improvements will serve to enhance control and
                         accountability over the raising and use of finances; facilitate responsiveness to changes in policy or
                         the economic environment during budget execution; reduce financial irregularity and bring the
                         government of Lao closer to international standards on fiscal transparency.

                         A1: Strengthened fiscal and debt management

                         This component will support government efforts to maintain fiscal stability and sustainable debt in a
                         context of increasing reliance on resource-based revenues. Three activities will be financed: (i) a 3-
                         year fiscal policy rolling paper will be prepared to frame preparations of the annual budget
                         framework and State Budget Plan; (ii) capacity will be built to support debt sustainability analysis
                         and the preparation of a debt strategy and legal framework and (iii) support provided to for improve
                         recording and reporting of debt so that borrowing decisions and budget execution are better
                         informed.

                         A2: Support for budget preparation
                         This component will support three main activities: (i) to show the linkages between policy and the
                         annual budget, enhancements will be made to the preparation of the annual budget framework and
                         State Budget Plan to show fiscal implications of major budget policy decision (ii) to improve control,
                         transparency and accountability for the collection and use of resources, departmental revenue and
                         expenditure budgets will be input in GFIS for large central ministries and provinces and (iii) to
                         enhance the orderliness of budget preparation, a review of the schedule for budget preparation,
                         budget legislation and budgetary processes will be undertaken. A budget manual to document
Public Disclosure Copy




                         processes would also be prepared.

                         A3: Enhanced budget execution.
                         This component will be aimed primarily at strengthening the ability of the Ministry of Finance to
                         manage the in-year execution of the budget. This will require that (i) the policies and procedures for
                         the processing of expenditures and revenues are strengthened. This includes establishing of reporting
                         requirements, amendments to the budget classification and chart of accounts, improved procedures
                         for bank reconciliation, standardized measures for the processing of payments and revised forms and
                         processes for depositing of revenues. Further, (ii) to enhance controls, support will be given to the
                         further consolidation of the Treasury Single Account and the completion of the modernization of
                         banking arrangements.

                         A4: Enhancements to GFIS
                         A number of enhancements will need to be made to the GFIS in order that it better meets user
                         requirements. This will (i) include program development, software enhancements, hardware and
                         skills development of the FITC and users. In addition, (ii) in order that changes are made in a
                         systematic way and well-documented, a provision will be also made for the oversight of
                         enhancements to the GFIS.

                         A5: Improved accounting standards.


                                                                       Page 2 of 5
                         This component will be dedicated to support for the implementation of the roadmap for the
                         conversion to International Accounting and Auditing Standards for the public and private sectors
                         which will be led by the Accounting Department and the Accounting Council. A sequenced approach
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will be adopted for sustained implementation of the accounting and auditing reforms mandated by
                         the new legislation. Support will be provided in thre eareas: (i) further institutional development of
                         the Accounting Department and the Accounting Council to transition appropriate roles and
                         responsibilities for self – regulation of the accounting profession to Council overtime; (ii) technical
                         assistance to sup port the necessary policy and technical activities as outlined in the PRSO matrix;
                         and (iii) the completion of a comprehensive needs assessment of accounting staff at the central,
                         provincial and district levels to support the development and sequenced implementation of a
                         comprehensive accounting and auditing training and development plan.

                         A6: Strengthening capacity.
                         Building on each of these components will be support to the Economics and Finance Institute (EFI)
                         to enhance the institution’s ability to develop and provide relevant, sustainable, and high-quality
                         training for finance officers at all levels of the government. Through this component (i) materials and
                         curriculum will be developed that outline standard operating procedures for budget preparation,
                         execution, reporting and accounting: these will form the basis of a revised training syllabus and (ii)
                         capacity building will also be provided to trainers at the institute.

                         A7. Program Management
                         In order to support the management of the reform process, support will also be provided to program
                         management. This will include support for (i) revisiting the government’s Public Financial
                         Management Support Program (PFMSP) and the results framework for monitoring its progress and
                         impact; (ii) the establishment of a challenge facility managed by the PCU which can make resources
                         available to support implementation of smaller priority activities identified within the PFMSP on a
                         demand-driven basis and (iii) support for overall project implementation and coordination. The
                         specific arrangements for implementation are outlined further in Section IV.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component B: Strengthening External Oversight Function

                         The External Oversight component supports the institutional capacity development of the two key
                         oversight agencies – National Assembly and the State Audit Organization. These agencies have an
                         important role in monitoring the progress of the PFM reforms and enhancement of accountability and
                         transparency in the public sector.

                         B1: National assembly
                         Assistance to the NA will be primarily targeted towards the Economy, Planning and Finance
                         Committee given that a key part of their mandate is to oversee the socio-economic plan and budget.
                         Policy support will be provided to enhance the awareness and capacity of NA Members in the areas
                         of (i) the relationship between the Committee and the SAO through peer learning and networking,
                         (ii) a series of awareness seminars for members on issues such as natural resource management,
                         financial sector oversight and other policy issues, and (iii) participation in the annual global
                         legislative audit program through the global and/or regional sharing of experience. Core technical
                         skills of staff will be built by providing training/support for economic, financial and budget analysis
                         in addition to other cross – capacity building opportunities provided under the new project.

                         B2: State Audit Office
                         Assistance to the SAO will support the implementation of the ongoing capacity development

                                                                       Page 3 of 5
                           program as outlined in the 10 year Action Plan and the more detailed implementation program to
                           2015. The primary sequenced capacity building activities will focus on (i) providing support for the
                           NT2 audit; (ii) preparing a workforce development plan and subsequent implementation of its
Public Disclosure Copy




                           recommendations; (iii) implementing the ICT strategy including the establishment of a training
                           center; and (iv) strengthening the professionalism of the SAO’s audit process. This work directly
                           supports the PRSO policy actions through 2014.
                            4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)


                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Viengkeo Phetnavongxay (EASTS)
                           Sybounheung Phandanouvong (EASTS)

                            6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/        No                No safeguard policies are triggered.
                            BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No                No safeguard policies are triggered.

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No                No safeguard policies are triggered.

                            Pest Management OP 4.09             No                No safeguard policies are triggered.

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No                No safeguard policies are triggered.
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No                No safeguard policies are triggered.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No                No safeguard policies are triggered.
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No                No safeguard policies are triggered.

                            Projects on International        No                   No safeguard policies are triggered.
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                   No safeguard policies are triggered.
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The Project does not have any safeguard issues since it will only finance consulting services,
                              goods, training and workshops. The project will not finance any civil works or any other activities
                              that will have environmental implications. Given the nature of the project it also has no impact on
                              social safeguards such as Involuntary Resettlement and Indigenous Peoples.



                                                                        Page 4 of 5
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                                None foreseen.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                                Not applicable.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                                Not applicable.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                                Not applicable.
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Leah April
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Mathew A. Verghis (SM)                      Date: 31-Mar-2013


                                                                      Page 5 of 5
