                                                                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                            CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                          Report No.: ISDSC784
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-May-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                       Tajikistan                             Project ID:                      P131441
                              Project Name:                  Global Partnership for Education (GPE)-4 (P131441)
                              Task Team Leader:              Saodat Bazarova
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 00-undefined-0000                           Estimated Board Date:            12-Nov-2012
                              Managing Unit:                 ECSHD                                  Lending Instrument:              Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                        General education sector (85%), Pre-primary education (15%)
                              Theme:                         Education for all (100%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                  Financing Source                                                                                                      Amount
                                  Borrower                                                                                                                  0.00
                                  EFA-FTI Education Program Development Fund                                                                               16.20
                                  Total                                                                                                                    16.20
                              Environmental Category:        B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              B. Project Objectives

                              To contribute to improving coverage and quality of pre-school and quality of basic education.

                              C. Project Description

                              The proposed Project has four components: (i) increasing access to early childhood education (ECE); (ii) improving the quality of basic education;
                              (iii) improving learning conditions in schools; and (iv) enhancing system effectiveness. All components supportmajor priorities of the MoE’s
Public Disclosure Copy




                              education strategy (NSED) and medium-term Action Plan and complement support provided by donors.

                              Component One: Increasing access to quality early childhood education programs. (USD 1.5 million; approximately 9.3 percent of total project
                              cost) The aim of this component is to increase access to affordable ECE programs that meet agreed quality standards. The component would
                              support three main activities. First, an analysis of the preschool sector would be undertaken, including an evaluation and costing of the various
                              preschool models, and an identification of steps needed to enable expansion. Second, the preschool regulatory framework would be reviewed and
                              revised, so as to facilitate its expansion, particularly of lower-cost ECE programs (including those provided by the private sector), while ensuring
                              that quality standards are defined and adhered to. Third, the grant would support the establishment of early learning centers by providing
                              communities with a set of furniture and materials, as well as support a training course for preschool teachers and periodic follow-up support. This
                              component would be implemented in close collaboration with and support from UNICEF and AKF.

                              Component Two: Improving the quality of basic education. (USD 1.75 million; approximately 10.8 percent of total project cost) The aim of this
                              component is to focus content and teaching-learning in general education on competencies, and improve the teaching-learning process to
                              encompass a wider range of active learning and formative assessment techniques. The main activities would include the revision of the teaching
                              plan (courses and hours by grade) in primary grades and the revision of learning standards for secondary grades; as well as the development and
                              initial introduction of the primary subject learning standards and content. The grant would support the design and delivery of in-service teacher
                              training for primary school teachers, and the production and distribution of pedagogical support materials. The grant would also finance
                              elaboration of standards and evaluative criteria for textbooks development, training of authors, and the purchase supplementary reading materials.
                              This component would be implemented in coordination with an upcoming USAID project on early grade reading.

                              Component Three: Improving learning conditions. (USD 11 million; approximately 67.9 percent of total project cost) The aim of this component is
                              to improve the learning conditions in basic education schools. The component would finance the construction and rehabilitation of schools, as well
                              as furnishing them. Site selection would be determined by a needs-based criteria, including the extent of overcrowding and physical state of the
                              existing school, lack of investments in the schools’ infrastructure improvement in the certain regions/districts, the local demographic trend, the
                              efficiency and effectiveness of supervision funds utilization, and the potential for consolidation of class groups. This component would be
                              implemented in coordination with KfW.

                              Component Four: System effectiveness. (USD 1 million; approximately 6.2 percent of total project cost) The aim of this component is to improve
                              management of the education system at central and school levels. At the central level, MoE management and fiduciary capacities would be
                              strengthened; one particular focus would be on using data for decision-making and policy development. The EMIS would be expanded to cover
                              other education levels, including preschool. The Project would also finance technical assistance to support PCF implementation, strengthening the
                           PCF formula, and furthering the fiscal policy dialogue, particularly around designing equalization payments that ensure schools actually receive
                           budgeted funds. The component would fund activities to assess and, if needed, support the PCF pilot for preschools supported by UNICEF. The
                           component would continue supporting directors training started in FTI-2 and FTI-3 which proved to be effective. The training covers financial
                           management, pedagogical leadership and community accountability issues in order to leverage the increased powers the directors have been
                           granted in these areas, enhance school responsiveness to parental and community demands, and improve school effectiveness. The component
                           would also finance expenses associated with the project management.

                            D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The FTI-4 Grant triggers OP/BP 4.01 and is classified as Category B for environmental assessment. It is expected to finance four types of civil
                           works in urban and/or rural areas: (i) rehabilitation/reconstruction of existing school buildings; (ii) new construction of premises in existing school
                           sites; (iii) new construction of school premises in new locations; and (iv) provision/repair of communications of existing buildings (water supply,
                           power supply, drainage, sanitation, heating).

                           The civil works planned under the proposed Project are of the same nature and size as the ones being financed under the on-going FTI-3 Grant
                           that is also implemented by the Ministry of Education. The rehabilitation and construction of educational premises would be of a small/medium
                           scale and not expected to cause significant or irreversible negative impact on the environment. Rehabilitation of the existing buildings and new
                           construction at the sites of existing school buildings carry minimal risk to the environment, which is typical for rehabilitation/reconstruction works.
                           Construction of buildings in new sites carries additional risks associated with selection of the site. Because the project would involve the
                           construction of new schools in new sites, there is a possibility that land would need to be acquired which could result in the displacement of
                           households or livelihoods. However, it is expected that such impacts would be minor with most construction taking place on unused public land.

                            E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

                           The grant will be implemented by the Ministry of Education which has assigned its Department of Capital Construction (DCC) as the main
                           subdivision responsible to the project implementation, including for responsibilities with regard to environmental and social safeguards. The
                           Ministry and DCC have adequate experience in implementing such projects as well as in ensuring compliance with the environmental and social
                           requirements as they have already implemented a similar Tajikistan Fast Track Initiative Catalytic Fund Grant 3 project (FTI – 3). Several
                           environmental reviews conducted by the Bank team concluded that overall, environmental safeguards are being well taken care of under FTI-3.
                           The DCC managers and its staff have a good understanding of the EMF, EAs/EMPs and environmental risks associated with construction and
                           demolition civil works. MoE has also recruited well qualified engineers to supervise the works, including environmental aspects. Supervision and
                           implementation support to the DCC is provided at the central level by the Consultant Civil Works Engineer, at the oblast level by 2 Consultant
                           Regional Engineers, and at the site level by 13 Consultant-Site Engineers. All DCC engineers and relevant MoE staff have received training on
                           the EMF; the training materials were prepared by the Consultant Civil Works Engineer, who also delivered the training. Based on the FTI-3 EMF
                           the DCC prepared site-specific EMPs for all proposed investments. EMP implementation is being monitored and properly documented.

                           The field visits conducted by a team lawyer and social safeguard specialist during project preparation did not find any situations likely to trigger OP/
                           BP 4.12. The previous project FTI-3 developed a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), but there were no situations that required triggering
                           involuntary resettlement and hence no RAPs were prepared. This project will hence adapt the RPF of FTI -3 to the requirements of the current
                           project. In the event that any land acquisition takes place, Resettlement Action Plans will be developed in accordance with the procedures set out
                           under the RPF. The RPF will be available on the project website and copies will be given to the offices of all the local authorities where there is a
                           possibility of activities involving involuntary resettlement. The RPF will be translated into Russian and Tajik.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Other social issues: In case of a new school construction (in the settlement where there was no school before) a thorough social analysis of the
                           catchment area including of ethnical profile of the population will be conducted.

                            F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

                           Roxanne Hakim (ECSS4)
                           Arcadii Capcelea (ECSS3)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

                            Safeguard Policies                                Triggered?        Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01               Yes                 The planned rehabilitation and construction of educational premises will be of a
                                                                                                small/medium scale and not expected to cause significant or irreversible
                                                                                                negative impacts on the environment. These activities might carry only minimal
                                                                                                risk to the environment, which is typical for rehabilitation/reconstruction works
                                                                                                and can be easily managed during the project implementation.
                                                                                                The project will apply prepared for the FTI-3 Environmental Management
                                                                                                Framework (EMF) which was disclosed and consulted in the country in 2009.
                                                                                                The EMF: (i) outlines the general anticipated environmental risks and impacts
                                                                                                and associated mitigation measures, (ii) describes the process and provide
                                                                                                specific guidance on contents for preparation of site-specific Environmental
                                                                                                Management Plans (EMPs) along with the designs for rehabilitation and/or
                                                                                                construction of each building; and (iii) indicates institutional responsibilities for
                                                                                                preparation, review/approval, implementation and monitoring/reporting of these
                                                                                                site-specific EMPs. The EMF will be updated, taking into account the newly
                                                                                                proposed project provisions. Additionally the EMF will include a new short
                                                                                                section describing the requirements on handling asbestos material. As
                                                                                                construction of buildings in new sites carries additional risks associated with
                                                                                                selection of the site, the EMF will also include a new section that would provide
                                                                                                a negative list of sites which will be not considered as a location for the new
                                                                                                                        school constructions. The revised EMF will be disclosed in the country for public
                                                                                                                        comments. The EMF will also specify all site-specific EMPs will be disclosed for
                                                                                                                        public comments.
                                Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                        No                    All new constructions will be done within the existing settlements and no
                                                                                                                        natural habitats will be impacted.
                                Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                 No                    All new constructions will be done within the existing settlements and thus no
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        any impacts on forest areas.
                                Pest Management OP 4.09                                            No

                                Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                             No                     While generally it is expected the project will not trigger this OP, it is possible
                                                                                                                        the new construction might be located in the vicinity of the physical cultural
                                                                                                                        resources (monuments, minarets, churches…). In such cases the EMP to be
                                                                                                                        prepared for a construction of new school will include a special section on
                                                                                                                        avoiding and mitigating of potential impacts on those resources.
                                Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                      No

                                Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                                Yes                   The project involves the construction of new schools. Hence land will need to
                                                                                                                        be acquired, and this could result in the displacement of households or impacts
                                                                                                                        on livelihoods. The project will therefore adapt the Resettlement Policy
                                                                                                                        Framework (RPF), prepared under the FTI-3 project to the requirements of the
                                                                                                                        current project. In the event that any involuntary resettlement is likely,
                                                                                                                        Resettlement Action Plans will be developed.
                                Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                          No

                                Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                          No
                                7.50
                                Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                              No



                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Jun-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
                                  should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                    Studies are not required. Due to tight preparation schedule the list of the CWs site will not be identified before Appraisal. Revised and adopted
                                    EMF and RPF will guide preparation EMPs for each of the sites and social assessment.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         IV. APPROVALS
                                Task Team Leader:                                Name: Saodat Bazarova
                                Approved By:
                                Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                 Name: Wolfhart Pohl (RSA)                                                                             Date: 11-May-2012
                                Sector Manager:                                  Name: Alberto Rodriguez (SM)                                                                          Date: 14-May-2012




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
