                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC3532

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-May-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-Jun-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                            Project ID:      P133326
                            Project Name:      Poverty Alleviation and Agriculture Development Demonstration in Poor Areas
                                               Project (P133326)
                            Task Team          Ulrich K. H. M. Schmitt
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       15-Jan-2014                         Estimated        20-Aug-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: EASCS                                Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Crops (30%), Irrigation and drainage (20%), Animal production (20%), Agro-
                                               industry, marketing, and trade (20%), Agricultural extensi on and research
                                               (10%)
                            Theme(s):          Rural markets (40%), Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Rural policies
                                               and institutions (20%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    300.00                     Total Bank Financing:        150.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                                Financing Gap:                 0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                     150.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        150.00
                              Total                                                                        300.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective would be to develop and demonstrate rural sector development
                           models for representative destitute areas that improve sustainable agricultural production systems,
                           improve institutional arrangements, and increase rural income.
                         C. Project Description
                         The proposed project seeks to assist the Government in developing models to advance the rural-
                         urban integration and rural sector modernization agenda in representative destitute rural and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         mountain areas.

                         The focus of the project would be on demonstrating approaches to rural income generation that are
                         based on the modernization of selected agricultural sub-sectors and value-chain development,
                         institutional farmer cooperative development, the provision of grant funds for poor farmer
                         households and cooperatives to support their participation in agricultural value chains, and capacity
                         building for rural households, cooperatives, enterprises, and local governments. The project would
                         seek to achieve the development objective through the implementation of the following components
                         and activities:

                         •        Component 1: Integrated Value Chain Development. The objective of this component would
                         be to develop more efficient agricultural value chains focusing on 2 to 4 agricultural or rural pillar
                         industries in each project county. This would be achieved through the restructuring and
                         modernization of the current production patterns and by supporting the enabling institutions in each
                         pillar industry. The modernization would aim at creating or supporting larger, economically more
                         viable and long-term sustainable production arrangements, for example cooperatives, household
                         groups, or enterprises, which are capable to use better technologies and can capture value added in
                         the up-stream processing and marketing value chains. The component would also support the
                         establishment of socially acceptable models of cooperatives, household groups, company-farmer
                         household, and company-farmer household-cooperative organizations through a business and
                         market-based approach.

                         Value chain-related investments would include:
                         o        New production systems, including production systems for advanced breeding stock and
                         improved seeds; pre-processing and processing technologies for agriculture and related products;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         o        Storage and marketing facilities at the cooperative and enterprise level;
                         o        Market studies to access to new and higher-value markets;
                         o        Up-grading of quality standards, labeling and certification, branding, product tracing,
                         logistics, food safety and others.

                         Institutional development investments would include:
                         o        Support to establish new and/or improve existing farmer cooperatives;
                         o        Support to farmer cooperatives in form of: (a) management facilities for farmer cooperatives;
                         (b) training in management and business operation; (c) technical training; and (d) start-up productive/
                         pre-processing investments for new and innovative technologies.

                         •        Component 2: Public Infrastructure and Services Support. The objective of this component
                         would be to improve public infrastructure and public services in order to enable and facilitate
                         restructuring of the agricultural sub-sectors under Component 1. The component would support
                         investments in:

                         o       Production road infrastructure (such as, for example, tractor roads, field tracks or access to
                         processing and marketing facilities);
                         o       Irrigation and drainage, terracing, etc.;
                         o       Communications and information and telecommunications (ICT) infrastructure and
                         equipment; and
                         o      Public market facilities, electricity supply and other infrastructure necessary to facilitate and
                         complement farmer and private investment under Component 1.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         In addition, the component would provide investment in other supporting public services, such as
                         food safety testing and control, public extension and training services, marketing systems and
                         agriculture research and technology transfer.

                         •      Component 3: Rural and Agricultural Business Development Support. The objective of this
                         component would be to provide business development services to farmer households and
                         cooperatives in support of the agriculture-value chain development under component 1. Specific
                         investments would include:

                         o        A conditional grant program to poor households and households groups to encourage the
                         self-organization of households and provide means for the purchasing of agricultural and other inputs
                         to allow them to participate in new production arrangements;
                         o        Training and mentoring for new and existing enterprises and cooperatives and for
                         community-based economic groups in ethnic minority areas;
                         o        Training for government officials on the roles of government and private sector and on how
                         to built public-private partnership arrangements; in addition, training on appraisal guidelines for
                         public sector support in rural areas;
                         o        Technical assistance to value-chain operators;
                         o        Policy studies on how to improve investment climate, good governance, and fair benefit-
                         sharing in cooperative-enterprise arrangements; and
                         o        Marketing studies for selected products, analytical studies related to poverty reduction and
                         agricultural sector development, policy guidelines, and the development of appraisal guidelines for
                         public sector support in rural areas.

                         Component 4: Project Management, M&E. The component would establish the project management
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and M&E system of the project and provide office equipment, transportation and technical assistance
                         services. It would support the coordination between implementation agencies at all levels and with
                         other government programs and institutions and the capture of implementation lessons from value
                         chain development. It would also include support to establishing and operating the project’s progress
                         and impact M&E system
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is proposed to include 27 counties in three provinces (Sichuan, Guizhou and Gansu).
                         The project areas would be located in the Wuling, Wumeng and Liupan mountainous areas. Rural
                         poverty in these areas is deep and persistent, with poverty rates often above 35 percent. The
                         geographic conditions in these areas and the limited availability of productive farmland, combined
                         with inaccessibility and underdeveloped infrastructure, pose specific challenges to agricultural
                         development and environmental management. A significant proportion of project area is home to
                         ethnic minority groups, of which some are not mainstreamed, speak their own languages and follow
                         traditional subsistence agriculture. Unsustainable slope-land cropping and destructive livestock
                         grazing are common problems. For the most difficult villages the Government sees no long-term
                         development perspective, considers public service delivery overly costly and therefore offers
                         ecological resettlement programs.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The proposed project would be implemented under the overall responsibility and guidance of the
                           State Council’s Leading Group for Poverty Reduction (LGPR) at the national and the Provincial
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Leading Group for Poverty Reduction and Development (LGOPAD) at the provincial levels. The
                           LGOPAD’s at the provincial level would have the major responsibilities to implement the safeguards
                           policies. Some of them have previous experience with Bank supported projects based on long-term
                           cooperation partnership. However, this experience may date back with significant staff turn-over.
                           Capacity constraints may exist. The LGOPADs are expected to have good capacity to implement
                           social safeguards policies and provisions, since such aspects belongs to their core mandate and are
                           part of their day-to-day work. In terms of environmental safeguards, capacity of the implementing
                           agency at provincial and county levels is expected to be quite weak. In particular, there is little
                           experience with the agricultural production issues as well as a weak understanding of Bank’s
                           environmental safeguard requirements and procedures.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Mark R. Lundell (EASCS)
                           Chaogang Wang (MNSUS)
                           Peter Leonard (EASDE)
                           Xin Ren (EASCS)
                           Meixiang Zhou (EASCS)
                           Aimin Hao (EASCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             An Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)
                           BP 4.01                                            report and Environmental Management Plan
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              (EMP) need to be prepared as part of the EA
                                                                              process. Depending on the project design, an
                                                                              Environmental Management Framework may
                                                                              also be required, if part of the project
                                                                              investments cannot yet be determined by the
                                                                              time of appraisal. The EIA needs to pay
                                                                              particular attention to the following:

                                                                              Livestock. Investments in the expansion of
                                                                              livestock and animal husbandry need to:
                                                                              consider the suitability and carrying capacity of
                                                                              pasture areas as well as fodder and feed stock
                                                                              sources, particularly in mountain areas; be in
                                                                              line with national policies on grazing
                                                                              restrictions and slope-land protection; and
                                                                              include appropriate measures to balance
                                                                              livestock numbers with fodder supply, both at
                                                                              the household and community level.

                                                                              Animal waste management. The EIA needs to
                                                             analyze issues around animal waste and non-
                                                             point source pollution, which in combination
                                                             with improper handling may lead to negative
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             environmental impacts under the project, and
                                                             devise appropriate management and mitigation
                                                             measures.

                                                             Crop production. Erosion may occur as part of
                                                             traditional slope-land cropping. The EIA need to
                                                             analyze the availability of appropriate water and
                                                             land resource for crop production under the
                                                             project. Potential impacts of monoculture
                                                             cropping and related possible negative impacts
                                                             such as pest and disease, soil quality
                                                             deterioration etc. may need to be addressed.

                                                             Agricultural processing. For investments in
                                                             simple primary processing, such as cleaning,
                                                             cutting or drying of raw produce, environmental
                                                             impacts are likely to be minimal. More
                                                             advanced processing, such as starch and
                                                             beverage production, slaughtering and meat
                                                             production facilities, however, may cause more
                                                             significant negative impacts in form of air and
                                                             water pollution as well as water and energy
                                                             consumption.

                                                             Rural Infrastructure. Possible negative impacts
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             form new infrastructure construction as well as
                                                             rehabilitation of existing infrastructure need to
                                                             be analyzed and mitigation measures described.

                                                             Protected area. Proximity of project investment
                                                             to any protected areas such as protection zones
                                                             for natural forest and for drinking water need to
                                                             be taken into account as part of the project site
                                                             selection criteria to avoid/minimize impacts on
                                                             the above areas.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   TBD   OP4.04 may be applicable if project sites are
                                                             located in or may impact natural habitats. Based
                                                             on current information, the project is not
                                                             expected to impact on critical natural habitats.
                                                             However, further information needs to be
                                                             provided through the EA process to confirm
                                                             whether OP4.04 is applicable or not.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes   The project can be expected to involve the
                                                                 application of pesticides in agricultural
                                                                 production as well as pest management issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 due to the expansion of agricultural production,
                                                                 intensification and diversification activities. A
                                                                 Pest Management Plan (PMP) needs to be
                                                                 prepared as part of the EA process.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   The occurrence of and proximity of project
                         BP 4.11                                 investments to cultural, historical, religious
                                                                 sites, sacred sites for minority people etc. are
                                                                 yet to be identified during EIA process to
                                                                 confirm whether OP4.11 is applicable or not.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   Ethnic minority population takes up about 25
                                                                 percent of total population in the project areas in
                                                                 Guizhou, covering a large number of different
                                                                 groups. In Sichuan, ethnic minority
                                                                 communities (Yi Minority) take up between 90
                                                                 to 95 percent of the population in project
                                                                 counties. The communities may not be part of
                                                                 the mainstream society and in many areas may
                                                                 be marginalized with income levels and living
                                                                 standards below those of the mainstream
                                                                 society. Many prospective project household
                                                                 are potentially vulnerable or disadvantaged and
                                                                 specific means may need to be designed to
                                                                 ensure that these communities and households
                                                                 will benefit from the project. A detailed Social
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 Assessment (SA)/Social Impact Assessment
                                                                 (SIA) needs to be prepared to carefully analyze
                                                                 the issues around ethnic minorities in the project
                                                                 areas. It is expected that an Indigenous People
                                                                 Plan (IPP) or Indigenous People Planning
                                                                 Framework (IPPF) needs to be prepared as well
                                                                 and IPP aspects need to be integrated into the
                                                                 project design.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   The project will support infrastructure for the
                         4.12                                    development of agricultural industries. This
                                                                 will include water supply, road, electricity,
                                                                 flood protection, development of farmland at
                                                                 village level. In addition, ecological
                                                                 resettlement and/or agriculture land
                                                                 consolidation may take place in some project
                                                                 areas under government programs, and this may
                                                                 or may not be in anticipation of the project. The
                                                                 SA/SIA needs to carefully analyze ongoing
                                                                 government programs for resettlement,
                                                                                                                                 agricultural land consolidation, as well as the
                                                                                                                                 amount of land resources needed for
                                                                                                                                 infrastructure investments under the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 Based on the findings of the SA/ SIA report, the
                                                                                                                                 specific resettlement instruments, either
                                                                                                                                 resettlement policy framework or resettlement
                                                                                                                                 action plan, will be determined and prepared
                                                                                                                                 during preparation.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Dec-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The EIA report, EMP, PMP as well as the SA/ SIA, Resettlement Plan (or Framework), and IPP
                                      (or IPPF) will be prepared, drafted, disclosed, and consulted with the project stakeholders before
                                      project appraisal, which is expected to take place around February 2014. Site-specific/sub-project
                                      EMPs, if determined to be required, will be made available at the project implementation stage,
                                      once the individual sub-sector proposals have been prepared, appraised, and approved.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Ulrich K. H. M. Schmitt
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name:                                                                                                                      Date:
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Mark R. Lundell (SM)                                                                                                 Date: 03-Jun-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
