                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC1386

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-May-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 14-May-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          India                           Project ID:     P132665
                            Project Name:     India: Enhancing Teacher Effectiveness in Bihar (P132665)
                            Task Team         Shabnam Sinha
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         24-Jun-2013                     Estimated       17-Sep-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    SASED                           Lending         Specific Investment Loan
                                                                              Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General education sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for all (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       458.00               Total Bank Financing:          217.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                             Financing Gap:                   0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                        241.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                               217.00
                              Total                                                                     458.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives


                           C. Project Description
                           While the immediate challenge facing the Government of Bihar (GoB) is one of training over 200,00
                           untrained teachers, the State is keen to embark on far-reaching reforms which will lead to better
                           quality of teachers improved teacher management and greater accountability to the system. The
                           proposed reform program will assist the GoB in addressing its holistic teacher education reform
                         process- starting with the most exigent requirement, that of providing pre-service training to the
                         untrained teachers. However, the gains from the deployment of a high quality pre-service program
                         will be built upon for larger sustainable gains to support the entire teacher education management
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and reform agenda of Bihar. The project support will therefore cover: (a) pre-service teacher
                         education; (b) continuous professional development (CPD); and (c) teacher management.

                         The proposed project would support the range of activities within the Govt. of Bihar’s teacher
                         management and development program. Many of these activities are however being established and
                         the Bank’s support will help the government to adjust or re-design these activities and to integrate
                         them to increase their chance of successful implementation. The project is expected to support/
                         strengthen state systems in the following areas:

                         a)       Robust and transparent teacher recruitment systems (Getting the right candidate and tracking
                         them through Teacher Education Management Information System - TEMIS) and strengthening pre-
                         service training for preparing the teachers with relevant skill and competencies to meet classroom
                         teaching demands.

                         b) CPD programs through effective institutional reform for building teacher skills through sustained
                         efforts. Both the pre-service and CPD programs will be delivered using programs that include ICT
                         enabled systems to meet problems of content loss in delivery.

                         c)       Measuring teacher performance which will be looped back into the teacher education and
                         CPD systems for effecting further reforms through accountability for performance including through
                         social audits by SMCs.

                         More specifically, the project would have two broad components to support the above mentioned
                         areas: (1) Enhancing teacher effectiveness through results-based funding, which includes provision
                         of supporting infrastructure and (2) Technical Assistance component. The details about the proposed
                         project components are given below:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Enhancing Teacher Effectiveness through Results Based Funding

                         The project will disburse against achievement of results and the results may be tracked through
                         Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs) that could cover the following project sub-components:

                         Sub-Component I: Developing a certification high-quality pre-service elementary teacher program,
                         adapted for delivery to untrained elementary teachers
                         •        Capacity of TE Institutions (SCERT, DIETs, BECs, CRCs) enhanced to undertake teacher
                         education including distance education programs
                         •        Functionality of Teacher Education MIS (TEMIS) ensured with full online teacher
                         information monitoring systems in place
                         •        Design of high-quality, two-year distance primary teacher certification program undertaken
                         for delivery to elementary teachers

                         Sub-Component II: Strengthening Teacher Education institutions (in public and private sectors) and
                         accrediting them for effective teacher education and continuous professional development (CPD)
                         program delivery
                         •        Design and functionality of a Teacher Quality Accreditation Agency ensured to undertake
                         quality assurance of CPD programs (both in the public and private sectors)
                         •       Pilot public private partnership program undertaken for TE institutional strengthening and
                         effective program delivery
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sub-Component III: Teachers’ classroom performance and attendance enhanced over measured
                         baselines through improved social accountability mechanisms
                         •       Strong school leadership systems put in place and School Development Management
                         Commit tees trained on school management and teacher performance tracking
                         •       Pilot survey of student’s achievement tracking to trace improvement on achievement levels
                         through exposure to teachers having access to improved TE program
                         •       Pilot program undertaken to test out teacher incentive program on teacher accountability and
                         performance

                         ICT Infrastructure: The program will support the 12th Five Year Plan agenda of infusing Teacher
                         Education reform through use of ICT to introduce technology in order to promote openness for
                         adaptability to new technology for developing professionalism; encourage practicing innovation
                         through introduction of new methods that are extremely interactive; going beyond classroom
                         traditional methods, making learning enjoyable, and promoting self-study and self-paced learning.
                         The project will work with the State to develop both a sustainable ICT system for delivery of all
                         forms of teacher professional development and the human capacity needed to use and maintain this
                         system created in ways that have a clear positive effect on teacher performance in the classroom and
                         can over a period of time be of effective use to the secondary education sector.

                         The present condition of the teacher education system in Bihar and the large number of teachers
                         which need immediate support means that radical alternative approaches to the present system are
                         needed. The Government of Bihar wishes to move towards a distance education teacher education
                         program that is ICT-enabled. Such an ICT-enabled system has the potential to solve many of Bihar’s
                         problems: it would give teachers access to a full set of digital teaching and learning materials much
                         beyond the usual availability of printed matter; empower them become active learners, by seeking
                         out new knowledge beyond the required texts, and thus model such behavior in the classroom for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         students; interact with other teachers; reduce the amount of time needed to travel to face-to-face
                         sessions while at the same time increasing the academic interactions between trainers and teachers
                         being trained. It will help in providing support to teachers when and where they need it, i.e., in their
                         schools; enable teachers to learn at their own pace; reduce transaction times and difficulties by
                         enabling teachers to submit assignments through technology rather than on paper; and allow the
                         materials and curriculum to be rapidly and inexpensively updated in response to the experience of
                         teachers under the program. Finally, using ICT would increase accountability by having more regular
                         assessments and updates on teachers’ performance tracked through the online Teacher Education
                         Management Information System (TEMIS).

                         Building Infrastructure: This will include creation/upgrading/rehabilitation/refurbishment of existing
                         physical/building infrastructure (including SCERT, DIETs, BRCs).

                         Component 2: Technical Assistance
                         The component is expected to finance selected, well-defined activities around (i) implementation
                         support and capacity-building activities (such as quality assurance, curriculum development, high-
                         level planning and improving the state TET); (ii) efforts to strengthen fiduciary, safeguard, and
                         monitoring and evaluation systems (such as procurement procedures both for civil works, ICT
                         hardware, and consulting services); and (iii) independent, rigorous validations, audits, and
                         operational and impact evaluations of selected reforms and activities.
                         A Teacher Assessment Center will be designated and empowered to conduct independent evaluations
                         and teacher performance assessment. Status of untrained teachers and their current levels of teaching
                         competence will be tracked and replicated annually to measure effect of the project on classroom
Public Disclosure Copy




                         practice. SMC/SMDC of schools will be trained to track teacher performance and teacher presence
                         in classrooms for effective social audit of teacher performance.

                         Key Implementing Agencies: The key stakeholder in this project is the Department of Human
                         Resource Development (HRD) through its proposed implementing agency - the Directorate of
                         Teacher Education. The academic leadership in terms of curriculum development, materials
                         production and dissemination would be provided by the SCERT and infrastructure development will
                         be managed by Bihar State Education Infrastructure Development Corporation.

                         Disbursement Arrangements: Under the results-based Component One (having three sub-
                         components), which is expected to constitute about 95 percent of the total credit amount, the
                         proposed project is proposed to disburse against Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs) which are
                         defined against implementation progress and performance targets. Conditional on the satisfactory
                         achievement of DLIs, the allocation for the results-based component would disburse on a
                         reimbursement basis for expenditures incurred by the government in Eligible Expenditure Programs
                         (EEPs), which are expected to be sizeable and/or meaningful public education expenditures and
                         would support the GOB teacher education reform process. The team will be discussion these further
                         with the counterpart.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is located in the State of Bihar in India with interventions spread across its various
                         districts. Bihar lies mid-way between West Bengal in the east and Uttar Pradesh in the west. It is
                         bound by Nepal in north and by Jharkhand in the southern direction. The State is a stretch of fertile
                         plain that is divided into two unequal parts, separated by the Ganges River, which flows from west to
                         east.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Bihar is India’s poorest State, with income per person at about 39 percent of the national average.
                         With a population of 104 million, it is the third largest state. Ninety percent of the population lives in
                         rural areas, where poverty incidence is 56 percent (2009-10: National Sample Survey and Planning
                         Commission Poverty Line). Not surprisingly, human development indicators are extremely low:
                         literacy rates are 73 percent among men and 53 percent among women; 42 percent of children under
                         3 are stunted, 58 percent are underweight, and only 24 percent of rural households have toilets.
                         Quality of drinking water is a big problem, as a result of poor sanitation and fluoride, arsenic, nitrate
                         and iron contamination.
                         Bihar is ranked 35th in the country in Educational Development Index (EDI) ranking, an index
                         generated from 20 variables covering outcomes, access, infrastructure, and teachers. Most of the
                         districts of Bihar are in the bottom quartile for the EDI distribution for the country.

                         Bihar has close to 70,000 elementary schools (primary education (Grades I-V) and upper primary
                         (Grades VI-VII), teaching about 20 million children. Almost all schools (97.91 percent) are
                         government schools. Girls’ enrollment – at 48 percent – is close to parity. The state has a total of
                         343,000 teachers out of which 257,000 are contract teachers that have been hired by the Panchayats
                         (local bodies) – a significant proportion of the teachers not trained – while the others are regular
                         teachers, hired by the State government. The state has a vacancy of another 205,000 teachers to meet
                         Right to Education (RTE) norms.
                           Bihar faces the challenges of recruiting teachers to meet the RTE criteria, providing them with
                           effective pre-service training and ensuring their continuous professional development to raise their
Public Disclosure Copy




                           quality and making them more accountable to the stakeholders. Recognizing the importance of
                           teacher quality, the state is embarking on a major reform in the whole area of teacher development
                           and management and the proposed program to be supported by the Bank is expected to support these
                           reforms further.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The training and support for safeguards would be integrated as part of the overall institutional and
                           organizational strengthening components planned for the Bihar Teacher Education project especially
                           the SSA SIS, an autonomous society under the Human Resource Development (HRD) department
                           and the Bihar Education Infrastructure Development Corporation (BSEIDC) that has been proposed
                           to be the procurement arm for the project.

                           A detailed capacity assessment will be carried out as part of safeguards studies, based on which
                           propositions will be made for creating/strengthening Borrower’s institutional capacity on safeguards.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Neha Pravash Kumar Mishra (SASDI)
                           Susrutha Pradeep Goonesekera (SASDS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             Specific interventions envisaged under the
                           BP 4.01                                             project such as creation and upgrading of the
                                                                               building infrastructure may have some potential
                                                                               adverse environmental impacts in the local
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               context. Even though the new buildings/blocks
                                                                               are would be located within existing campus
                                                                               (within available govt. land), planning,
                                                                               construction and operation of buildings would
                                                                               require appropriate integration of environment,
                                                                               health and safety measures to ensure that
                                                                               adverse environmental impacts are minimized
                                                                               and properly managed. Impacts pertaining to
                                                                               design (sanitation, water supply, drainage, waste
                                                                               water management, solid waste arrangements,
                                                                               ventilation, access etc.); worksite safety
                                                                               management, including occupational health and
                                                                               safety of construction workers and maintenance
                                                                               aspects would require attention.

                                                                               On other project interventions pertaining to ICT,
                                                                               the anticipated environmental impacts are not
                                                                               likely to cause any significant or serious damage
                                                                               to natural and physical environment. However,
                                                                 given the constraints with regard to power
                                                                 availability in the state, opportunities to
                                                                 maximize energy efficiency of such equipment
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 will be explored and built-into project design.

                                                                 OP 4.01 has been triggered to ensure that all
                                                                 major (like building infrastructure) and minor
                                                                 (ICT and curriculum related) interventions are
                                                                 planned and designed to be environmentally
                                                                 sound by integrating appropriate principles and
                                                                 approaches into the over-all decision making
                                                                 process.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No    OP 4.04 is not being triggered for this project as
                                                                 no interventions are envisaged in natural
                                                                 habitats, including those defined as ‘critical’
                                                                 under the policy.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    OP 4.36 is not being triggered for this project as
                                                                 no interventions are envisaged in forest areas
                                                                 and therefore no conversion/degradation of this
                                                                 natural resource would occur.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    OP 4.09 is not being triggered for this project as
                                                                 biological/environmental control methods or
                                                                 reliance on synthetic chemical pesticides is not
                                                                 envisaged.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   Since some civil works are involved, ‘chance
                         BP 4.11                                 finds’ at work sites is a likely impact that would
                                                                 have to be managed. Adverse impacts on any
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 locally important cultural property would be
                                                                 examined, if any, for appropriate mitigation
                                                                 during planning and implementation stages.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     TBD   The proposed project area would cover social
                                                                 groups from backward communities and
                                                                 suitable implementing arrangements would need
                                                                 to be adopted to enhance (and sensitize) GOB
                                                                 efforts focusing on these communities.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    TBD   While the project did not envisage any
                         4.12                                    relocation of persons, it was identified that the
                                                                 boundaries of some of the project locations
                                                                 (campuses) may have been encroached for
                                                                 cultivation and residential purposes. A social
                                                                 assessment is currently being carried out and
                                                                 adverse impacts, if any, will be noted and
                                                                 appropriate mitigations proposed.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No    OP 4.37 is not being triggered for this project as
                                                                 there is no construction of new dams or
                                                                                                                                 activities that are concerned with safe
                                                                                                                                 functioning of existing dams.
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            OP 7.50 will not be triggered for this project as
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            there are no interventions planned/proposed
                                                                                                                                 over or around an international waterway that
                                                                                                                                 could cause a potential conflict. There are also
                                                                                                                                 no activities that may affect the use or pollute
                                                                                                                                 such a waterway.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             OP 7.60 is not being triggered as the project is
                                 7.60                                                                                            not proposed in any disputed area.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Jul-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      In line with WB’s operational policies, the environment and social assessment would be
                                      conducted. Based on the findings from these studies, EMF and SMF will be prepared. The
                                      borrower’s organizational capacity to achieve environmental and social objectives againstthe
                                      range of environmental and social impacts and opportunities that may be associated with the
                                      Program will be assessed as part of these assessments.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Shabnam Sinha

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name:                                                                                                                      Date:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Amit Dar (SM)                                                                                                        Date: 14-May-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
