                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA3786
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-May-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 02-May-2013, 05-May-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                              Project ID:    P126817
                            Project Name:      Guangxi Laibin Water Environment Project (P126817)
                            Task Team          Paul Procee
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          17-Dec-2012                        Estimated   31-May-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASCS                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Flood protection (90%), Wastewater Collection and Transportation (10%)
                            Theme(s):         City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        127.38                Total Bank Financing:      80.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                               Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                    47.38
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                       80.00
                              Total                                                                                      127.38
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to reduce flood risks and improve drainage in
                           selected areas of Laibin city.
                            3. Project Description
                           The Flood and Drainage Plan was used as the basis to identify highest-risk areas and in selecting and
                           prioritizing the infrastructure investments in flood protection in the City. Non-structural and cost-

                                                                        Page 1 of 9
                         effective natural water defense options were integrated in the design of the Project to further reduce
                         risks and vulnerabilities of residents. A detailed description of the investments undertaken for each
                         Project component is provided in Annex 2.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The flood control investments financed by the Project along the Hongshui River and its tributaries
                         are linked to the Guangxi Qianxun River Basin Flood Management Program (the Qianxun River
                         Basin Program, or “the Program?). In addition, the city is already planning investments for the urban
                         re-development of one area of the old downtown in Laibin City, including an 800m section of dikes,
                         which will be an integral part of the investments proposed by the Project to reduce flood risks along
                         the north bank of the Hongshui River.

                         The Project is divided into four components: (i) river flood risk reduction; (ii) improving urban
                         drainage; (iii) technical assistance and capacity building; and (iv) project management and
                         supervision. The different components of the Project will foster an integrated and sustainable
                         approach to flood control, combining structural measures such as investments in river flood
                         protection infrastructure and storm drain networks with non-structural measures such as the
                         strengthening of natural embankments, the rehabilitation of a natural drainage, flood risk monitoring,
                         and an advanced warning system.

                         Component 1: River Flood Risk Reduction (US$ 58.99 million). The first component focuses on
                         reducing the vulnerability of people in the existing urban area to floods from Hongshui River and its
                         tributaries, the Beizhijiang and Longdong Rivers. The Project will help the City strengthen about
                         16.8km of embankments, including pumping stations and sluice gates, and integrate them in urban
                         parks were suitable to reduce risks and allow for future improvements of infrastructure. Because
                         embankments in some areas provide an inadequate level of protection, the Project will invest in
                         strengthening existing embankments and upgrading flood related infrastructure to protect the city to a
                         minimum of 1 in 50 year floods. The Project will also install and set up an integrated flood control
                         and water quality monitoring system..
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2: Improving Urban Drainage (US$ 66.59 million). Component 2 will focus on
                         improving drainage in selected areas of the city. The component will finance investments in
                         improving expanding and separating the sewage and storm drainage networks in the existing urban
                         area of Laibin City. Different options to reduce the potential clogging of the system by debris and
                         waste will be evaluated and implemented. An indirect benefit of expanding the sewer network and
                         separating the drainage and sewage lines will be to improve wastewater collection by the WWTP,
                         which is only operating at 66% capacity now and receives only about 69% of the actual wastewater
                         produced in the downtown area. The component will also pilot innovative approaches to improve
                         natural drainage and reduce urban runoff by increasing vegetation cover along roadways,
                         experimenting with more porous road surfaces, including waste bins and collection points, and
                         rehabilitating the embankments and river environment along the Caoxiegou Stream.

                         Component 3: Technical Assistance and Capacity Building (US$ 0.50 million).Technical assistance
                         and capacity building activities will be directly linked to the overall objectives of the Project and the
                         infrastructure investments proposed under Components 1 and 2. The aim is to improve the City’s
                         overall capacity for integrated flood risk management as well as capital investment planning and
                         asset management. To better understand the water system and flood risks, the Project will help gather
                         and systematize information on the City’s natural and built environment, including data on the City’s
                         hydrology, meteorology, and socio-economic and demographic profi le. Spatial technologies will be
                         used to identify hazards, exposure and vulnerabilities, which will be translated into maps to guide

                                                                       Page 2 of 9
                         planning and policies to reduce risks. Furthermore, a flood warning, emergency preparedness and
                         response training has been identified that will be piloted in the City and may be replicated in other
                         cities at high-risk of flooding. The Project will assist Laibin City in developing programs to sustain
Public Disclosure Copy




                         public infrastructure assets such as water treatment facilities, sewer lines and urban roads. The
                         assistance will focus on maintenance, rehabilitation, and replacement with the goal to ensure proper
                         operation and extend the life of infrastructure assets to the benefit of Laibin City and its people.

                         Component 4: Project Management and Supervision (US$ 1.30 million). This component includes
                         training and services to support the City with: (i) project management, including financial
                         management, procurement, contract supervision and reporting; (ii) outcome monitoring and
                         evaluation; (b) construction supervision; and (c) the supervision of the implementation of
                         environmental management and resettlement action plans.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented in urban area of Laibin City. Laibin is located in central Guangxi
                         Zhuang Autonomous Region (Guangxi) in southern China. The City district has a population of
                         300,000 people, while the entire county has a population of 2.3 million in 2010. Two rivers flow
                         through the city, the Hongshui and Beizhijiang Rivers. Mountains, hills and river valleys make up the
                         main types of landforms of the city, and its terrain slopes downward from the north to the south.
                         Plains and mesas constitute the flat and broad central region of the city where the project is located.

                         Laibin City is situated in the subtropical monsoon climate, and the tropic of cancer passes through
                         the south of the city proper. It enjoys moderate weather and boasting sufficient rainfall. The average
                         temperatures during the hottest July and the coldest January are respectively 28.6C and 10.9C (83.5
                         and 51.6F). Average precipitation is around 1,344mm of which over 70% of the annual rainfall is
                         concentrated between June and August. The project will be in the Xingbin District featuring with flat
                         terrain.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Songling Yao (EASCS)
                         Feng Ji (EASCS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              During project preparation, the team conducted
                          BP 4.01                                             the environmental assessment of all physical
                                                                              investment under Component 1 and Component
                                                                              2. As in similar urban and flood projects, adverse
                                                                              environmental impacts are mostly related to the
                                                                              construction phase, such as noise, dust, spoil
                                                                              disposal, social and traffic disturbance, and
                                                                              reversible.

                                                                              Well-established measures and engineering
                                                                              designs will minimize and mitigate these impacts.
                                                                              Major impacts of the project are related to
                                                                              disposal of spoil from dredging canals. The
                                                                              impacts can be managed with appropriate and



                                                                      Page 3 of 9
                                                                         well-known measures and standard operational
                                                                         codes and practices, based on experiences in
                                                                         similar projects in China and worldwide.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         Given the overall level of impacts and safeguard
                                                                         risk, this is a category B projects
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No              The project is mainly in the city’s urban and
                                                                         peri-urban area disturbed by intensive human
                                                                         activities. The project will not convert, degrade or
                                                                         restore any natural habitats or critical natural
                                                                         habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No              The project will not finance activities that would
                                                                         involve significant conversion or degradation of
                                                                         critical forest areas or related critical natural
                                                                         habitats as defined under the policy.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No              TThe project will not lead to purchase nor use of
                                                                         pesticides. This policy is not triggered.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No              Based on the available information, no physical
                         BP 4.11                                         cultural resources will be affected by the project.
                                                                         Chance-find procedures has been included in the
                                                                         EMP.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No              The social team member conducted IP screening
                                                                         in the project area with assistance from the social
                                                                         consultant and the local authorities. The project is
                                                                         located in urban and peri-urban area of Laibin
                                                                         City, where the ethnic minority screening found
                                                                         some individual ethnic minority people scattered
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         in seven villages, and there is no any ethnic
                                                                         minority village or community found. So the IP
                                                                         policy is not triggered.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes             The Project, along with another linked project,
                         4.12                                            will involve the permanent acquisition of 34 ha of
                                                                         land and the temporary acquisition of 13 ha of
                                                                         land. Resettlement activities due to permanent
                                                                         land acquisition will entail relocating 173
                                                                         households with 773 persons and 8 entities with
                                                                         670 employees, and affect 2,014 people in total in
                                                                         the Project area.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No              The project will not finance construction or
                                                                         rehabilitation of any dams as defined under this
                                                                         policy.
                         Projects on International        No               Not applicable.
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No               Not applicable.
                         7.60



                                                                 Page 4 of 9
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               Environment.

                             Environmental Assessments (EAs) has been conducted by the Environmental Protection Research
                             Academy of Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region (accredited with First Grade in EA) in
                             accordance with China’s legal and EA policy frameworks as well as World Bank safeguard
                             policies and procedures. The assessment concluded that the Project will have an overall positive
                             environmental impact and will contribute to reducing flood risk and water pollution in selected
                             areas of Laibin city. The major negative impacts are construction related impacts such as dust,
                             noise, wastewater, spoil disposal and disturbance to local communities such as traffic management
                             and transportation of construction materials. The construction-related impacts are site-specific and
                             reversible in nature, and effective mitigation measures exist to mitigate and minimize these
                             impacts. In addition, the project will have minor noise and odor impacts from the operation of
                             pumping stations financed under the project.

                             Social

                             The project triggered the OP 4.12 and the social assessment also included linked projects, such as
                             investments along the middle section of Hongshui River Dike, the Chengdong WWTP, remaining
                             sections of Beijingzhijiang Dike, and the Laibin Solid Waste Landfill.

                             The Project and linked projects, will involve the permanent acquisition of 34 ha of land and the
                             temporary acquisition of 13 ha of land. Permanent land acquisition will require the resettlement of
                             173 households or 773 people, 8 entities with 670 employees, and affect a total of 2,014 people in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the Project area.

                              The Bank also reviewed involuntary resettlement activities that took place prior to project
                              identification to ensure that the resettlement is consistent with the objectives of Bank policy. No
                              outstanding or legacy issues were found related to these activities. Resettlement that took place
                              prior to project will nevertheless be further monitored during project implementation and
                              correctives measures will be taken if needed.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                               n/a
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                               Environment.
                              Different alternatives were considered as part of the feasibility studies and the EA to reduce and
                              minimize environmental impacts. These included the selection of natural rehabilitation of
                              embankments instead of concrete embankments; low-impact green drainage alternatives compared
                              drainage pipe networks, rehabilitation of canals instead of engineering solutions, and pipe
                              installation method. The EA also analyzed the “without project? scenario.




                                                                        Page 5 of 9
                           Social

                           Various measures were considered to avoid, mitigate, and minimize potential land acquisition and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           relocation of houses, shops, enterprises, and infrastructure facilities in project planning and design,
                           such as narrowing project occupation area, using concrete dike to replace earth dike, etc.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            Environment.

                           Construction-related Impacts. Environmental Codes of Practices (ECOPs) have been prepared to
                           address these general impacts. Specific site mitigation measures have been developed to minimize
                           the potential impacts caused by the construction activities. Though EA confirmed that no physical
                           cultural resources will be affected by construction activities, Chance Find Procedures have been
                           included in the EMP.

                           Noise and Odor. Noise impact will be reduced to the acceptable level by the provision of acoustic
                           barriers and noise insulation facilities, and by optimizing construction activities and by banning
                           night-time construction. Noise and odor from the operation of pumping stations will be minimized
                           by proper siting and by the provision of buffer zones and by the using of low noisy machinery.
                           An EMP has been developed for the Project as a stand-alone document. The EMP includes
                           mitigation measures and ECOPs, monitoring and supervision arrangements, institutional
                           arrangements for the implementation of the EMP, capacity building, and estimated budget of the
                           mitigation measures and monitoring programs for both the construction and operation phases. The
                           EMP also proposes (i) site-specific mitigation measures both for construction and engineering
                           design, and management measures to address broader social impacts such as traffic management
                           for transport of construction materials; (ii) remedial measures in case of non-compliance by the
                           contractors. Mitigation measures and ECOPs for the construction phase will be entered into
                           bidding documents and supervised by relevant institutions.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Social

                           A project resettlement team was established to conduct resettlement plan under guidance from the
                           TT, and a Resettlement Plan (RP) was prepared and reviewed by the TT. Resettlement measures
                           for avoiding and/or mitigating the adverse impacts as well as for livelihood rehabilitation and
                           economic development opportunities were explored in the RP as social development objective of
                           the project design.

                           •         Compensation: Compensation package was developed according to regulations of state,
                           provincial level and municipal level. i) house compensation: Urban household house
                           compensation is clearly defined not lower than market price; rural house compensation is based on
                           replacement price; and all households were provided two compensation options of cash
                           compensation and replacement house. ii) enterprise compensation will be in line with professional
                           evaluation; iii) all relocation of household, enterprises, businesses will be provided with transition
                           fee and movement allowance; iv) land compensation: permanent land acquisition will follow the
                           Land Law, while temporary land acquisition will follow the municipal land regulation; any land
                           taking will be depended upon land acquisition agreement with land owner and land user; v) public
                           facilities compensation will be based on professional evaluation; etc.


                                                                       Page 6 of 9
                           •        Household relocation: Two options were provided to the affected households, who could
                           choose by themselves. The RP has listed some sites of replacement house to be built for the
                           affected households, and mentioned that some commercial departments would be purchased for
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the affected households as a measure of housing restoration. The RP also included measures to
                           ensure the replacement house to be built up on time, including financial, administrative measures,
                           as well as monitoring measure.
                           •        Household livelihood restoration: Livelihood measures include cash compensation,
                           providing commercial business building area at an area of 40 square meter per person, social
                           security program, job training, subsidies in transition period.
                           •        Restoration of enterprises/businesses: With fully disbursed compensation, the seven
                           owners will restore their enterprises/businesses, whose workers will get subsides for six months in
                           the transition period.
                           •        Restoration of public facilities: With full compensation disbursement under an agreement
                           between the PMO and relevant owners, the public facilities will be restored by the owners
                           themselves.
                           •        Restoration of temporary land use: about 13 ha land will be temporarily used, and all the
                           land will be fully restored under supervision by district land bureau in line with national
                           regulation, and returned to the land user according to land use agreement signed prior to land use.
                           •        Resettlement costs will be fully financed by PMO, and are included in the total cost of the
                           Project. District governments will implement specific resettlement activities. The PMO
                           committed the full ownership and responsibility for implementation of the RP.
                           •        Monitoring & Evaluation: RP implementation of the PMO will be monitored and
                           measured by an external monitor, WB and the municipal government. The PMO will be
                           responsible for providing internal resettlement progress report. The Bank's task team and the PMO
                           will jointly monitor and evaluate the emerging resettlement results and corrective actions will be
                           recommended and taken as appropriate and necessary.

                           Laibin has established a Project Leading Group, chaired by the vice mayor, and a project
                           management office to supervise the preparation and implementation of the project. The Project
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Management Office (LPMO) has received the Bank's Safeguards training during project. EMP
                           trainings will be provided during project implementation. Experienced consultants and
                           supervision engineers will be hired for the supervision and monitoring of the EMP
                           implementation.

                           The key social risks relate to absence of experiences on World Bank project by Laibin municipal
                           government, and availability of counterpart fund for resettlement. To address the social risks, the
                           Laibin Government established a PMO, assigned dedicated staff, and conducted training program
                           for the staff to strengthen the capacity; and committed to prioritize resettlement financing for the
                           project. The TT will obtain formal commitment on the fund availability from Binyang District
                           Government prior to the project appraisal. Capacity building on resettlement was planned in the
                           RP. The social consultant to be engaged will provide the PMO with training program and other
                           assistance to strengthen the capacity of resettlement implementation.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Environment.
                           In accordance with Bank Safeguard policies and Chinese regulations, public consultations were
                           conducted from July to October, 2012, including public consultation meetings and questionnaire
                           survey with project-affected persons and other stakeholders.Their opinions and concerns have


                                                                      Page 7 of 9
                           been taken into account in the EA process and Project design. The EA and the EMP were locally
                           disclosed on September 24, 2012 through announcements in the Laibin City newspaper and
                           posting on the local DRC’s website. The EA safeguard documents were sent to the Bank InfoShop
Public Disclosure Copy




                           for disclosure on October 30, 2012.

                           Social
                           Hohai University, as social consultant, and the PMO conducted extensive consultation meetings at
                           the municipal level, district level, communities/villages. Project stakeholders such as urban
                           authorities and the affected communities/villagers were consulted on resettlement in various
                           channels, consisting of TV, newspaper, meeting, interview, questionnaire, and focus groups. The
                           affected households and village committees, enterprise owners have been informed, investigated
                           and consulted, and their concerns have been integrated into project design and resettlement
                           planning. Further consultation and grievance addressing will be conducted during implementation.
                           The RP cover detailed monitoring plan for the resettlement implementation. The PMO committed
                           the full ownership and responsibility for implementation of the RP.

                           The RP was disclosed in accordance with the Bank’s policy, with an announcement on Laibin
                           Daily Newspaper on October 17, 2012, which is accessible to general public. Information
                           disclosure on project resettlement was distributed in the affected communities/villages during the
                           resettlement impact investigation and planning process. The RP was disclosed to Infoshop on
                           October 30, 2012.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      17-Dec-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   30-Oct-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            24-Sep-2012
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      17-Dec-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   30-Oct-2012
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            24-Oct-2012
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment


                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Paul Procee
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:         Name: Mark R. Lundell (SM)                          Date: 05-May-2013




                                                                        Page 9 of 9
