                                                                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                             APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA362
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Nov-2011

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        Nigeria                                  Project ID:                       P120798
                              Project Name:                   Nigeria States Health Program Investment Credit (P120798)
                              Task Team Leader:               Dinesh M. Nair
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 11-Nov-2011                                    Estimated Board Date:             16-Feb-2012
                              Managing Unit:                  AFTHE                                    Lending Instrument:               Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                         Health (75%), Sub-national government administration (20%), Public administration- Health (5%)
                              Theme:                          Health system performance (25%), Population and reproductive health (25%), Other public sector governance
                                                              (25%), Child health (25%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                        Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                              0.00
                                   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                               150.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                     150.00
                              Environmental Category:         B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              To increase use of high impact maternal and child health interventions at selected public health facilities in the project states.

                              3. Project Description

                              Introduction: The NSHPIC is structured around 2 key pillars: (i) paying for results, including through DLI and rewarding performance of front line
Public Disclosure Copy




                              workers, and (ii) providing technical assistance for institutional strengthening at state, LGA and facility levels to build capacity to manage and
                              operate the RBF approach.

                               2        Project Participating States: The project will work with the federal government and in three states: Adamawa, Nasarawa and Ondo
                              States. The selected states are committed to health system reform. All three have signaled a strong commitment to the RBF approach: the
                              Governors of each state have furnished to the Bank a Policy Endorsement which provides assurances inter alia on (i) the adoption of the Results
                              Based Financing approach for this project and the principles behind the Performance Based Financing, Decentralized Financing and
                              Disbursement Linked Indicator payments; (ii) DLI to be applied at state and LGA levels; (ii) establishing a State Primary Health Care Development
                              Agency or similar agency to act as a Purchaser and keep it fully staffed; (iii) ensuring that administrative structures with sufficient autonomy are
                              available at all levels to successfully implement RBF.

                              Project Design: The project will have two components and will be rolled out in a phased manner:

                               Component 1: Program Financing: Total US$125.3M for 3 states over 5 years

                                Sub Component 1A (Total # US$87M): PBF at Primary and Secondary Care Facilities. This component will (i) enable performance-based
                              payments to health facilities (1 PHC facility in each Ward; 1 General Hospital in each PBF LGA and one Secondary hospital per State) on a per-
                              service-delivered basis after adjusting for quality of care for those services that are vital for achieving the health-related MDGs. (ii) Prior to
                              graduating to a Performance Based Financing (PBF) arrangement facilities will receive operational support for strengthened supervision and for
                              following protocols (Decentralized Facility Financing).
                                Sub Component 1B LGA Support (US$14.6M): This sub-component will enable payments to the LGAs for achievement on the LGA Score Card
                              designed to measure performance on actions necessary to reduce of current inefficiencies.
                                Sub Component 1C: Support to the State (US$23.3M): This sub-component will enable payments to the states for meeting State Disbursement
                              Linked Indicators (DLIs). Support to the state will be provided through a program for results approach based on a DLI matrix. The DLIs will
                              comprise both processes and outputs, with targets for all 5 years and indicative dollar values, against which annual disbursements will occur.

                              Component 2 Technical Support (US$25 M for 3 states over 5 years):

                                Sub Component 2 A (US$15 million): Technical Assistance for RBF. The TA component will: (i) provide intensive technical support to build
                              institutional capacity to manage the RBF program; and (ii) support the long-term sustainability of this approach by ensuring a rigorous program of
                              learning. The TA component will provide funds for: (i) capacity building for introducing RBF approaches; (ii) independent verification of
                              achievement; (iii) fund holder activities; (iv) project management; (v) training, process and protocol development; and (vi) knowledge sharing and

                                                                                                                                                                          Page 1 of 4
                               dissemination, consultations, policy dialogue and institutional learning.

                                Sub Component 2 B: Monitoring and Evaluation (US$10 million) to support strengthening of M&E, including impact evaluation. This component
                               will finance: (i) system strengthening for improved routine data collection and utilization; and (ii) learning through a rigorous impact evaluation to
                               capture the effects of the program.

                               4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)
Public Disclosure Copy




                               Primary and Secondary Health Care Facilities in the States of Adamawa, Nasarawa and Ondo.


                               5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                               Alexandra C. Bezeredi (AFTOS)
                               Caroline Mary Sage (AFTCS)
                               Joseph Ese Akpokodje (AFTEN)

                               6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                      Yes        No      Explanation
                               Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                   ✖                 The proposed activities in component 1 of the program may involve minor
                                                                                                       repairs to and rehabilitation of existing buildings and health facilities. No new
                                                                                                       construction will be funded. The biggest issue the project will need to deal with
                                                                                                       from an environmental perspective is Waste. Thus, rather than preparing a full
                                                                                                       scale ESMF, a Health Care Waste Management (HCWM) Plan has been
                                                                                                       prepared and disclosed by the proponent. The HCWM plan was based on
                                                                                                       review of the existing Nigeria National Medical Waste Management Plan of
                                                                                                       2005 and has been disclosed in-country and at World Bank Infoshop prior to
                                                                                                       appraisal.
                               Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                      ✖
                               Forests OP/BP 4.36                                               ✖
                               Pest Management OP 4.09                                          ✖
                               Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                           ✖
                               Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                    ✖
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                              ✖      The Project does not involve nor will it finance land acquisition; the minor
                                                                                                       rehabilitation and repair works are at existing hospitals/clinic sites.
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                        ✖
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                        ✖
                               7.50
Public Disclosure Copy




                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                            ✖

                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                  Environmental Assessment OP4.01 is triggered given concerns around the handling of medical waste. It is key that communities in targeted
                                  LGAs are properly informed about the project and that systematic consultations are undertaken in preparation of the HCWM Plan. Other social
                                  issues raised by the project are being tackled in a range of ways.

                                   Environmental Safeguards:

                                   The NHSPIC is not expected to involve any civil works other than rehabilitation of existing buildings. Potential adverse environmental and
                                  social impacts are expected to be minor, site specific, non cumulative and relatively easy to mitigate. Accordingly, in terms of Environmental
                                  Assessment, the program would be categorized as B. The programs triggers World Bank Safeguards Policy OP 4.01 on Environmental
                                  Assessment as program related activities would generate health care wastes including sharps.

                                   Issues: Currently, systems for the management of hospital waste are poorly developed at all levels, including secondary hospitals. There is no
                                  consistent practice of segregation of hospital waste, burial pits are not built according to accepted standards, and waste is burned in the open in
                                  some cases. A study on waste management practices conducted during the preparation of the Nigeria: HIV/AIDS Medical Waste Management
                                  Plan (2008) found the following problems with current medical waste management practices at health facilities in Nigeria:

                                    #      lack of waste generation data
                                    #      inadequate waste treatment and disposal equipment
                                   #       inadequate knowledge of waste management practices among health workers and community members
                                    #      lack of code of conduct and technical guidelines for proper waste management, resulting in poor practices at health facilities and
                                  dumpsites

                                   The study identified a need for (i) strict enforcement of existing provisions; (ii) capacity building of health care workers at all levels; (iii) creation
                                  of greater awareness in communities of the need for and importance of proper management of medical wastes; and (iv) the establishment of a
                                  better environmental management system.
                                                                                                                                                                                Page 2 of 4
                           Social Safeguards:

                             Issues: The project aims to address many of the key constraints communities face in accessing health care services, including:
                             #        Low utilization rates and lack of demand for services: Poor quality of care and lack of information leads to poor utilization of services,
                           particularly for the poor and for women. They are then forced to either forego care or seek care at private facilities, at significant out-of-pocket
                           cost.
Public Disclosure Copy




                             #        Lack of information: Communities are poorly informed about the services available at their health facility, and what they need to pay
                           for them. Communities lack information on resources given to public health facilities by various sources.
                            #         Inability to express voice and seek redress for complaints: Despite the poor levels of service delivery, opportunities for communities to
                           voice their needs and grievances are limited. Combined with their ignorance of their health entitlements vis-avis the public health facility,
                           communities are unable to hold the health system accountable for results.
                             #        Low participation in decisions related to health service delivery: While Ward Health Committees # meant to enhance community
                           participation in resource allocation decisions taken at the health facility and be responsive to community needs - have been set up, for the most
                           part their performance is uneven, the representativeness limited, and their responsibilities too narrowly defined.

                            In addition, the project seeks to mitigate RBF-specific risks. These risks include: (i) favoring service delivery to easier to reach populations and
                           not targeting those who are most in need; (ii) focusing on delivering incentivized services to the detriment of other equally important health
                           programs; and (iii) involuntary participation in selected health services, particularly in the context of the supply-side RBF proposed in the project.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                           Project interventions (described below) are expected to provide long-term and sustainable solutions to the safeguards issues identified above.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                           Project Interventions to address Social Issues:

                             It is important to note that RBF is structured to improve quality and accountability at different levels of the health system: money will only be
                           disbursed based on specific agreed results that will be verified by third parties; and the funds thus made available are earmarked for
                           improvements in the quality and availability of services and medicines. NSHPIC further aims to do the following: (i) enhance participation by
                           reactivating facility/ward development committees with clearly defined roles in facility planning and budgeting resources, including performance
                           incentives to staff; (ii) increase transparency in health sector resource allocation/budgeting and expenditures by disclosing such information in a
                           Citizens# Charter and information board displayed at each facility and at the LGA level; (iii) enhance social accountability through community
                           validation of facility performance, feedback and grievance redressal systems and (iv) increase awareness and access to information by
                           implementing a targeted multi-media strategy to disseminate information to communities on availability and cost of services at their health
                           center, thereby generating greater demand for services available at public facilities.

                             The project will maintain a pro-poor focus by: The project will maintain a pro-poor focus by: (i) Geographically targeting interventions to states
                           with high poverty levels; (ii) Targeting groups most vulnerable to avertable mortality and morbidity, such as women and children; (iii) Increasing
                           the availability of basic primary health services free of cost, thereby increasing access to such services to the poorest; and (iv) Adjusting
                           incentive payments to favor geographically remote facilities, and so raising the stakes and rewards for service providers located among remote
                           underserved communities.
                             The geographic targeting of certain vulnerable groups will help to mitigate the risk of RBF programs missing the most underserved. Project
Public Disclosure Copy




                           outcomes will be monitored through a variety of carefully designed tools that will measure the accessibility, quality and affordability of services
                           being provided at project health facilities. In addition, the planned surveys will use a sample size sufficient to report results for DO 1-4
                           disaggregated by quintile.

                             Project Interventions to address Environmental Issues: The project will (a) apply the necessary safeguard requirements at primary care facility
                           level; (b) leverage the PBF modality to provide monetary incentives to individual hospitals, clinics and health workers for conforming to good
                           HCWM practices and penalize them for non-compliance; (c) draw upon the HCWM plan of the Nigeria HIV/AIDS Program Development Project
                           II. As part of the project, a HCWM plan has been developed to provide guidance on processes that the implementing agencies (Federal, States,
                           Local Government Authorities, and Healthcare Facilities Managements) will follow to ensure the protection of healthcare workers, wastes
                           handlers, and the community from the harmful impacts of hazardous healthcare wastes and to maximize project compliance with international
                           and national environmental regulations and best practices. Following the clearance of the final document by FGN, the Bank will disclose the
                           revised regulations and assist Nigeria with country-wide dissemination if so desired.

                            The PBF modality implemented under the NSHPIC will incentivize all levels of the health system to support the achievement of environmental
                           safeguards:

                            #         PBF will pay clinics for proper health waste management and penalize those who do not have proper facilities and follow proper
                           protocols. Furthermore, clinics will be provided with standards for pit construction including fencing and locked gate, burying instructions and a
                           ban on open pit burning.

                            #        PBF promotes an important public health intervention by paying clinics for outreach resulting in more households using pit latrines.
                           The project will also ensure that health workers provide accepted international instructions for how latrines are to be built.

                            #       Part of the bonus payments to both DFF and PBF will be utilized for rehabilitation and maintenance of PHC facilities and hospitals,
                           such as painting, fixing leaks, roofing, covering verandas and waiting areas, fixing plumbing and electricity.

                             #        Instructions will be given to participating facilities that more substantial activities must be vetted by SPHCDA and the Bank.
                           Furthermore, in such cases, the facility will be urged to apply directly to the HIV/AIDS project for funding if necessary (since additional funds are
                           available under that project for HCWM upgrades at facility-level). Once funding is approved, the ESMF and oversight arrangements approved
                           for the HIV/AIDS project will come into operation.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                            and implement the measures described.

                                                                                                                                                                     Page 3 of 4
                              Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              Nigeria has demonstrated its commitment to mitigating adverse social and environmental impacts in the implementation of a range of World
                              Bank projects. There are adequate legal and institutional frameworks in the country to ensure compliance with World Bank safeguards policies.
                              In 2007, the government established the National Medical Waste Management Policy. The policy stipulates that waste generated by both public
                              and private medical institutions in Nigeria must be safely handled and disposed of by these institutions, and provides guidelines and a rollout
                              plan for medical waste management activities at medical institutions.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
Public Disclosure Copy




                               on potentially affected people.
                              Key stakeholders include: (i) poor and vulnerable groups: a large proportion of the population in the selected project states is poor (71.73% in
                              Adamawa, 61.59% in Nasarawa and 42.14% in Ondo in 2004) and project interventions target vulnerable groups such as women and children
                              who face a disproportionate risk of mortality and morbidity due to avertable causes; (ii) state and local governments, that will receive substantial
                              financial, technical and capacity building support through the project to enhance the availability and quality of health services; (iii) civil society
                              organizations, such as the Ward Development and Facility Management Committees and other NGOs/CSOs, that will have an opportunity to
                              participate in the mechanisms established by the project to monitor health system performance and hold it accountable; (iv) the government at
                              the federal level, which will also receive financing and support for selected project activities, as well as learn from the experience of the project
                              and plan to scale it up in other states; and (v) the donor community, that will learn valuable lessons on output-based financing through the
                              careful design and monitoring of the NSHPIC experience, to be replicated elsewhere.

                            B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                            Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                              Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                               Yes
                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                  31-Oct-2011
                              Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                              21-Nov-2011
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                               21-Nov-2011
                              For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                              Directors
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                            disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                            C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                              Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                   Yes [     ]       No [    ]          NA [   ]

                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?                   Yes [     ]       No [    ]          NA [   ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language           Yes [     ]       No [    ]          NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for        Yes [     ]       No [    ]          NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?                   Yes [     ]       No [    ]          NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard         Yes [     ]       No [    ]          NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same             Yes [     ]       No [    ]          NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Signed and submitted by:                                                 Name                                                        Date
                            Task Team Leader:                    Dinesh M. Nair                                                                  28-Nov-2011
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:     Dinesh M. Nair (RSA)                                                            30-Nov-2011
                            Comments:
                            Sector Manager:                      Benjamin P. Loevinsohn (SM)                                                     28-Nov-2011
                            Comments:




                                                                                                                                                                         Page 4 of 4
