                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                  Report No.: ISDSC999

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Sep-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            China                            Project ID:       P129401
                            Project Name:       Guiyang Rural Roads Project (P129401)
                            Task Team           Wenlai Zhang
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           22-Apr-2013                      Estimated         09-Jan-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      EASCS                            Lending           Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector:             Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (100%)
                            Theme:              Rural services and infrastructure (80%), Trade facilitation and market access
                                                (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                              Amount
                              Borrower                                                                       151.52
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                          150.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Total                                                                          301.52
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The development objective of the Project is to provide improved transport accessibility in Guiyang
                           through upgrading and rehabilitation of selected priority rural roads from the sector development
                           plan, and to build the maintenance capacity of Guiyang.
                           C. Project Description
                           The Project will partly support the implementation of the activities under the Guiyang's 12th Five-
                           Year-Plan for Rural Roads Development, with a particular focus on the upgrading/improvement and
                           rehabilitation of the county and township roads. The Project will also help build the capacity for rural
                           roads maintenance. It will include the following five components:
                                   Component A: Upgrading/improving of county and township roads. This component will
                           include two types of works: (1) upgrading one county road from Class IV to Class II; (2) improving
                         the lower class county and township roads to Class IV.
                                 Component B: Rehabilitation of county and township roads. This component is to
                         rehabilitate the deteriorated county and township roads.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Component C: Establishment of rural road maintenance bases. This component is to
                         establish two rural road maintenance bases and provide maintenance equipment.
                                 Component D: Establishment of overloading monitoring stations. This component is to
                         establish five overload monitoring stations, and provide weighing and monitoring equipment.
                                 Component E: Technical Assistance (TA). This component will include: (1) technical study
                         on rural road maintenance system; and (2) training program to build the capacity of the rural roads
                         sector of Guiyang.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the          safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The rural roads under this project are located in the suburbs area of Guiyang Municipality. Guiyang
                         covers 7 districts, 3 counties and 1 county-level city. The municipality boundaries span over 8,034
                         km2 area, located in a hilly and mountainous terrain with elevation ranging from 500 to 1,760 meters
                         above sea level. According to statistics in 2010, Guiyang has a total population of 4.32 million, of
                         which 1.38 million (about 32%) live in the rural areas.
                         At the end of 2011, the total length of rural roads in Guiyang was about 7,875km, which included
                         1,624 km county roads, 1,494 km township roads, 4,715 km village roads and 42 km dedicated roads.
                         The rural roads network in Guiyang is generally underdeveloped. The condition of rural roads,
                         mostly at Class IV or unclassified, was generally poor and with low quality of service. Existing
                         asphalt and cement concrete pavement has extensively deteriorated; and quite a number of roads are
                         unpaved. The poor road conditions caused much inconvenience and high travel cost for the villagers,
                         particularly in the mountainous areas.
                         The physical works under this project are mainly rehabilitation and upgrading of the existing rural
                         roads, therefore, the specific environmental, social and resettlement impacts may be minor.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Guiyang Municipal Government will maintain a Project Leading Group (PLG) headed by a
                         Vice-Mayor and with representation of the Secretary General of the Mayors' office and the related
                         government agencies, to provide oversight and to coordinate the implementation of the Project and
                         ensure the availability of the funds and other resources needed for the Project. As a readily
                         established office that has been managing the first Guiyang Transport Project, the Guiyang World
                         Bank funded Project Management Office (GPMO) will be maintained to handle the day-to-day
                         project management on behalf of PLG.
                         The Guiyang Municipal Transport Bureau (GMTB) will be responsible for managing the
                         implementation of the Project under the oversight of PLG and GPMO. It will form a Guiyang Rural
                         Roads Construction Office (GRRCO) to handle the day-to-day implementation management. Each
                         of the project counties will form a branch construction office, under the management and supervision
                         of GRRCO, to be responsible for the implementation of the roads in the respective counties.

                         The implementing agency's capacity for safeguards activities will be strengthened during the
                         preparation and implementation of the project, through (1) designating dedicated and experienced
                         staff to manage safeguards implementation; (2) making sound institutional mechanism which enables
                         the safeguards staff to closely work with the technical staff; (3) hiring qualified and experienced
                         environment and social consultants to prepare the safeguards frameworks and action plans, to
                         provide training to the staff of implementing agency, and to monitor the implementation of
                         safeguards measures.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Jun Zeng (EASCS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Ning Yang (EASCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies             Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes          Physical activities to be supported by the project
                           BP 4.01                                     would include improvement and rehabilitation
                                                                       of rural roads, building of two rural road
                                                                       maintenance bases and five overload monitoring
                                                                       stations. The project roads and associated
                                                                       overloading monitoring stations and
                                                                       maintenance depots will be selected from the
                                                                       roads pool of Guiyang Rural Roads 12th 5-
                                                                       Year-Plan. The specific locations of the works
                                                                       will be determined during project
                                                                       implementation. Because of its rehabilitation
                                                                       nature largely within existing right-of-way, the
                                                                       project would not require significant land
                                                                       acquisition or structure relocation, with the
                                                                       exception of a small number of roads that may
                                                                       require small land acquisition due to minor
                                                                       adjustments in curves. Though to a reduced
                                                                       extent, the implementation would cause limited
                                                                       impacts on the environment including soil
                                                                       erosion and subsequent water pollution, damage
                                                                       on vegetation and animals, and noise and dust
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       problems mainly during construction. Therefore
                                                                       the policy is triggered. The project is Category
                                                                       B for environmental purpose.
                                                                       Given the nature of the proposed works and
                                                                       their low potential environment impacts,
                                                                       Environmental Code of Practices (ECOPs) will
                                                                       be prepared for each type of investments
                                                                       (rehabilitation work, upgrading and
                                                                       improvement, overloading monitoring stations
                                                                       and maintenance depots). These ECOPs will be
                                                                       included as part of the design and construction
                                                                       practices to be followed by the contractors.
                                                                       ECOPs for those works involving significant
                                                                       expansion/upgrading of roads will include the
                                                                       procedures for preparation and review of
                                                                       investment/site specific EAs/EMPs to be
                                                                       developed during project implementation.
                                                                       The ECOPs are subject to public consultations
                                                                       and will be individually disclosed locally in
                                                                 Chinese and in the InfoShop prior to departure
                                                                 of the appraisal mission.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No    Considering the project nature, the project is
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 unlikely to cause any significant impacts on
                                                                 natural habitats. The policy is not triggered.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    The project will not involve forests and is
                                                                 unlikely to cause negative impacts on the
                                                                 quality of any forests. This policy is not
                                                                 triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The project will not involve use or procurement
                                                                 of pesticides. The policy is not triggered.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    The project is not anticipated to cause negative
                         BP 4.11                                 impacts on physical cultural resources. Chance-
                                                                 find procedure will be included in the EMF.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   15.43% of Guiyang population is ethnic
                                                                 minority people. Main ethnic minority groups in
                                                                 Guiyang are Miao, Buyi, Dong, Yi, Tujia and
                                                                 Gelao. The Bank team confirmed that these
                                                                 groups are IP groups as defined by the Bank's
                                                                 OP4.10 on Indigenous People, and it would be
                                                                 very likely that these ethnic minority groups
                                                                 present in or have collective attachment to the
                                                                 project area. Therefore, the Bank's OP4.10 is
                                                                 triggered, and an Indigenous People
                                                                 Development Plan (IPDP) will be prepared.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   Land acquisition and structure relocation will be
                         4.12                                    unavoidable for this project, although some of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 the specific impacts might be minor due to the
                                                                 nature of the project. During the project
                                                                 preparation, specific roads/components could
                                                                 not be determined and therefore involuntary
                                                                 resettlement impact could only be determined
                                                                 during project implementation.
                                                                 Based on above mentioned information, the
                                                                 Bank team concluded that the Bank's OP 4.12
                                                                 on Involuntary Resettlement is triggered, and a
                                                                 Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be
                                                                 prepared in both Chinese and English. It should
                                                                 describe the overall legal framework, planning
                                                                 principles, Resettlement Action Plan (RAP)
                                                                 preparation and approval arrangement,
                                                                 procedures, compensatory and rehabilitation
                                                                 approach, consultation and participatory
                                                                 requirements, grievance redress mechanisms,
                                                                 and organizational and monitoring
                                                                 arrangements.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project will not involve any dams. The
                                                                                                                                 policy is not triggered.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The project will not involve any international
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            waterways. The policy is not triggered.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project is not located in disputed areas. The
                                 7.60                                                                                            policy is not triggered.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-May-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Not applicable.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Wenlai Zhang

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan (RSA) Date: 25-Sep-2012
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Mark R. Lundell (SM)                  Date: 18-Sep-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
