INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA902
b  Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-May-2012
0
1 1. BASIC INFORMATION
U)     1. Basic Project Data
0
0
.U,
Q      Country:               China                         Project ID:             P126210
.      Project Name:          Chongqing Urban Rural Integration Project II-Health (P126210)
Task Team Leader:      Shuo Zhang
Estimated Appraisal Date: 20-Feb-2012               Estimated Board Date:    14-Jun-2012
Managing Unit:         EASHH                        Lending Instrument:      Specific Investment Loan
Sector:                Health (100%)
Theme:                 Health system performance (100%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Financing Source                                                                       Amount
Borrower                                                                                  55.51
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                    100.00
Total                                                                                    155.51
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Is this a Repeater project? No
2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective is to improve the access of populations in selected non-metropolitan areas to County/District level hospital-
based services, raising the efficiency of service production and improving the quality of care in targeted hospitals.
3. Project Description
>N    The proposed Project, in response to a request from the Municipality of Chongqing, will primarily support construction and capacity building of
0- district/county level hospitals. The World Bank has been discussing with the Municipality the need for adopting an integrated approach under the
O      proposed Project, which includes addressing some of the "soft" constraints as well. The proposed Project will comprise three components
a)    covering the aspects discussed with the Municipality: (a) Strengthening Service Delivery Performance; (and b) Improvement of County/District
M     Level Health Services. Each of these is designed to address challenges facing the delivery of health services at the county-level: (a) insufficient
0     appropriately trained service providers, lack of information systems which provide relevant data for decision making, capacity to manage hospitals,
0     as well as pool referral system and care coordination among different levels; (b) shortage of service supply (in- and out-patient facilities) and (c)
Q      support to monitoring and evaluation, and project implementation not financed from other sources.
22     Strengthening Service Delivery Performance. In recognition that the lack of qualified medical professionals (which are key to improving delivery
capacity of rural health services) are currently a bottleneck to provision of rural health service, the proposed Project would also support increasing
the number of qualified health professionals at sites proposed for support under this Project. Focus of the training will be on management and
specialist training, covering topics such as (a) macro policy of hospital management and reform; (b) micro management of hospitals; and (c)
building of specialties and training of specialists. Since training plans for both rural and urban area general practitioners have been prepared and
will be invested by government, the proposed Project support will complement this effort. This component could also support piloting of efforts to
strengthen the referral system from village to County/District level and improve the coordination of care provision at different levels. Scaling up of
successful pilots being tested under the World Bank supported Rural Health Project will also be considered. It is commonly acknowledged that
one mechanism for increasing efficiency in the management of hospitals is having a modern management information system. The proposed sites
have varied capacities in this area, and CURIP II aims to support the efforts of municipal government as the pilot of a national program. In addition,
to reduce the gap in the provision of health care at the county level and rural areas, support for telemedicine is also being considered. This will
include not only the provision of necessary hardware and software, but also the preparation of guidelines, training of staff, and the establishment of
a network as well as development of programs on tele-diagnosis and/or tele-training. Supervision, monitoring and evaluation, and costs associated
with relevant technical assistance for this component is also financed.
Improvement of County/District Level Health Services. Health facilities in selected counties will be supported by civil works to increase access.
This will provide additional outpatient and bed space at the County/District level with the aim to provide quality and lower cost services in local rural
settings and thus reduce the crowding currently experienced in urban areas. Of the eight counties currently selected, only two are in the one-hour
economic circle, and these counties are located on the edge of the circle (one to the east, and one in the northwest), and of the remaining six, two
are located in the southeast wing, and four are located in the northeast wing. The construction will follow the international practice on health
facility design which takes into consideration of a) lifecycle planning; (b) flexible or adaptable designs; (c) energy efficient/green hospital design; (d)
therapeutic design approaches; and (e) sustainability. Aspects relating to institutional and capacity strengthening, monitoring and evaluation, as
well as management of the proposed Project (including technical support for procurement management, for ensuring implementation of relevant
mitigation plans for safeguards, energy efficient specialists to provide advice, and in telemedicine aspects to guide facilities in preparing for this
approach) is also supported.
Page 1 of 5


﻿4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)
The Counties/Districts proposed to receive support from the Project for construction of additional outpatient/inpatient capacity include Changkou,
Dianjiang, Tongnan, Fuling, Qianjiang, Wanzhou, Wushan, and Youyang.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
0-    Chongwu Sun (EASCS)
0
U      Zong-Cheng Lin (EASCS)
2     Yongli Wang (EASCS)
U,    Meixiang Zhou (EASCS)
0
Q      6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered?  Explanation (Optional)
.0     Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01  Yes       As indicated in the project description, one of the major proposed project
-o                                                    components will improve county-level health facilities in selected counties/districts
0.                                                    through civil works/ construction to increase access (including bed capacity),
thereby providing additional outpatient and bed space. Therefore, this policy is
triggered.
The environment specialist in the task team conducted a preliminary environmental
screening during the identification. It was noted that three of eight county-level
health facilities proposed for World Bank financing will be constructed within
existing hospital locations, and the remainder will be built on new sites, and
according to the information provided, are not special ecological and culturally
sensitive sites (natural habitat, protected area or physical cultural resources).
Potential environmental issues that will be addressed in the environmental impact
assessment (EIA) include: (a) construction related nuisances (e.g., dust, noise,
management of excavated soil and construction materials, etc.) associated with
the component one during the construction phase; and (b) wastewater
management and medical waste management during operation. Such impacts are
site-specific, unlikely to be significant or irreversible, and mitigation measures can
be readily designed with known engineering and good management practices.
Therefore, the project is proposed as a Category B project as per OP4.01.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No          The proposed Project activities are mainly in the urban setting and areas disturbed
by intensive human activities. According to the preliminary environmental
screening, there are no ecological sensitive areas and natural reserved. This policy
is not triggered.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No          The proposed Project does not involve forests resources. This policy is not
triggered.
Pest Management OP 4.09            No          The proposed Project will not lead to purchase or use of any pesticides. This policy
is not triggered.
0
U)     Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11  Yes    Based on the survey conducted in project preparation and social survey, the
identification of household graves has triggered this policy, and compensation and
mitigation measures are covered under the resettlement action plan. Chance-find
0                                                     procedures have been developed and incorporated in the EA and EMP.
 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    No          The policy is not triggered based on the screening undertaken by the Task Team,
no Indigenous Peoples as defined in OP4.10 are present in, or have collective
attachment to, the project areas.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12  Yes       The policy is triggered because there will be limited land acquisition in two of the
proposed project sites under component 2, Improvement of County/District Level
Health Facilities.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No          The proposed Project will not involve impacts to any dams in the project area. This
policy is not triggered.
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP  No  The proposed Project will not involve trans-boundary rivers. The policy is not
7.50                                           triggered.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60  No      The proposed Project is not located in any disputed areas. The policy is not
triggered.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant andlor irreversible impacts:
Based on the social and environmental screening at PCN stage and confirmed through further project safeguard instrument preparation, three
safeguards policies triggered are: OP4.01 Environmental Assessment, OP4.11 Physical Cultural Resources, and OP4.12 Involuntary
Resettlement. The project is classified as a Category B project as per OP4.01.
Environmental safeguards:
Page 2 of 5


﻿The project is anticipated to have substantial positive social benefits through improvement of public health facilities and infrastructure at district/
county level in Chongqing Municipality. The main physical activities include construction and expansion/renovation of health service facilities.
There are no special ecologically sensitive sites (natural habitat or protected area) in the project areas, given its urban context. There is also no
culturally sensitive site within the right-of-way of the project activities. The adverse environmental impacts are site-specific, and mitigation
measures can be readily designed with known engineering and good management practices.
The manageable environmental issues are mainly those related to construction activities, i.e., 1) construction related nuisances, e.g., dust,
noise, construction wastewater/solid waste management, etc.; 2) social impacts such as impacts on local communities, traffic safety,
O        accessibility of public, and construction safety at three existing hospital expansion/renovation. These impacts are well known in nature and can
be readily minimized and mitigated through proper project design and construction management practice. There is no potential large scale,
a       significant and/or irreversible impacts envisaged in the project.
0
Medical waste management is a major environmental issue in hospital and health service facilities. In view of well-known and potential
.n      harmfulness of medical wastes, the due diligence review of collection, temporary storage and disposal of the medical wastes from the
Q        CURIP!ahospitals was conducted. In the EA and EMP, mitigation measures to ensure effective collection and treatment and minimize the risks
-o       so as to avoid negative impact on environment were proposed and be adopted: (1) establishment of an effective medical waste management
responsibility system; (2) adequate management system for collection and storage of medical wastes; and (3) Strict adherence to related
regulations about transportation and disposal of medical wastes.
Social safeguards:
The location of household graves on the sites to be acquired has triggered Physical Cultural Resources, OP4.1 1. The compensation related to
these is covered in the resettlement action plan. Among all the eight project sites, all but two subprojects will have their civil works of mainly
hospital construction and ancillary facilities on existing land without the need for extra land acquisition. Only under Wushan and Wanzhou
subprojects there will be a total of 159.24 mu (less than 11 ha) of land to be permanently requisitioned from four rural villages (including 16 mu
(about one ha) of land for building access roads). There will be 13,590 square meters of houses to be demolished in two of the four villages.
Three small scale private companies and one state-owned company will be affected. The total project affected people will be 744 persons of
172 households. The World Bank Policy OP4.12 is triggered and a resettlement action plan has been prepared for Wanzhou and Wushan land
acquisition and resettlement respectively.
2. Describe any potential indirect andlor long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
The proposed project will help improve the health service facilities, especially at district/county level in Chongqing Municipality, thus to improve
health condition and welfare of local population which will contribute to the integrated urban and rural development of Chongqing. The project is
in line with the overall master plan of health sector development in Chongqing.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
Environmental: Alternative study was considered during the project feasibility study and EA preparation for more technical details, e.g. site
selection analysis for Tongnan, Dianjiang and Wushan Hospitals, technical options for medical wastewater treatment, as well as with and
without project option analysis. Comprehensive comparisons were analyzed with consideration of technical, economic, as well as
environmental and social factors.
Social: Based on the screening at PCN stage, alternatives related to land use were explored through optimizing locations and land use so as to
minimize social risks and adverse impacts. Comparisons were analyzed in the Feasibility Studies (FS) with comprehensive consideration of
0        technical, economic, as well as environmental and social factors.
U        Six out of eight subproject sites were selected with existing land for project civil works, and therefore those six subprojects do not need to
acquire extra land.
0      4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
and implement the measures described.
.U,
o         Environmental:
-O       The EA report, prepared by the client and their EA consultants, thoroughly addressed the potential environmental and social impacts envisaged
for the project, and developed adequate measures in the EMP to avoid, minimize, mitigate and compensatethe potential adverse impacts. The
preparation of EA documents followed the relevant national laws/regulations and guidelines, as well as Bank's safeguards policies and
environmental health and safety (EHS) guidelines.
A stand-alone EMP has been prepared based on the findings of the EIA report. The EMP detailed the environmental management and
supervision organizations and responsibilities, mitigation measures, training plan, monitoring plan, and budget estimates of EMP
implementation. It includes a set of Standard Environmental Specifications for contractors, which will be incorporated into bidding documents
and contracts to ensure effective implementation. It also includes specific measure and the plan to address specific issues, i.e., medical waste
management covering collection, storage, transportation and final disposal, including institutional arrangement and management
responsibilities.
Medical waste management is a major environmental issue in hospital and health service facilities. In view of well-known and potential
harmfulness of medical wastes, the due diligence review of collection, temporary storage and disposal of the medical wastes from the CURIP II
hospitals was conducted. In the EA and EMP, mitigation measures to ensure effective collection and treatment and minimize the risks so as to
avoid negative impact on environment were proposed and be adopted as follows:
(1) Establishment of an effective medical waste management responsibility system. A medical waste management responsibility system is to
be established in accordance with Requirements on Strengthening the Regulation over Management of Hazardous Waste and Medical Waste
jointly issued by the Ministry of Environmental Protection and the Ministry of Public Healthy [2011]19) . The Medical Waste Management
Regulations (No 380 by the State Council in June 2003) and Management Practices of Medical Waste from Medical and Health Institutions (No
36 by the Ministry of Health in 2003) will be strictly implemented. Integrated management will be put into place, covering all links from the
procurement, utilization of medical products to the classified collection, removal and treatment of medical waste, etc. The medical and health
institutions will be in charge of the classified collection and management of medical waste and its transference to concerned organizations for
centralized treatment. The medical waste treatment organization will be responsible for the harmless disposal. The legal persons of the
hospitals and medical waste treatment organizations will be the first responsible for preventing spread of diseases and environmental pollution
caused by medical wastes, particularly preventing the illegal processing and utilization.
Page 3 of 5


﻿(2) Adequate management system for collection and storage of medical wastes. A feasible plan for the collection and disposal of medical
wastes should be mapped out with full consideration given to such as factors as regional identity, economic strength, environmental condition,
technological practicability, cost validity, public attitudes, ecological and environmental conservation, etc. Practices have shown that in the
process of implementing the World Bank's EHS Guide, Medical Waste Management Regulations and Management Practices of Medical Waste
in Medical and Health Institutions, classified collection proves to be the basic guarantee of pollution prevention and harmless disposal. The
wastes stored in special containers with distinct marks and packed and stacked separately, shall be collected in a timely, convenient, safe and
quick manner. Infectious wastes, pathological wastes, injury wastes, drug wastes and chemical wastes cannot be mixed; the first three kinds of
wastes, once put in bags or containers, cannot be taken out again. When wastes fill 3/4 of the bags or containers, the bags or containers must
O        be sealed in an effectively tight way. The isolation and treatment of infectious wastes must be safe, effective and economical. Gloves and
protective clothing must be put on when dealing with infectious wastes and any potentially hazardous waste. Medical wastes mixed with various
components should be disposed in the same way as the most dangerous component is dealt with. Infectious wastes are thrown into classified
U)       garbage bags, confirmed by professionals and then isolated from non-infectious wastes. In accordance with related regulations, all containers
0
for infectious wastes shall be marked "Biological Hazard". Containers must be ensured to be anti-leak in the case of liquid infectious waste. All
.U       sharp objects shall be stored separately and be treated as medical wastes. Packing containers for sharp objects should be hard, anti-leak and
Q        puncture-proof. Needles and knives should be stored in anti-leak and puncture-proof containers with clear marks. Puncture-proof gloves should
be put on when dealing with sharp infectious wastes.
(3) Strict adherence to related regulations about transportation and disposal of medical wastes. The manifest system of medical waste
transportation will be strictly complied with. The manifest shall be filled by producing organization, transportation organization and receiving
organization respectively, giving reference to the serial number, characteristics, features, package types, major dangerous components,
taboos, emergence measures, the shipper, the model and plate number of the transfer vehicles, serial number of the manifest, etc. By strictly
controlling the whole process of transportation, the surface water and the ecological environment along the transportation route are saved from
accidental damages. The due diligence review shows that the chosen institutions for medical waste disposal are qualified. The disposal
facilities for medical waste disposal for CURIP!a hospitals are Fuling District Medical Waste Disposal Facility, Yongchuan District Medical
Waste Disposal Facility, Wanzhou District Medical Waste Disposal Facility, and Qianjiang District Medical Waste Disposal Facility, respectively.
The due diligence review was conducted which shows that the selected facilities for medical waste disposal are qualified.
Social: The Chongqing Project Management Office (PMO) has hired a professional institute to prepare the resettlement action plans (RAPs) to
handle land taking and house demolition which will take place in Wanzhou and Wushan. The task team will provide training and consultancy
services throughout the project cycle. The RAPs were reviewed by the World Bank team and deemed acceptable, and in line with the World
Bank social safeguards policy. The RAPs set detailed principles, standards and procedures as well as other crucial requirements for handling
involuntary resettlement. Implementation of the RAP will be monitored periodically, internally and externally, during the implementation stage of
the Project. To the team's knowledge, the PMO has rich experiences in implementing World Bank-supported projects and has successfully
handled land acquisition under other World Bank projects without receiving any complaints in the past. The PMO will assign a dedicated social
staff to coordinate social safeguards work, together with the local government departments responsible for local land requisition and house
demolition.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
on potentially affected people.
Environmental : EMP implementation will be managed by Chongqing PMO. The contractors and supervision engineers will be required to
assign qualified environmental staff to their team to ensure effective implementation of the EMP. During the EA preparation, public
consultations were conducted two times in accordance with the World Bank's OP4.01. Main public concerns have been addressed in the EA,
and necessary mitigation measures were developed in EMP and the project design. The EA documents have been locally disclosed prior to
disclosure at Bank's Infoshop on February 8, 2012. The updated documents have been locally disclosed on February 25th and disclosed at
0        Bank's InfoShop on March 8th.
a       Social: During the RAP preparation and FS, resettlement information dissemination campaign was carried out among rural villages and towns
U)      in the project areas. Public consultations were taken through surveys, interviews and meetings with future affected people. Information and
0
-U alternative options about the project, the plan of civil works, and the proposed locations of hospitals were shared with the public and key
.U)      stakeholders during consultation. The RAPs were disclosed locally in relevant hospital and government websites on February 9, 2012 and they
were disclosed in the InfoShop on February 10, 2012. The updated documents after safeguard review and clearance has been posted locally
on February 29th and disclosed at Bank's InfoShop on March 8th.
.      B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  13-Feb-2012
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                              02-Feb-2012
Date of submission to InfoShop                                               08-Feb-2012
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors
Resettlement Action PlanlFramework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  19-Jan-2012
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                              09-Feb-2012
Date of submission to InfoShop                                               10-Feb-2012
If the project triggers the Pest Management andlor Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Auditior EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Not applicable.
Page 4 of 5


﻿C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?  Yes [ X ]  No [  ]  NA [
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts on  Yes [ XI  No  NA
O       cultural property?
C-)
a)     OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the  Yes [ XNo  NA
0        plan?
.Ln    The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Q
o        Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?  Yes [ XNo     NA[
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language  Yes [ x  No  NA[
that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for  Yes [ X ]  No [  ]  NA [
the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?  Yes [ X ]  No [  ]  NA [
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard  Yes [ X ]  No [  ]  NA [
impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same  Yes [ x ]  No [  ]  NA [
been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?
Ill. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader:           Shuo Zhang
Approved By:
Sector Manager:             Name Toomas Palu (SM)                                    Date: 22-May-2012
0
)
0
0
Page 5 of 5


