                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA5741
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Sep-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Sep-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           India                              Project ID:    P114827
                            Project Name:      Second Gujarat State Highway Project (GSHP II) (P114827)
                            Task Team          Arnab Bandyopadhyay
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          16-Sep-2013                        Estimated   27-Nov-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASDT                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (98%), Central government
                                              administration (2%)
                            Theme(s):         Other rural development (67%), Pollution management and environmental health
                                              (33%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     400.00           Total Bank Financing:                 175.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                  145.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                     175.00
                              IBRD Guarantee                                                                              0.00
                              Special Financing                                                                          80.00
                              Total                                                                                     400.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to provide improved capacity, quality and safe road services to


                                                                       Page 1 of 10
                         users of the core road network of state highways in Gujarat, through institutional strengthening and
                         efficient contracting and financing strategies.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project has four components as described below. Of the Bank Assistance size of US $195
                         million, US$ 175 million will be allocated as IBRD loan. The balance US$ 20 million will be
                         allocated for the innovative financing component using an IBRD Guarantee as a credit enhancement
                         tool intended to facilitate the participation of the private sector as lenders to road infrastructure
                         projects in the state. The baseline financing structure would thus include an IBRD Loan and a
                         Guarantee.

                                 Component A: Highway Improvement Component (Total Cost: US$ 303 million): About
                         350 km of road upgradation and 275 km of road rehabilitation works are proposed to be included
                         under this component. The highway improvement component will incorporate safe infrastructure
                         designs, public transport and wayside facilities. The works will be undertaken through a mix of nine
                         input based item rate plus performance based maintenance contracts, one PPP Annuity Based
                         DBFMOT and one performance based OPRC Contract. This component consists of two sub-
                         components, A1 and A2.

                            Sub-Component A1 (US$ 183 million): This component will include upgrading and rehabilitating
                         of 435 km state highways through FIDIC based input contracts in nine contract packages. A
                         performance based maintenance period of 3 years has been included in all contracts, post
                         construction. This component would also include associated land acquisition and resettlement, utility
                         relocation, environmental management and supervision and quality assurance services.

                                  Sub-Component A2 (US$ 120 million): This component will include (i) 4 laning of 61 km of
                         State Highways through a pilot PPP Annuity based DBFMOT Concession at an estimated cost of US
                         $ 70 million, and (ii) initial upgradation and subsequent maintenance and operation of 130 km of
                         state highway network through a pilot Output and Performance based Road Contract (OPRC), at an
Public Disclosure Copy




                         estimated cost of US$ 50 million. In the PPP DBFMOT concession, spanning over 12 years, 40% of
                         the estimated construction cost will be paid during construction period, linked to specified
                         construction milestones. In addition there will be performance linked annuity payments during the
                         remaining concession period. The OPRC concession will span over 10 years, during which the
                         contractor will have to upgrade and subsequently maintain the road to pre-agreed performance
                         standards. The land acquisition and resettlement, environmental management, utility relocation and
                         design, independent monitoring and quality assurance services for these two contracts will be
                         included in this component.

                                  Component B: Sector Policy and Institutional Development Component (Total Cost: US$ 12
                         million). This component seeks to deepen the GSHP I efforts towards improving R&BD’s
                         operational capacity , and also augment the state’s capacity in two more critical areas, viz., Policy &
                         Planning and Knowledge Building, as detailed below. The priority areas of engagement have been
                         identified in various stakeholder and staff consultations and are closely aligned to the Gujarat
                         Infrastructure Development Vision 2020.

                         R&BD’s Operational Capacity Development sub-component will focus on eight critical areas, viz.,
                         design-review, planning, road asset management, contract management, monitoring & evaluation
                         (M&E), work zone and road safety, environment & social management (E&SM), and grievance
                         redressal. The project will assist in mainstreaming best practices in these focus areas through (i)


                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                         process-oriented improvements (including revision/introduction of new codes, manuals and
                         guidelines); (ii) enhanced HR strategies (improving R&BD capabilities in technical training,
                         development of management skills and strategic HR planning); and (iii) IT-based interventions,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         including on further enhancement of the GRMS for support to all aspects of roads planning,
                         management and safety.

                         Policy and Planning sub-component will assist in (i) updating the State’s Road Sector Policy (1996)
                         and framework for “Road Classification & Responsibility?; (ii) preparing a medium-term master plan
                         for the development of the state road network, in integration with planning for other transport modes
                         in the state; (iii) building capacity for better management of three thematic areas of focus, viz., PPP,
                         Road Safety and Governance & Accountability.

                         Knowledge Building sub-component will assist the ongoing initiatives of the Government of Gujarat
                         to better harness the potential of existing institutions – namely, Engineering Staff College (ESC) and
                         Gujarat Engineering Research Institute (GERI) – and to develop two Centres of Excellence for (i)
                         Road & Bridge Design Innovation and (ii) Construction Management. Specifically, the project will
                         support the preparation of “development blue-prints? for these knowledge-partner entities, through
                         institution-specific studies. The “blue prints? thus will focus on key aspects such as mission/role,
                         business plan/strategy, funding and collaborative linkages with government, other sector-
                         stakeholders and academic/research institutions.

                         The funding of US$12 million also provides for GAAP implementation costs and will cover
                         technical assistance (TA) and consulting services; training fees and/or training delivery costs and
                         associated consumables; purchase of advanced technology and equipment; facilitation of advanced
                         in-country and international training and/or HRD initiatives on advanced roads sector topics/skills/
                         knowledge.

                         Component C: Road Safety Management Component (Total Cost: US$ 22 million): This component
                         will strengthen the road safety management system and improve capacity to undertake multi-sectoral
Public Disclosure Copy




                         road safety interventions in the state. The strategic planning and the development of this component
                         has been based on a Road Safety Management Capacity Review, a pioneering initiative in the
                         country, supported and funded in collaboration with the World Bank Global Road Safety Facility
                         (GRSF). The following initiatives will be financed under this component.

                         (a)     Safe Corridor Demonstration Project: Multi sectoral interventions will be implemented on a
                         high volume, high risk, 30 km corridor (Dehgam to Bharuch & Ankleshwar to Valia) to demonstrate
                         road safety best practices. The interventions will include comprehensive road safety measures
                         including infrastructure safety designs, enforcement activities, public awareness/social media
                         campaign and post-crash health care management aimed at reducing deaths particularly among
                         vulnerable road users. A robust road safety management and monitoring and evaluation system will
                         also be developed under this initiative.

                         (b)     Enhancement of asset management system with safety attributes. This activity will enhance
                         the road safety module of the GRMS and facilitate piloting integrated periodic maintenance and
                         safety enhancement contracts.

                         (c)     Strengthening of Gujarat Road Safety Management System. The priority areas, as
                         recommended by the road safety management capacity review process, include policy changes on
                         targeted high risk issues, establishing a state crash database with police training, developing

                                                                      Page 3 of 10
                         deterrence framework to unsafe driving behavior, preparation for demonstration corridor program,
                         and facilitating a state-wide lead agency for road safety management. Under this sub-component, the
                         project will financially support and assist the project steering committee in the implementation and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         technical assistance of the above priority areas.

                                  Component D: Innovative Financing Component. This component will have the form of an
                         IBRD Guarantee in an amount of US$ 20 million. As already indicated, the GOG has led the way on
                         PPP structures to develop and finance road infrastructure projects. This approach is consistent with
                         the strategy of diversifying and leveraging financing sources, but has proven to be difficult to
                         implement for corridors with moderate traffic levels, more so in recent times. This is the case of the
                         Bagodara-Bhavnagar Road, a 127.7 km priority commercial project comprising 2 State Highways
                         (SH1 & SH36) which was tendered in early 2012 but failed to attract any formal bids due to
                         structural concerns associated with the financial viability of the project and the inability to raise the
                         required financing.

                         The innovative financing component is intended to enable the implementation of the Bagodara-
                         Dhandhuka section of Bagodara-Bhavnagar Road under a new PPP structure. For this purpose the
                         project will be re-tendered and the IBRD Guarantee will be applied as a credit enhancement
                         instrument that will mitigate critical risks, as follows: (i) Payment of Debt Service (interest &
                         principal) during the first 15 years of the financing on a rolling basis in an amount capped at approx.
                         US $7.5 million (equivalent to up to 2 yrs. of Debt Service). This support is critical to mitigate the
                         risk associated with the uncertainty of revenue/traffic in road projects and fundamental to enable
                         bankability; and (ii) Repayment of the principal amount of the loan outstanding at the tail end of the
                         maturity of the financing (approx. US $12.5 million for years16 to 20) in order to encourage the
                         Lenders to provide additional tenor vs. market standard which is essential to improve the financial
                         viability and the overall economics of the project for all the parties.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project will be implemented in different parts of Gujarat spread across several districts in South,
                         Central, North and Saurashtra parts of the state.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         I. U. B. Reddy (SASDS)
                         Sita Ramakrishna Addepalli (SASDI)

                          6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes               As recorded in the EA, the potential
                          BP 4.01                                              environmental impacts, include: (a) limited forest
                                                                               diversion and unavoidable felling of roadside
                                                                               trees. (b) impact on local drainage, and possible
                                                                               impact on water resources during construction
                                                                               stage; (c) impacts on existing physical,
                                                                               community and cultural properties, mainly
                                                                               relating to road side shrines; and (d) construction
                                                                               related temporary Environment, Health, and
                                                                               Safety (EHS) impacts




                                                                       Page 4 of 10
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes             The detailed EA reflected the requirement of 5.9
                                                                         Ha of Reserved Forest (RF) for one of the project
                                                                         corridors. This forest land proposed to be diverted
                                                                         is part of of larger forest Byad-Lonavada
                                                                         Regional forest. about 25 % of forest land to be
                                                                         diverted is scrub land. The EA reflected that
                                                                         diversion of this forest land would not affect the
                                                                         health of the regional forest. In addition to the
                                                                         diversion of forest land, the project requires
                                                                         cutting of road side trees, whenever formation
                                                                         width is greater than 9.75 m. Road side trees in
                                                                         Gujarat are classified as Notified Protected
                                                                         Forests (NPFs). About 280Ha. of such land is
                                                                         acquired in different parts of the project spread
                                                                         along different corridors of length 675 km. The
                                                                         impact in this regard will be in terms of number
                                                                         of trees to be cut. This impact need to be
                                                                         mandatorily mitigated by compensatory tree
                                                                         plantations, which is currently taken up by the
                                                                         PIU with State forest Department.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes             The project is likely to impact existing physical,
                         BP 4.11                                         community and cultural properties, mainly
                                                                         relating to road side shrines and hence OP 4.11
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         on Physical and cultural resources is applicable.
                                                                         These impacts are addressed through site specific
                                                                         plans as part of EA/EMP
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes             Gujarat has substantial tribal population (about
                                                                         15 percent), concentrated in the eastern part of the
                                                                         state. Three of the roads pass through Schedule V
                                                                         areas with tribal population and thereby trigger
                                                                         Bank’s OP 4.10. Free, Prior, Informed
                                                                         Consultation (FPIC) with communities living
                                                                         along these roads has been undertaken to
                                                                         ascertain and incorporate views and suggestions
                                                                         to minimize adverse impacts at the design stage
                                                                         and enhance the positive impacts. Appropriate
                                                                         designs have ensured that there no impacts on
                                                                         land for any of these corridors and only three (3)
                                                                         ST households, losing commercial structures,
                                                                         shall be affected.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes             SIA carried for the upgradation roads under
                         4.12                                            indicate potential impacts on land and assets,



                                                                 Page 5 of 10
                                                                                besides cultural and community owned assets.
                                                                                Some non-title holders are also likely to be
                                                                                affected especially for junction improvements.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                Under the innovative financing component of the
                                                                                project, one (1) corridor involves acquisition of
                                                                                nearly 130 hectares of land for the which SIA and
                                                                                RAP preparation is presently ongoing
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               Environment: Environmental Assessment (EA) had been structured to address: (i) detailed EA
                              for widening and strengthening of project corridors covered under Component A of the project
                              except the road network covered in OPRC contract; (ii) Environmental Management Framework
                              for maintenance roads under Component A1 and OPRC contract; and (iii) Environmental Due
                              Diligence for 43.6 km long project corridor from Bagodara-Bhavnagar (BB Road), included in
                              Component D, on innovative financing structure involving private sector participation The
                              environmental assessments have identified potential environmental impacts, including: (a) limited
                              forest diversion and unavoidable felling of roadside trees. These however do not impact any
                              critical national habitats. In total, 280 Ha of Forest land need to be diverted and about 23,500
Public Disclosure Copy




                              number of trees to be cut. (b) impact on local drainage, and possible impact on water resources
                              during construction stage; (c) impacts on existing physical, community and cultural properties,
                              mainly relating to road side shrines; and (d) construction related temporary Environment, Health,
                              and Safety (EHS) impacts.

                              Social: Upgradation roads shall impact approximately 730 PAHs comprising Title and Non-
                              Titleholders, approximately 23 hectares of private land, 7 hectares of government land and 304
                              privately owned structures, mostly shops. Type of use of these affected assets includes residential,
                              commercial, mixed use, industrial, agricultural land, etc. Further project shall impact privately
                              owned assets such as water pumps, boundary walls, besides cultural and community owned assets.
                              Three of the roads pass through Schedule V areas with tribal population. Appropriate designs have
                              ensured that there no impacts on land for any of these corridors and only three (3) ST households,
                              losing commercial structures, shall be affected. Under the innovative financing component of the
                              project road section, a corridor involves acquisition of nearly 130 hectares of land. At present SIA
                              and RAP preparation ongoing for the road.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                               Environment: The nature of environmental impacts are described above.



                                                                        Page 6 of 10
                         3. Social  – None
                             Describe  any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                            impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Corridor of Impact (COI) approach has been followed to reduce impacts on environmental and
                            social features within the Right of Way of the road. Curve improvements have been minimized in
                            the urban stretches to reduce the impact on structures and in rural areas to minimise the impact on
                            land. Cross-section alternatives at a few locations involved tree cutting within the RoW rather than
                            acquisition of additional agricultural lands for construction of the new two lanes. In constricted
                            urban stretches, additional road side parking facility had been discontinued to minimize impact on
                            adjacent properties. In few corridors, efforts have been taken to bypass forest stretches through
                            which the road presently passes, to avoid forest land diversion. At several stretches based on the
                            suggestions given by road side communities during consultations, the road alignment has been
                            slightly shifted to avoid impacts on key environmental and social features such as cultural
                            properties and wells.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                            assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              Environment: Borrower’s measures for environmental management include: (i) corridor specific
                            EMPs for widening and strengthening corridors to mitigate and minimize impacts. These plans are
                            integrated in to project design for implementation as part of construction and are integrated in to
                            bid documents. The replantation measures to compensate tree cutting are addressed through forest
                            department; (ii) Environmental and Social Management framework for integrating Environmental
                            and Social Management Measures into maintenance of roads as well as OPRC corridors. The
                            framework specifies screening protocols and standard EMPs that need to be integrated in the
                            bidding documents; and (iii) Environmental Management for road corridor included in Component
                            D. The environmental measures in this regard are mainly related to defining the environmental
                            management standards to be met by the road developer. These measures will be integrated in the
                            bid documents. Overall R&BD level environmental capacity addressed by staffing the PMU with
                            one Environmental Engineer and a Forest Officer working full time on GSHP-II preparation and
Public Disclosure Copy




                            implementation. These key staff will be supported by field level R&BD engineers at different
                            project corridors; and (ii) Supervision Consultants who will be providing specific day-to-day
                            supervision of implementation of EMPs as an integral part of supervision of different construction
                            contracts. The consultants will be mandated to staff qualified environmental specialists to ensure
                            effective implementation.

                           Social: GoG has prepared a RPF that is consistent with Bank’s OP 4.12, and provides for
                           compensation for land at actual market value based on the latest Jantri rates and replacement cost
                           for structures and other assets; support measures such as Transitional and Shifting allowance,
                           Income generation assistance. Non-Titleholders too are provided with replacement cost for
                           impacted assets, time period for removal of assets and other commensurate measures for shifting
                           and income generation. RAPs have been prepared for all upgradation corridors and include: details
                           of impacts, entitlements, road safety interventions, plans for income restoration, gender aspects
                           and provides budget for compensation, assistances, training and capacity building, implementation
                           and M&E. For corridors passing through tribal areas, Free, Prior, Informed Consultation (FPIC)
                           with communities living along these roads has been carried out. IPDP provides for additional
                           measures for ST PAPs, preference in provision of work opportunities, awareness programs on
                           Road Safety, facilitation and linkages to the existing government programs. A HIV Prevention
                           Plan has been prepared to address the issue at identified hot spots along the project corridors. As
                           some of the key personnel in the PIU involved previously with GSHP I continue involvement,

                                                                     Page 7 of 10
                           there is fair exposure and familiarity to Bank’s safeguard policies, procedures and documentation
                           requirements. An Environment and Social Management Unit (ESMU) headed by an Executive
                           Engineer will be established. The ESMU shall be supplemented by land acquisition officer and as
Public Disclosure Copy




                           well as supported by the NGO to be contracted for RAP implementation. For the corridor under
                           the innovative financing component, responsibility of LA and R&R activities shall rest with GoG.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Environment: Multi-stage stakeholder consultations have been carried out during conduct of
                           environmental assessments and prior to finalization of environmental management plans.

                           Social: The affected people are the primary stakeholders. Continuous consultation and
                           incorporation of suggestions by communities enabled to minimize adverse impacts. Further FPICs
                           were carried out with communities living along the project roads through the tribal areas.
                           Disclosure of project details and entitlements of PAPs enhanced the transparency of the project.
                           Consultation with affected communities is a key planned activity in RAP implementation.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      20-May-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   20-May-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            18-May-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      21-Jul-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   22-Jul-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            21-Jul-2013
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      21-Jul-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   29-Jul-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            21-Jul-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level


                                                                    Page 8 of 10
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?


                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Arnab Bandyopadhyay
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name:                                              Date:
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name:                                              Date:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    Page 10 of 10
