                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC433

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Mar-2012
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-Jun-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Kazakhstan                        Project ID:      P127966
                            Project Name:       Kazakhstan - Youth Corps program (P127966)
                            Task Team           Keiko Inoue
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           16-Jul-2013                       Estimated        31-Oct-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      ECSH2                             Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Adult literacy/non-formal education (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for the knowledge economy (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:          21.76              Total Bank Financing:               0.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                              Financing Gap:                      0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                               Amount
                              Borrower                                                                         0.00
                              Trust Funds                                                                     21.76
                              Total                                                                           21.76
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed project development objective would be to promote positive youth development in
                           Kazakhstan through service learning opportunities that serve the community while helping youth
                           develop important life skills. The project is expected to also bring about wider recognition amongst
                           the public that youth can be both an asset and part and parcel of the building blocks of a just society
                           and nation.
                           C. Project Description
                         This concept note describes a proposed youth Project for a total duration of five years, focused on
                         service learning for youth in Kazakhstan. Service learning is an approach whereby students learn and
                         contribute at the same time, through active participation in organized service experiences that
Public Disclosure Copy




                         actually meet community needs. Service learning provides students opportunities to use their
                         acquired skills and knowledge in real life situations in their communities; thus enhancing youth’s
                         formative experience by extending student learning into the community and helping foster a sense of
                         caring for others. Through this experience, society at large also learns to perceive youth as an asset
                         that can contribute to larger national development goals instead of the frequent stereotyped
                         perception of youth as trouble-makers going through a difficult period of the life cycle.

                         This is the concept of Positive Youth Development, very much at the heart of this proposed service-
                         learning experience. Positive Youth Development may not be widely known outside of the youth and
                         education arena but it is an increasingly popular policy, curricular, and programmatic approach that
                         allows schools and youth organizations to infuse youth development principles throughout their
                         programs, while supporting their community and national development goals. The proposed project
                         will take lessons learned from Bank projects on youth both in the Europe and Central Asia region
                         and in other regions such as Latin America and the Caribbean. Moreover, best practice from three
                         examples of widely known programs that support service learning of the kind described above the
                         American Americorps, the Peace Corps, and Teach for America will also be taken into account. A
                         longitudinal impact evaluation of the AmeriCorps, program, which assessed alumni who participated
                         in AmeriCorps between 1992-2000 and followed them for eight years, found that the program
                         created a positive impact in generating interest in public service, exposing youth to different careers,
                         and improving the civil attitudes and behaviors of program alumni.

                         The proposed Project would be fully financed through a US $20 million trust fund financed by the
                         Swiss Government.
                         The proposed Project is organized around three components, as described below.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1. Supporting internships in public and private sector institutions that deliver social
                         services. The component would have two distinct parts.

                         The first part would finance the subsistence stipends of the youth participants. The preliminary step
                         in this would be the identification and enrollment of a core group of youth participants . Then, these
                         participants would be provided a six to eight weeks life skills training course. Only after the
                         successful completion of this training course would the youth be placed in communities/place of
                         work. Youth between the ages of 15-24 would be eligible to receive a stipend while working full or
                         part time for the community for a maximum of one year. A sample of activities to be streamlined
                         during preparation, would include tutoring and mentoring, working at local schools or health centers,
                         working on environmental projects, caring for the elderly and children with special needs.
                         The second part would finance grants to eligible organizations that would sponsor service programs
                         where the youth would participate, to assist them in training and supporting youth to meet critical
                         community needs. The Youth Corps project would identify CSOs which could be private and semi
                         public organizations interested in offering the service learning opportunities to Youth Project
                         members. The criteria and procedures for the identification of the “hiring? offices or CSOs would be
                         based on specific and transparent criteria agreed to with the Kazakh Government during preparation
                         and outlined in the Project Grants Manual. These “hiring? offices would also provide participants
                         with mentoring and hands-on training while they are placed in their service program.
                         These two parts of Component 1 put together are at the heart of the project design: while the youth
                         would be given a stipend for the duration of their service, the “hiring? offices would also be eligible
                         to apply for small grants to finance work-related training to the youth. The hiring organization would
Public Disclosure Copy




                         have to agree to keep the youth participant on the job for an agreed upon period of time (between
                         three to nine months). The value of the grant for each CSO (“hiring office?) is expected to vary based
                         on criteria such as type of service, location of such service, and number of youth served. The
                         eligibility criteria and the mechanism to determine the grant amount will be developed in detail
                         during project preparation.

                         Component 2. Developing an institutional framework. This would be the project’s a policy and
                         social marketing component .
                         The policy sub-component would further support the work of the Youth Policy unit in the Ministry of
                         Education and Science (MES) and specifically, the coordination of policy and programs for youth
                         with the government’s “Road Map? and the Kazakh Employment Strategy 2020.

                         The social marketing sub-component would support an intensive communications campaign to
                         engage both youth and society on: (i) the efficacy of the project itself and, (ii) once the Youth Corps
                         is up and running, the positive impact youth can have on society and the development process of a
                         nation. Through clever marketing on the benefits and impact of the Youth Corps project, it is
                         expected that this sub-component will help energize the up-take from youth and CSOs, and could
                         also potentially have an impact through the public dissemination of successes of the Project, on the
                         sustainability of the Youth Corps program in Kazakhstan as an established structure and a viable
                         option for youth as well as society.

                         Overall, it is envisaged that this component through both, the policy work and the social marketing,
                         would contribute to solidifying the government’s policy direction in the area of youth. The structures
                         for national youth policy in the Europe and Central Asia region are often centralized and lack
                         connections to non-governmental youth organizations. Additionally, youth ministries and sub-
                         departments also need support to build adequate statistical capacity for collecting disaggregated data
Public Disclosure Copy




                         on youth trends, as well as to monitor and evaluate the impact of government interventions for young
                         people. Ultimately, the outcome of the Project with the support of this component would be a more
                         sustainable youth strategy for the country and possibly, through the demonstration effect of the
                         successes of the Project, a Youth Corps Program owned and implemented by the GoK.


                         Component 3. Monitoring and Evaluation and Project Management. This component would consist
                         of monitoring and evaluation (M&E), and project management.
                         The Monitoring and Evaluation component of the Project would consist of two parts: (1) the regular
                         monitoring of project’s implementation and outcomes based on the agreed performance indicators
                         developed during preparation, and, (2) the project’s evaluation that would entail the design and
                         implementation of a rigorous evaluation which would assess the effectiveness of the Youth Corps
                         program. The evaluation component of the Project would be implemented by the World BankHaving
                         evaluation as a Bank executed activity has merit and is based on the Bank’s extensive and rich
                         experiences with impact evaluations. An impact evaluation of this nature would be technically
                         complicated and could greatly benefit from the international expertise that Bank staff possesses and
                         the Youth Policy Department does not have the capacity to implement. Furthermore, this impact
                         evaluation and its findings would be critical to the future sustainability of the Youth Corps Project. It
                         is important to note that monitoring of the Project would remain the primary responsibility of the
                         Youth Policy Department and the Project Management Unit.
                               The component would also finance Project Management and Capacity Building to support the
                               implementation of the Youth Corps project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                               D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                               analysis (if known)
                               Environmental and social safeguards are not triggered by this Project as it would only finance
                               stipends, grants to NGOs and technical assistance.
                               E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                               Not applicable.

                               F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                               Johnson Appavoo (ECSOQ)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                                 Safeguard Policies                                                Triggered?                    Explanation (Optional)
                                 Environmental Assessment OP/                                      No
                                 BP 4.01
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No
                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 26-Oct-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The project is not triggering any Safeguards. However, the team will consult with Bank
                                      specialists on the necessity of carrying out a social assessment.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Keiko Inoue




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Approved By:
                         Regional Safeguards Name:                         Date:
                         Coordinator:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sector Manager:     Name: Andrea C. Guedes (SM)   Date: 27-Jun-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
