                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC5558

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Sep-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-Sep-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Sri Lanka                       Project ID:      P146314
                            Project Name:      Improving Climate Resilience (P146314)
                            Task Team          Marc S. Forni
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          07-Jan-2014                     Estimated        27-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASDC                           Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         General finance sector (20%), General public administration sector (20%),
                                               General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (30% ), Flood protection
                                               (30%)
                            Theme(s):          Natural disaster management (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     30.00                     Total Bank Financing:         30.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                 30.00
                              Total                                                                       30.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to reduce exposure of people in vulnerable
                           areas to hydrometeorological risk, through evidence-based investment planning and urgent
                           mitigation measures, and to improve Government’s capacity to respond effectively to an eligible
                           crisis or emergency.
                           C. Project Description
                         The main aim is to help Sri Lanka begin a process that would build a more climate-resilient
                         economy. With rapid economic progress in recent times, increased assets are at risk to increasingly
                         variable hydrometeorological events. Ensuring disaster and climate resilient development will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         ensure continued growth is sustainable.

                         Given the current lack of understanding of the multisectoral impacts of climate change,
                         hydrometeorological modeling and scenario analysis work is required. Once completed a large
                         climate resilient investment program would be identified and financed through multiple funding
                         sources. Key line ministries would be brought together in the assessment of risks or impacts on
                         particular sectors and an investment road map would be developed.

                         While there is a lack of understanding of comprehensive climate and disaster risk, there are urgent
                         flood and drought mitigation investments required to ensure the short term integrity of irrigation and
                         flood control infrastructure. Given the impacts of hydrometeorological events in the eastern province
                         in recent years, urgent investment is required to improve flood and control systems.

                         To address long-term capital development needs and short term hydrometeorological mitigation
                         requirements, the project will comprise the following four components.

                         Component 1: Risk Assessment and Basin Investment Plans (US$6 million). The objective of this
                         component is to improve the understanding of the hydrometeorological risk in 4-5 river basins that
                         are highly exposed to hydrometeorological risk. This would include the following activities: i)
                         development of hydrological/ hydraulic models; ii) collection of flood exposure and vulnerability
                         data that would be integrated with the hydrological/ hydraulic model to develop a risk model; and iii)
                         assessment of the underlying causes of flooding and drought including rainfall variability, land use
                         changes, and infrastructure development; and iv) creation of investment plans with detailed designs.
                         A strategic environmental assessment, including social aspects particularly related to resettlement of
                         people from vulnerable areas, for selected investment areas would also be undertaken. The result of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         this component would be the development comprehensive climate resilient investment plans that
                         would be financed by Government, the Bank and other donors. The interrelation between the floods
                         and drought will be analyzed in detailed in developing the hydrometeorological risk mitigation
                         interventions.

                         Component 2: Priority Hydrometeorological Mitigation Interventions (US$18 million): The objective
                         of this component is to implement urgent hydrometeorological mitigation interventions that have
                         been identified and prioritized by recent needs assessments. The interventions would focus on both
                         upstream irrigation systems and downstream flood control structures. Upstream investments would
                         include repairs of damaged tank systems and rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage schemes.
                         Downstream investments would include: i) widening of narrow bridges and culverts allowing flood
                         water to drain off quickly; ii) removing of bottlenecks in the drainage canals; and iii) construction of
                         diversions or retention structures to minimize downstream flooding. Such investments would not
                         involve construction of new infrastructure, only critical repairs to existing structures. The result of
                         this component w ould be a decrease in annual hydrometeorological losses.

                         Component 3: Implementation Support (US$3 million): The objective of this component is to ensure
                         the successful implementation of the activities carried out under the proposed project and support the
                         scaling of a long term planning division. This comprises: (i) implementation support in the areas of
                         project management, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), procurement, financial management, and
                         environmental and social safeguards; (ii) public awareness and communications support regarding
                         project interventions and management of public expectations; (iii) support to the implementing
                         agencies in construction, supervision, and compliance with environmental and social safeguards; (iv)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         purchase of vehicles, office furniture, and IT equipment for the Project Management Unit (PMU);
                         and (v) operating costs of the PMU.

                         Component 4: Contingent Emergency Response Component (US$3): Following an adverse natural or
                         man-made event or that causes a major disaster, the Government may request the Bank to re-allocate
                         project funds to this component (which presently carries a zero allocation) to support response and
                         reconstruction . This component would allow the Government to request the Bank to reallocate
                         project funds to be engaged to partially cover emergency response and recovery costs.

                         The total project cost is US$30 million, which would be financed by an IDA credit.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Activities to be financed by the project are expected to be in Eastern Province in the areas most
                         impacted by the 2011 floods. The Eastern province consist of eastern coast of Sri Lanka on a flat
                         coastal plain boarded by the Indian Ocean and has an area of 9,996 square km with a population of
                         1.55 million in 2012. It has 3 administrative districts: Trincomalee, Baticaloa and Ampara. The
                         province is the most diverse in Sri Lanka, both ethnically and religiously. While the service sector is
                         dominant in the East, the province also is highest within the country in agriculture production and
                         fisheries.

                         The province features a tropical wet and dry climate or dry monsoonal climate with an average
                         maximum temperature around 32 degrees Celsius. During the monsoon season from November to
                         February heavy rains are recorded with an average rainfall of 1,400mm and for the rest of the year
                         there is little precipitation. The province's coast is dominated by lagoons, the largest being Batticaloa
                         Lagoon, Kokkilai lagoon, Upaar Lagoon and Ullackalie Lagoon. The Trincomalee harbor is the fifth
Public Disclosure Copy




                         largest natural harbor in the world, is overlooked by terraced highlands, its entrance is guarded by
                         two headlands, and a carriage road along its northern and eastern edges. The longest river, the
                         Mahaweli Ganga (335 km) falls into this harbor. Trincomalee is less well developed and sparsely
                         populated area compared to Batticaloa, which is densely populated. Batticaloa lagoon is the longest
                         lagoon in Sri Lanka and it is 56km long and covers an area of 162 square km. The natural vegetation
                         is adapted to the annual change from flood to drought. The typical ground cover is scrub forest,
                         interspersed with tough bushes and cactuses in the driest areas. There are 6 protected areas in the
                         Province and 3 are shared with bordering provinces and one is a marine protected area. The forest
                         cover is 343,608.7 ha (which is 35 percent of land cover) dominated by dry monsoon forests.
                         Trincomalee and Batticaloa also harbor second and third highest strands of mangroves covering an
                         area of 3,617ha. Coastal degradation from mining activities and increased pollution; freshwater
                         resources being polluted by industrial wastes and sewage runoff; waste disposal; and encroachment
                         into protected areas and forest land are some of the key environmental threats in the Eastern
                         Province.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         Sri Lanka has made impressive strides in developing legislation on protection, management and
                         enhancement of the environment and on prevention, control and abatement of pollution as well as
                         frameworks for environmental planning and environmental assessments or development projects, the
                         most important legislation being the National Environment Act (NEA). Efforts have resulted in broad
                           environmental management capacity including project-specific environmental assessments.
                           However, more effective environmental management requires progress with: (i) changes to the
                           current system of Project Approving Agencies (PAA) for issuing environmental clearances to make
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the system more effective; (ii) promoting increased use of strategic and sectoral environmental
                           assessments to mitigate any serious unanticipated environmental consequences; (iii) further
                           strengthening of the capacity of Central Environment Authority (CEA) to supervise the
                           implementation of environmental monitoring plans (EMPs), which is the weakest link in the
                           Environmental Assessment system; and (iv) appointing an independent committee of stakeholders to
                           monitor the compliance towards NEA and other related legislation. Within the context of the current
                           project, the proposed rehabilitation activities which involve structures to ease the water flow without
                           flooding including drainages, irrigation channels, bridges culverts, etc. will not fall under the NEA.
                           Therefore, the applicable environmental safeguards of the project will be related to World Bank’s
                           environmental safeguard policies managed directly by the Project Management Unit. However, for
                           the prosed strategic environmental assessments for the basin level plans will be undertaken in close
                           collaboration with the CEA.

                           The national Involuntary Resettlement Policy (NIRP) adopted in 2001 governs resettlement/
                           compensation issues insofar as development projects are concerned. NIRP provides a framework
                           consistent with best practices. Nevertheless, the following steps would go a long way in
                           implementing NIRP effectively: (i) Amend the Land Acquisition Act (LAA) to incorporate NIRP
                           principles into law; (ii) delineating unambiguous roles and responsibilities of different government
                           agencies in implementing the resettlement actions; (iii) clarifying the responsibility of the CEA in
                           monitoring the environmental aspects of resettlement plans; (iv) ensuring consistency in the quality
                           of the training programs and process manuals conducted by various agencies; (v) rationalizing the
                           discrepancies between existing policies and the NIRP (e.g. the Framework for relief, rehabilitation
                           and reconciliation.

                           The Ministry of Irrigation and Water Resources Management (MIWRM) has a track record in
                           implementing Bank projects. The Project Management Unit (PMU) currently in place for a Bank
Public Disclosure Copy




                           financed project has the core staff including staff to oversee the safeguards. The PMU has been
                           managing the Bank financed Dam Safety and Water Resources Planning Project. This project has
                           been ongoing since 2009, with satisfactory compliance to social and environmental issues.
                           Therefore, it is anticipated that the PMU will maintain the current capacity to ensure safeguard
                           compliance, with provisions to include more as required. To improve the capacity of the borrower to
                           manage safeguard issues associated with additional lending activities, the project will mobilize
                           additional staff and build the capacity, systems and procedures based on the experience
                           implementing Bank projects to meet the national standards and World Bank requirements.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Susrutha Pradeep Goonesekera (SASDS)
                           Darshani De Silva (SASDI)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             The project overall is environmentally
                           BP 4.01                                              beneficial since the development objectives of
                                                                                the project is to increase the understanding of
                                                             flood risk and mitigate basin-level flood risks
                                                             where ensuring asset management and public
                                                             safety, reducing water induced hazardsand
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             enhance the effectiveness of infrastructure
                                                             investments in the country. However, the
                                                             rehabilitation work proposed will require
                                                             environmental and social due diligence to be in
                                                             place and the flood risk planning process.

                                                             Within this context, an Environmental and
                                                             Social Assessment and Management
                                                             Framework (ESAMF) will be prepared prior to
                                                             appraisal which will outline the processes and
                                                             serve as a guideline to undertake environmental
                                                             and social assessments (ESAs) and/or
                                                             environmental and social management plans
                                                             (ESMPs) as required. Sub-project specific ESAs
                                                             and/or ESMPs will be undertaken for all
                                                             activities that will be identified prior to
                                                             appraisal. Safeguards process to be followed as
                                                             per the OP/BP 8.0 will be also included as part
                                                             of the framework for any emergency support
                                                             that may likely to be supported during the
                                                             project implementation period.

                                                             The proposed SEA will be conducted to cover
                                                             the basin investment plans that will be
                                                             developed for future investments. This will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             undertaken as a need beyond the current
                                                             project’s physical investments that will be
                                                             managed through the ESAMF.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   As many of the structured to be rehabilitated
                                                             will be some extent associated with natural
                                                             habitats such as lagoons, rivers, mangrove
                                                             habitats, etc. this policy is triggered. The due
                                                             diligence requirements will be covered under
                                                             the ESAMF.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No    No physical investments will take place in
                                                             forested areas. Investments will be in human
                                                             populated locations and will be made to existing
                                                             infrastructure. All activities within forest areas
                                                             will be included as part of the negative list.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       No    There are no planned activities that would
                                                             require pest management or lead to the
                                                             increased use of pesticides.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   TBD                           Given the Eastern Province consists of number
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         of historical sites and the nature and extent of
                                                                                                                                 impacts of proposed repair and rehabilitation is
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 unknown at this point of time, it is possible that
                                                                                                                                 ‘chance finds’ at work sites is a likely impact
                                                                                                                                 that would have to be managed. Therefore, all
                                                                                                                                 subprojects identified prior to appraisal will be
                                                                                                                                 assessed for likely impacts during the project
                                                                                                                                 preparation. It is proposed that sub-projects that
                                                                                                                                 may have significant negative impacts on
                                                                                                                                 physical cultural resources should be included
                                                                                                                                 in the negative list and chance find procedures
                                                                                                                                 applicable during implementation will be
                                                                                                                                 incorporated in the ESAMF.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            There is no indigenous population in the project
                                                                                                                                 area.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    TBD                           As per the project description, investment
                                 4.12                                                                                            activities are likely to be confined only to
                                                                                                                                 repairs and rehabilitation to the existing
                                                                                                                                 structures. No new structures are envisaged.
                                                                                                                                 However, repair and rehabilitation based
                                                                                                                                 improvements might have some impacts on the
                                                                                                                                 livelihoods of people residing in the nearby
                                                                                                                                 vicinity.

                                                                                                                                 The nature and extent of impacts cannot be
                                                                                                                                 assessed as of now as: (i) structures to be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 rehabilitated are yet to be identified; and (ii) this
                                                                                                                                 identification will take place over time. All
                                                                                                                                 subprojects identified for investment prior to
                                                                                                                                 appraisal will be assessed during the project
                                                                                                                                 preparation in regard to involuntary resettlement
                                                                                                                                 due to project investments. Based on the results,
                                                                                                                                 a decision to trigger OP 4.12 or adequacy of OP
                                                                                                                                 4.01 will be made.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            Physical investments will not be made on dam
                                                                                                                                 structures or water retention structures.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             Sri Lanka is an island country; hence issue of
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            international waterways is not applicable.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             There are no disputed areas in Sri Lanka.
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Oct-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:


                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             The Environmental and Social Safeguards framework, in the Ministry of Irrigation and Water
                             Resources Management, will be updated in October 2013.
                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Task Team Leader:      Name: Marc S. Forni

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name:                                                 Date:
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Bernice K. Van Bronkhorst (SM)                  Date: 13-Sep-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
