                                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                  CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Report No.: ISDSC5096

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Aug-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 28-Aug-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data
Public Disclosure Copy
                         Country:           Panama                          Project ID:     P145621
                         Project Name:      Sustainable Production Systems and Conservation of Biodiversity (P145621)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Task Team          Teresa M. Roncal
                         Leader:
                         Estimated          09-Dec-2013                     Estimated       28-Feb-2014
                         Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                         Managing Unit:     LCSAR                           Lending         Investment Project Financing
                                                                            Instrument:
                         GEF Focal Area:    Biodiversity

                         Sector(s):         General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (70%), Public administration-
                                            Agriculture, fishing and forestry (30%)
                         Theme(s):          Biodiversity (40%), Rural non-farm income generation (20%), Micro, Small and
                                            Medium Enterprise support (20%), Participation and civi c engagement (10%),
                                            Decentralization (10%)
                         Financing (In USD Million)
                         Total Project Cost:     39.96                    Total Bank Financing:         0.00
                         Total Cofinancing:                               Financing Gap:                3.00
                           Financing Source                                                         Amount
                           BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                         7.63
                           Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                          9.59
                           International Fund for Agriculture Development                             5.71
                           Municipalities of Borrowing Country                                        0.10
                           LOCAL BENEFICIARIES                                                        1.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Non-Government Organization (NGO) of Borrowing
                                                                                                        0.94
                           Country
                           Foreign Private Commercial Sources (identified)                             12.00
                           Total                                                                       36.96
                         Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                         Category:
                         Is this a          No
                         Repeater
                         project?

                         B. Project Objectives
                         The proposed global environmental objective is to conserve globally significant biodiversity and
                         enhance local livelihoods in Panama through improved management effectiveness of protected areas
                         and mainstreaming biodiversity-friendly management practices in their buffer zones.
                         C. Project Description
                         The project would be organized into four components:
                         Component 1 - Participatory Management of Protected Areas (US$3.6 million estimated for GEF
                         financing)-- would support ANAM’s efforts to strengthen the management of the selected PAs,
                         promote partnerships with local government, communities, NGOS, and the private sector to achieve
                         financial sustainability of PAs. It would test alternative financial mechanisms, such as trust funds,
                         cost-sharing arrangements, co-management arrangements with local government and communities,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and administration contracts. . The component would continue to support some activities carried out
                         under CBMAP II, particularly for implementation of municipal environmental plans and for the
                         establishment of the NPAS Trust Fund. A contribution of at least US$1.0 million to the endowment
                         of this trust fund will be financed, and some expenses for the operational manual and investment
                         policy of the fund.

                         Component 2 - Biodiversity and Sustainable Productive Landscapes (US$3.3 million estimated for
                         GEF financing)-- would focus on activities to mainstream biodiversity and sustainable production
                         landscapes in production areas in the buffer zones of selected PAs. The project will support producer
                         groups or producer associations that live in the buffer zones, and that have implemented successful
                         subprojects with financing of CBMAP II, to scale up their operations and implement biodiversity-
                         friendly production and management practices with a focus on gaining or increasing access to
                         markets for their products so that biodiversity-friendly practices become economically sustainable.
                         Subprojects to be developed under this component may include adoption of practices for
                         biodiversity-friendly production, such as use of organic compost and living fences, use of native
                         species, as well as exploring ways of including adaptation to climate change elements associated
                         with the diversification of products, soil erosion control, and resilience to climatic pressures. A
                         detailed list of potential activities will be developed during preparation. Training and technical
                         assistance will be provided to producers for implementation of subprojects and improvement of their
                         technical and business management skills.

                         Component 3 - Knowledge Management and Communication (US$1.8 million estimated for GEF
                         financing)-– would promote awareness and offer training to key project stakeholders of both genders
                         (e.g., producers, indigenous peoples, local government, and private sector) on good practices and
                         knowledge management at local and regional levels to support biodiversity mainstreaming and
                         promote the consumption of bio-labeled goods. This component includes the development of a strong
Public Disclosure Copy




                         communication and outreach strategy for dissemination of information, and support to capacity-
                         building activities to both technical assistance providers and producers. This component will support
                         strengthening the capacity of the recently established economic unit in ANAM to lead the authority’s
                         efforts to carry out environmental economic analysis that could demonstrate clearly the economic
                         value of biodiversity to decision-makers in Panama. This will support ANAM as it seeks to enhance
                         the financial sustainability of Panama’s protected area system. A subcomponent for promoting
                         partnerships and South-South cooperation is also included in this component. This will allow ANAM
                         to work together with the National Commission for the Knowledge and Use of Biodiversity,
                         CONABIO, in Mexico in the implementation of a regional program for training and technology
                         transfer related to sustainable production, and the development of biodiversity standards and/or
                         market labels, and certification. In particular, this project will seek to learn from the progress being
                         made under the GEF-financed, World Bank implemented “Sustainable Production Systems and
                         Biodiversity Project? in Mexico.

                         Component 4 - Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (US$0.9 million estimated for
                         GEF financing)- would support the technical and administrative coordination, supervision,
                         monitoring, and evaluation of the project.

                         The project implementation period will be five years. The Recipient will be the Republic of Panama
                         represented by the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF), and the implementing agency will be
                           ANAM, in particular the Department of Protected Areas and Wildlife (DAPVS), in charge of the
                           NPAS.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                           analysis (if known)
                           The proposed project will be implemented in approximately 10 selected PAs including their buffer
                           zones geographically located in the central-eastern part of the country within the Panamanian MBC.
                           The PAs will be selected based on the following criteria that will be further refined during
                           preparation: (a) relative value in protecting biodiversity of national and global importance, (b)
                           density of indigenous and non-indigenous populations in poverty/extreme poverty in their buffer
                           zones, (c) production processes incubated by the CBMAP II, which require additional support to
                           become sustainable green businesses, (d) sufficient organizational capacity among producers that
                           will help streamline the project implementation, and (e) level of market integration or
                           marginalization. The area proposed is expected to cover between 500,000 and 700,000 hectares
                           (approximately 20-25 percent of the total land area protected), and be stretched over six provinces,
                           two comarcas (i.e., Ngabe-Bugle and Kuna) and the Naso-Teribe Indigenous Territory in part of the
                           Changuinola District, Bocas del Toro Province.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           ANAM, as implementing agency, has experience handling social and environmental safeguard
                           issues, most recently in the Rural Productivity Project (Loan 7439-PA), which is being implemented
                           partially blended with a GEF Project for Rural Productivity and Consolidation of the Atlantic
                           Mesoamerican Biological Project (TF056628). The Project has a social specialist and environmental
                           specialist. These projects were successful in developing organizational, administrative and technical
                           capacity in rural and indigenous communities in extreme poverty, in which both social and
                           environmental safeguards policies have been successfully applied. While the national team has a
                           good grasp of safeguard policies and their respective disciplines, there will be a need for training and
                           collaboration with the Bank´s specialists.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Mary Lisbeth Gonzalez (LCSSO)
                           Angel Alberto Yanosky (LCSEN)
                           Abdelaziz Lagnaoui (LCSEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The proposed project is expected to generate
                           BP 4.01                                               overall positive environmental impacts given its
                                                                                 objective to mainstream biodiversity
                                                                                 management into commercially viable
                                                                                 production systems in buffer zones and to
                                                                                 promote participatory management of Panama’s
                                                                                 protectedareas. OP/BP 4.01 is triggered due to
                                                                                 the sensitive social and biological context of the
                                                                                 interventions, and to avoid and manage risks
                                                                                 and mitigate any potential environmental
                                                                                 impacts that may result from the investments in
                                                                                 productive activities and construction or
                                                             rehabilitation of small infrastructure.

                                                             Based on the potential impacts and experience
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             with previous two projects, the team is
                                                             suggesting a Category-B for this project.
                                                             Preliminary project preparation consultations
                                                             have been carried out in all proposed provinces
                                                             of the project, while specific social and
                                                             environmental consultations will take place
                                                             during project preparation.

                                                             As specific sites are not known at this stage, an
                                                             environmental and social management
                                                             framework (ESMF) will be prepared to screen,
                                                             assess, and mitigate environmental impacts
                                                             related to proposed subprojects and a detailed
                                                             list of potential activities will be developed
                                                             during preparation. The ESMF also will outline
                                                             the process to prepare the necessary
                                                             Environmental Assessment and Environmental
                                                             Management Plans (EMPs) for each investment
                                                             activity that may be in an environmentally
                                                             sensitive area and provide specific guidelines to
                                                             avoid or minimize risks and manage potential
                                                             environmental impacts. Any subprojects
                                                             considered as Category A will not be eligible
                                                             for funding by the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             For preparing the ESMF, the client is preparing
                                                             an Environmental Assessment of the entire
                                                             project and guidelines will be clarified for
                                                             screening out Cat A activities.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   The proposed project protected areas, including
                                                             their buffer zones or influence areas, are all
                                                             important critical natural habitats within high
                                                             priority ecosystems for Panama.

                                                             The project will not finance any activity that
                                                             could potentially cause significant conversion or
                                                             degradation of natural habitats. The project
                                                             activities will also promote sound practices in
                                                             protected areas, which may include payment for
                                                             environmental services, and other innovative
                                                             ideas to protect environmentally sensitive
                                                             habitats. Human activity in the buffer zones
                                                             induced by the project may indirectly impact
                                                             natural habitats. The ESMF will include criteria
                                                         and procedures to avoid and minimize these
                                                         risks and manage potential negative impacts on
                                                         natural habitat.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                         Subprojects contemplating significant
                                                         degradation or conversion of natural habitats
                                                         will not be eligible for financing. A screening
                                                         mechanism would be used in the case of exotic
                                                         plants/shrubs and exotic animal species and a
                                                         simplified protocol would be developed to
                                                         identify and monitor impacts on local habitats as
                                                         well as a negative list of activities that will be
                                                         included in the Project Operations Manual that
                                                         would not be eligible for financing. The ESMF
                                                         will establish procedures and mechanisms
                                                         (including content) for screening activities
                                                         against Policy on Natural Habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36        Yes   The proposed project will be developed in
                                                         natural forest areas of importance for
                                                         biodiversity. Yet it is too early to know at this
                                                         stage whether interventions could affect the
                                                         rights and welfare of people dependent on
                                                         forests and if this would bring changes in the
                                                         management, protection, and utilization of
                                                         natural forests. Further details as appropriate
                                                         will be included in ESMF and Social
                                                         Assessment. OP/BP 4.36 is triggered as a
                                                         precautionary measure, and also to improve
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                         forest conservation. Certification or eco-
                                                         labeling, if appropriate, will be promoted and an
                                                         increase in areas under improved management
                                                         or certification is expected by completion.
                                                         Eligible activities would be identified for
                                                         specific eco-regions, along with a negative list
                                                         of activities.
                                                         The proposed negative lists and screening tool
                                                         be incorporated into the ESMF as well as the
                                                         Operational Manual for the project.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09   Yes   The work on a production system may involve
                                                         pest management and the use of agro-chemicals
                                                         in subproject activities. The ESMF will include
                                                         screening procedures for pest management and
                                                         pesticide use. A Pest Management Plan will be
                                                         prepared for subprojects likely to procure
                                                         pesticides or envisage changes in pest
                                                         management practices. The risks associated
                                                         with pesticide use will be described in the
                                                                 ESMF and recommended measures and
                                                                 procedures proposed for managing those risks
                                                                 will be included.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   This project is not expected to have any
                         BP 4.11                                 negative impact on physical cultural resources,
                                                                 and these have not been identified in relation to
                                                                 potential project activities. However, some
                                                                 project areas may potentially have cultural
                                                                 resources; the policy is triggered as
                                                                 precautionary to handle any potential “chance
                                                                 finds? during project implementation. The
                                                                 ESMF will include provisions for the treatment
                                                                 of physical cultural resources discovered during
                                                                 project implementation (chance finds) and
                                                                 identify forests and protected areas that may be
                                                                 considered as sacred lands and/or cultural
                                                                 resources as defined under the policy (i.e. sites
                                                                 identified with religious, aesthetic or cultural
                                                                 significance).
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   A Social Assessment (SA) will be carried out in
                                                                 order to gather the socio-economic profile of the
                                                                 wide-range of stakeholders that will help design
                                                                 differentiated mechanisms and services to meet
                                                                 the specific characteristics of different local
                                                                 contexts and beneficiaries. The Social
                                                                 Assessment will also include a proposal for
                                                                 developing a grievance redress mechanism,
                                                                 including a conflict resolution strategy, for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 project.

                                                                 An Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) will be
                                                                 prepared to ensure that indigenous peoples are
                                                                 informed and consulted and their participation is
                                                                 encouraged and promoted during the life of the
                                                                 project. The project builds upon the experience
                                                                 of CBMAP-II and it will continue working with
                                                                 indigenous authorities to ensure that Congress
                                                                 and governance structures are respected,
                                                                 consulted and participate in the decision-
                                                                 making process related to the project that might
                                                                 concern or affect their interests. The project will
                                                                 continue promoting culturally adequate, free,
                                                                 prior, and informed consultations with
                                                                 indigenous peoples.

                                                                 The CBMAP-II has successfully engaged
                                                                 indigenous peoples Congresses and authorities
                         in the identification, preparation and
                         implementation of subprojects and Management
                         Plans, with their broad participation in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         biodiversity conservation. The IPP will identify
                         additional lessons learned from CBMAP-II and
                         other projects to improve indigenous peoples
                         participation and it will also improve the
                         consultation mechanisms to obtain broad
                         community support.

                         Based on the experience of the previous
                         projects, this operation will develop a detailed
                         communication strategy to ensure that
                         indigenous peoples, mainly those who are
                         monolingual are well-informed and consulted
                         about the objectives and activities of the project,
                         and can benefit from its development objective.
                         The ultimate objective of the communication
                         strategy is to ensure indigenous peoples
                         engagement. To promote this engagement the
                         project will take into account the following
                         principles: (a) cultural heritage and identity as
                         assets; (b) free, prior and informed consultation
                         and participation process; (c) community-driven
                         development; (d) land assessment and
                         biodiversity conservation; (e) indigenous
                         peoples’ knowledge in natural resources
                         management; (f) environmental issues and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         indigenous peoples views on climate change;
                         (g) access to markets; and (h) gender equality
                         particularly promoting participation of women
                         in subprojects, strategic alliances and in
                         community-based innovation processes. This
                         later issue will be supported by the preparation
                         of an action plan, as part of the IPDP that will
                         specify clear mechanisms to promote the
                         inclusion of women and youth.

                         The IPDP would also identify specific actions to
                         support and mainstream biodiversity and
                         sustainable production in production units of the
                         buffer zones of selected PAs. This component
                         will enable producers to implement
                         management systems to improve profitability
                         while addressing sustainability challenges and
                         biodiversity conservation.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes   A Process Framework (PF) will be prepared to
                         4.12                                   ensure that procedures are in place to mitigate
                                                                any potential restrictions in access to protected
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                areas and ensure consultations with potential
                                                                beneficiaries on resource management activities
                                                                in and around protected areas as part of the
                                                                management plans. The PF will identify a clear
                                                                protocol to ensure that activities supported by
                                                                the project within indigenous territories have
                                                                broad participation and consultation and will not
                                                                incur in any type of restriction of access to
                                                                resources. The protocol will be detailed enough
                                                                that it will systematize the information,
                                                                consultation and participation process.

                                                                One of the main objectives of the PF is to
                                                                identify, together with indigenous peoples, the
                                                                planning process to design and implement
                                                                protected areas management plans to ensure that
                                                                there is a balance between the social and
                                                                livelihood demands and needs of indigenous
                                                                peoples with the promotion of biodiversity
                                                                conservation. One of the main lessons learned
                                                                from CBMAP-II is the integration of
                                                                biodiversity conservation and livelihoods with
                                                                local governance. The CBMAP-II worked to
                                                                harmonize social issues with biodiversity
                                                                conservation. The goal is to achieve a better
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                integration of rural communities—including
                                                                indigenous peoples—to harmonize people’s
                                                                livelihoods, biodiversity conservation and local
                                                                governance to develop more sustainable
                                                                conservation practices, including agriculture
                                                                that will facilitate access to markets for the
                                                                producers.

                                                                Any activity (subprojects and management
                                                                plans) that could lead to involuntary acquisition
                                                                of land, displacement or resettlement will be
                                                                ineligible. This operation is not supporting the
                                                                expansion of protected areas or expropriation of
                                                                land for productive projects.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No    This policy is not triggered as the project will
                                                                not support the construction or rehabilitation of
                                                                dams nor will it support other investments
                                                                which rely on the services of existing dams.
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            This policy is not triggered as any subproject
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            activities that may affect International
                                                                                                                                 Waterways will not be eligible.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             This policy is not triggered as there will be no
                                 7.60                                                                                            subprojects in disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 14-Nov-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The preparation of safeguard-related instruments will include an Environmental and Social
                                      Management Framework for which the terms of reference for the Environmental Assessment are
                                      currently under development. Considering the similarities with the Rural Productivity Project
                                      (Loan 7439-PA), partially blended with a GEF project for Rural Productivity and Consolidation of
                                      the Atlantic Mesoamerican Biological Project (TF056628), and ANAM’s experience, it is
                                      expected that the preparation of the Environmental and Social Management Framework, IPP, and
                                      PF will be straight forward as project team will use the lessons learned from these projects.
                                      Preparation of these instruments will start shortly after the PCN decision meeting. The
                                      instruments will be publicly consulted and disclosed before appraisal.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Teresa M. Roncal

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name:                                                                                                                      Date:
                                 Coordinator:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Renato Nardello (SM)                                                                                                 Date: 28-Aug-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
