                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC3412

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Aug-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 23-Aug-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Bolivia                         Project ID:     P143995
                            Project Name:      Bolivia: Improving Employability & Job Quality Among Vulnerable Groups
                                               (P143995)
                            Task Team          Gaston Mariano Blanco
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       11-Nov-2013                        Estimated       11-Feb-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: LCSHS-DPT                           Lending         Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Public administration- Other social services (60%), Vocational training (40%)
                            Theme(s):         Improving labor markets (80%), Social Inclusion (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        20.00                 Total Bank Financing:        20.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                               Financing Gap:                0.00
                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                    0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                      20.00
                              Total                                                                      20.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objectives of the proposed project are to: (a) improve employability of low
                           income youth population by supporting the expansion and strengthening of the Government skills
                           development program; (b) enhance job quality among vulnerable groups by strengthening
                           employment programs for self-employed, People With Disabilities (PWDs) and vulnerable women;
                           and (c) improve the MTEPS capacity to design, manage, and monitor labor and employment policies.
                           C. Project Description
                         This Project supports the design and implementation of policies and programs to improve
                         employability and job quality among vulnerable groups, and the strengthening of institutional
                         capacity required to achieve this goal. This Project addresses strategic objectives of the MTEPS such
Public Disclosure Copy




                         as the promotion of employment quality (dignified labor) and strengthening the stewardship role of
                         the MTEPS in private and public partnerships towards achieving this goal. These objectives are
                         closely associated to broader Government objectives as enhancing the linkages between employment
                         policies and policies in other areas as productive development, rural development and public
                         investment in subnational governments.

                         The lending instrument is a specific investment loan for an estimated amount of US$ 20 million.

                         Component 1. Improving and expanding employment programs and services. This component would
                         support the MTEPS in strengthening existing interventions and developing additional programs to
                         enhance employability and labor market insertion of vulnerable groups, with especial focus on the
                         youth, people with disabilities, and vulnerable women. This Component would exploit lessons from
                         the implementation of the Youth and Children Project supported by the World Bank and would
                         support the development of articulated labor market programs. In particular, this Component would
                         finance technical assistance, materials, consultants and operating costs to design and implement three
                         types of labor market interventions. First, the Project would support the improvement, expansion and
                         operational strengthening of the existing Mi Primer Empleo Digno (MPED).

                         Second, the Project would support the expansion of general orientation and soft skills training for job
                         seekers and would also support the capacity building among small entrepreneurs and self-employed,
                         especially in the targeted populations. The development of entrepreneurial traits and skills, including
                         entrepreneurial education, both in school and out of school, access to financing and technical
                         knowledge, have been positively evaluated in the international experience (Cho and Honorati, 2013).

                         Third, the Project would also finance the design, piloting and evaluation of programs aiming to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         improve employability of people with disabilities and vulnerable women. This would include: (i)
                         supporting the Government in measuring the extent of disability in Bolivia and impacts on labor
                         market in Bolivia; these data and analytical activities should be sustained in the MTEPS as part of
                         the existing monitoring indicators to be supported by this Project in Component 2; (ii) strengthening
                         employment services focusing on people with disabilities and train MTEPS staff in delivering those
                         services in employment offices; and (iii) assessing the range of services and adequacy of other
                         MTEPS programs for people with disabilities, and piloting alternative interventions or revisions to
                         existing ones to respond to the needs of people with disabilities. The Component would also finance
                         a diagnostic tool of gender and labor markets outcomes in Bolivia to refine the design and pilot
                         implementation of programs aiming to increase gender equity in labor markets. As outcomes may
                         differ by participation, earnings, and type of employment, the diagnostic tool should serve to identify
                         critical target groups of women where program pilots would take place.

                         Component 2. Strengthen MTEPS capacity to design, implement and articulate labor and
                         employment policies. This Component would finance technical assistance, materials, consultants
                         and operating costs to strengthen the operational stewardship of MTEPS in designing and
                         implementing employment policy and programs. Existing policies in Bolivia aiming to enhance
                         employment opportunities require stronger technical capacity within the MTEPS in carrying out
                         essential functions, as well as stronger institutional capacity in coordinating with the private sector,
                         other Government agencies and subnational authorities. This Component would finance the
                           development of these technical and institutional capacities in two critical areas.

                           First, the Component would finance the strengthening of MTEPS in carrying essential functions of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the MTEPS. This would finance technical assistance, materials, consultants and operating costs to
                           improve the range of employment services, their content and efficiency, as well as institutional
                           capacity to articulate different services provided by the MTEPS (monitoring, training,
                           intermediation). In particular, the Project would support the strengthening of the MTEPS through the
                           development of technical capacity of the Labor Observatory (Observatorio de Trabajo y Empleo de
                           Bolivia, OTEB) to collect information, analyze and monitor labor markets.

                           Second, the Component would finance technical assistance to develop the capacity to design, pilot
                           and evaluate labor market policies and programs. In particular, the Project would support the
                           development of interventions to: (i) design and pilot the implementation of flexible social security
                           schemes for self-employed workers; (ii) revise labor regulations enforcement to develop constructive
                           supervision models that facilitate the gradual achievement of decent employment conditions through
                           partnerships between workers, employers and the Government; and (iii) strengthen the stewardship
                           role of the MTEPS in articulating labor and employment policies where other Ministries are involved
                           and the development of coordination and articulation mechanisms with other National Government
                           agencies, and especially subnational governments.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project would be executed in 10 urban areas of Bolivia. During project preparation the Team
                           will carry out a social assessment to define whether there are Indigenous peoples that meet the four
                           criteria of OP 4.10 within the geographical scope of where the Project’s services will be provided. In
                           the case that there are, the Policy will be triggered and an Indigenous Peoples Plan will be prepared
                           in consultation with these communities.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The MTEPS has managed the implementation of the Component 2 of the Investment in Children and
                           Youth Project (P101094). Whereas both OP 4.01 and OP 4.10 were triggered for that Project, the
                           activities covered under the Indigenous Peoples Plan were focused on a component covering rural
                           communities and were carried out by a different agency. However, the MTEPS decided to implement
                           an information and communication campaign of the MPED in three languages Aymara, Quechua and
                           Guarani. If the Policy is triggered and specific actions are adopted within an Indigenous Peoples Plan
                           (IPP), MTEPS’s capacity for working with Indigenous peoples will be assessed and strengthened as
                           necessary and such actions will be described in the appraisal stage ISDS.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Raul Tolmos (LCSEN)
                           Peter F. B. A. Lafere (LCSSO)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         No               This policy is not triggered as the nature and
                           BP 4.01                                               scope of the project activities are not expected
                                                                                 to generate adverse environmental impacts.
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No                            This policy is not triggered since no impact is
                                                                                                                                 expected on natural habitats.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No                            This policy is not triggered given that the
                                                                                                                                 project will not finance activities that affect
                                                                                                                                 forests.
                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No                            This policy is not triggered because the project
                                                                                                                                 will not finance the purchase or use of
                                                                                                                                 pesticides.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No                            The policy is not triggered because there are no
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         project activities that will impact the quality or
                                                                                                                                 management of physical cultural resources as
                                                                                                                                 defined under the policy.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     Yes                           The Policy is triggered at this stage waiting for
                                                                                                                                 the results of a Social Assessment. A Social
                                                                                                                                 Assessment (SA) will be carried out during
                                                                                                                                 project preparation. This SA will analyze the
                                                                                                                                 existence of indigenous population as it is
                                                                                                                                 defined in the OP/BP 4.10 in the urban areas. .
                                                                                                                                 The SA will be informed by a participatory
                                                                                                                                 process with relevant indigenous stakeholders.
                                                                                                                                  If it is determined that Indigenous peoples with
                                                                                                                                 these characteristics are present within the
                                                                                                                                 Project Area, the Social Assessment will
                                                                                                                                 specifically analyze any potential barriers to
                                                                                                                                 access to the program’s services. Measures to
                                                                                                                                 address these barriers will be designed in
                                                                                                                                 conjunction with these Indigenous communities
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 and incorporated into an Indigenous Peoples
                                                                                                                                 Plan.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            This policy is not triggered given that the
                                 4.12                                                                                            project will not require land acquisition that
                                                                                                                                 would result in the impacts covered under OP
                                                                                                                                 412.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            This policy is not triggered as the project will
                                                                                                                                 not finance any dams nor rely on the operations
                                                                                                                                 of existing dams.
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            This policy is not triggered since the project will
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            not finance activities that impact international
                                                                                                                                 waterways as defined by the policy.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             This policy is not triggered given that the
                                 7.60                                                                                            project will not finance activities in disputed
                                                                                                                                 areas as defined by the policy.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Nov-2013



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                             The Social Assessment will be conducted between September and October of 2013. The final
Public Disclosure Copy




                             decision to trigger OP 4.10 will be made at this time and if necessary an Indigenous Peoples Plan
                             will be prepared, consulted and disclosed prior to appraisal. Results will be included in the PAD-
                             stage ISDS..
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:       Name: Gaston Mariano Blanco

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name:                                                    Date:
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Edmundo Murrugarra (SM)                            Date: 23-Aug-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
