                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSC3221

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Apr-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Apr-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Nepal                             Project ID:       P132750
                            Project Name:       Project for Strengthening the National Rural Transport Program (P132750)
                            Task Team           A.K. Farhad Ahmed
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           08-Jul-2013                       Estimated         17-Oct-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      SASDT                             Lending           Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (80%), Public administration-
                                                Transportation (20%)
                            Theme(s):           Rural services and infrastructure (30%), Rural policies and institutions (30%),
                                                Trade facilitation and market access (20%), Decentra lization (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     90.42                       Total Bank Financing:          60.42
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                                  Financing Gap:                   0.00
                              Financing Source                                                               Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                              30.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                     60.42
                              Total                                                                           90.42
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective for this operation is to strengthen the national program for
                           developing and maintaining district-level rural transport infrastructure for the benefit of rural
                           communities.
                           C. Project Description
                         The concept for this project involves a framework for rural transport infrastructure investment that is:
                         (i) open to any willing districts according to their capacity for achieving results; (ii) demand driven;
                         (iii) based on performance incentives; and (iv) focused on developing and improving strong
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Government systems for the long run. The project has three different components as described
                         below.

                         Component A:
                         Component A of the project will fund: (i) institutional strengthening and technical assistance for
                         districts; and (ii) third party monitoring of physical works under Component B of the project. The
                         PMU will implement and manage an arrangement for third party monitoring based on lessons learned
                         from similar experiences with the Bank-supported RAIDP. This may include partnership(s) with
                         NGO, civil society organizations, and / or private firms. Third party monitoring will apply to any
                         district that accesses project funding for physical works under Component B of the project.

                         Access to technical assistance funds will be performance-based and preconditioned on a district’s
                         ability to meet the Local Bodies Fiscal Commission’s Minimum Conditions. Eligible technical
                         assistance activities will include: (i) preparing infrastructure inventories and planning initiatives such
                         as District Transport Master Plans (DTMPs); (ii) planning of priority road links (iii) project
                         preparation activities such as site survey, engineering designs, safeguards preparation, and
                         procurement activities; (iv) project implementation activities including site supervision, contract
                         management, and quality control; (v) staff training on specific technical subjects; (vi) improving
                         budget planning, financial management, and fiduciary control mechanisms via a combination of
                         training and direct support; and (vii) mobilizing length-person schemes or other systems for routine
                         maintenance. The PMU will prepare a budget outlining the maximum amount of Component A
                         funding that will be available for technical assistance in each financial year.

                         Component B:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component B of the project will support physical works to maintain and upgrade rural transport
                         infrastructure. Access to this funding will be performance based and will entail two distinct funding
                         windows. Window 1 will support maintenance of roads and crossing structures using an output-
                         based approach that ties payments to results achieved. Window 2 will support road upgrading and
                         crossing structure development as needed to provide all-weather connectivity using a traditional
                         input-based payment approach. As with technical assistance under Component A, any district
                         wishing to avail of funds under Component B’s funding windows will first need to pass the Ministry
                         of Federal Affairs and Local Development’s (MoFALD) Minimum Conditions.

                         Window 1 - output-based maintenance funding

                         Window 1 will support maintenance of all season roads and crossing structures. Access to these
                         funds will depend on a district’s ability to: (i) pass the Minimum Conditions; and (ii) satisfy a basic
                         set of project-specific criteria. Window 1 funding will disburse on the basis of verified physical
                         outputs achieved. Individual investments must constitute ‘eligible expenditures’ to count as payable
                         outputs. This will require compliance with all safeguards and procurement guidelines. Districts will
                         co-fund a portion of maintenance costs from their own financial resources to complement Window 1
                         funding. The PMU will establish co-funding requirements annually based on resource availability
                         and levels of demand from districts.
                         Any district that is fully implementing the Treasury Single Account (TSA) system for financial
                         management (see annex D) may request up to 50% advance disbursement against Window 1 funds
                         committed to a specific investment. This advance w ill not be available to districts that use
Public Disclosure Copy




                         alternative financial management systems. Final disbursements to districts will be net of any
                         advances previously received. Districts that fail to deliver agreed outputs or depart from RAIDP II
                         procurement and safeguards requirements will be required to refund any advances. Standard
                         agreement terms between the PMU and participating districts will provide the means for enforcing
                         repayment in the event it becomes necessary. Districts will bear responsibility for all cost overruns
                         during implementation and Window 2 commitments will be fixed for each specific investment once
                         agreed. Conversely, the PMU will not “claw back? Window 2 funds if districts deliver outputs that
                         meet DoLIDAR standards more efficiently than originally estimated.

                         Window 1 disbursements for road maintenance will be fully scalable and based on each whole
                         kilometer completed according to DoLIDAR standards. Crossing structure disbursements will be ‘all
                         or nothing’ for each discrete structure and no partial disbursement for a single structure will be
                         possible. The project will route Window 1 funding for crossing structure maintenance via
                         DoLIDAR’s trail bridges or motorable bridges programs as appropriate to the technical scope of
                         proposed investments.

                         Window 2 – upgrading

                         Window 2 funding will be available to any district that: (i) has passed LBFC’s Minimum Conditions
                         within a given fiscal year; (ii) has met or exceeded MoFALD’s target threshold for the Performance
                         Measures; and (iv) can satisfy and advanced set of project-specific criteria which the PMU will
                         measure. Support from Window 2 will fund upgrading of seasonal roads and new crossing
                         structures. Disbursements from Window 2 will follow a traditional input-based approach. The
                         project will route Window 2 funding for crossing structures via DoLIDAR’s trail bridges or
                         motorable bridges programs as appropriate for the technical scope of proposed investments.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         In the case of roads, upgrading and new crossing structures must be complementary such that access
                         along the integrated road linkage becomes possible in any season. Window 2 will not support
                         upgrading for road linkages that lack supporting crossing structures. Similarly, districts will not
                         receive Window 2 funds for developing new crossing structures on roads that only provide seasonal
                         access. Window 2 funding for trail bridges will flow according to the agreed framework provided by
                         MoFALD’s trail bridges SWAp.

                         Sector specific criteria for accessing Window 2 funding will capture the following considerations: (i)
                         whether a district has fully funded its latest Annual Road Maintenance Plan (ARMP); (ii)
                         completeness and accuracy of inventory data for district roads; (iii) DTMP completeness and overall
                         quality; (iv) strength of the district’s fiduciary systems and adoption of the Treasury Single Account
                         system; and (iv) quality and inclusiveness of road sector stakeholder outreach and engagement
                         programs within the district.

                         Component C:
                         Component C will fund investments in market infrastructure along roads that offer all season rural
                         connectivity. DoLIDAR will commission a study of rural market infrastructure in Nepal during
                         project preparation or the initial stages of project implementation. This study will propose a list of
                         rural market sites where targeted infrastructure investments could improve physical functionality of
                         selected markets. The study will also categorize markets based on their relative importance based on
                         the value chain analysis. Examples of potential investments include coverings to protect against
                         adverse weather, permanent stall structures, livestock facilities, water supply, sanitation, drainage,
                         etc. DTOs will implement Component C investments under the PMU’s oversight. Allocations of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component C funding will only take place in districts that have passed the Minimum Conditions.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed project is located in Nepal, a geographically small landlocked country. Nestled
                         between China and India, the two most populous and among the world’s most rapidly growing
                         economies, Nepal’s territory is mostly mountainous/hilly and its transport infrastructure is poor.
                         Many communities have only limited access to markets, social services, general economic
                         opportunity. The country is located in the central part of the Himalayan arc and occupies nearly one
                         third of the mountain range. 83 percent of Nepal’s geographical area is mountainous and the
                         remaining 17 percent lies in the northern edge of the alluvial plains of the great Gangetic Basin.
                         Project activities will occur in all districts of Nepal’s (75 in number). Since this is a national project
                         that uses a framework approach to selecting investments, specific project locations are not known at
                         this stage. However, the type of activities/ subprojects is known. Component B of the project will
                         support physical works to maintain and upgrade rural transport infrastructure. The physical works
                         include road and crossing structure maintenance, and upgrading and construction of crossing
                         structures.

                         Social and environmental impacts of the project will vary by the nature of the sub projects and their
                         location. Maintenance works under window 1 are less likely to result in significant impacts given the
                         nature of works involved (e.g. shoulder and slope maintenance, clearing drains, maintenance of road
                         signs, road resurfacing, crossing structure maintenance, etc.). However, full road upgrading and new
                         crossing structure construction under window 2 will often require improved road sub-structures, new
                         drainage works and new retaining structures. Such works may result in more significant adverse
                         impacts. Where a new alignment or realignment might be needed, it will be selected after considering
                         two or more alternatives to ensure that land acquisition, forest loss, landslides risks and other adverse
Public Disclosure Copy




                         impacts are minimized.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The most significant issues with regard to safeguards are associated with window 2 of the proposed
                         project, namely upgrading the existing road and construction of crossing structures. The Department
                         of Local Infrastructure Development and Agricultural Roads (DoLIDAR) under Ministry for Federal
                         Affairs and Local Development (MOFALD) will be the implementing agency of the project.
                         DOLIDAR is familiar with the Bank’s safeguard requirements, through its involvement in Rural
                         Access Improvement and Decentralization Project (RAIDP). Under RAIDP, a Senior Social
                         Development Specialist and an Environmental Specialist have been appointed within DoLIDAR’s
                         Project Coordination Unit. In addition to these specialists, there are Social Development Consultants
                         and Social Mobilizers that have supported RADIP works in participating project districts. Under
                         RAIDP, DOLIDAR has also prepared and is implementing Environmental and Social Management
                         Frameworks (ESMF), Environmental Management Plans (EMP), Social Management Plans (SMP)
                         and Vulnerable Community Development Plans (VCDP). The proposed operation will further build
                         upon DoLIDAR’s past experience in preparing and implementing Bank-financed projects in
                         compliance with all applicable safeguards policies.
                         F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                         Drona Raj Ghimire (SASDI)
                           Parthapriya Ghosh (SASDS)
                           Rekha Shreesh (SASDT)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes          OP 4.01 is triggered because the proposed
                           BP 4.01                                        project activities (depending on location and
                                                                          type) may have adverse impacts on slope
                                                                          stability/ soil erosion, dusts/air quality, health &
                                                                          safety, fresh water, forests etc.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       TBD          It is not clear at the PCN stage if activities under
                                                                          project will be located in or near natural habitats
                                                                          (such as protected areas), or use resources from
                                                                          natural habitats.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes          Subproject activities may take place in any of
                                                                          Nepal’s 75 districts. Rural roads included
                                                                          within project activities may pass through
                                                                          community and state forests. Hence, forest OP
                                                                          4.36 has been triggered.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09           No           OP 4.09 is not being triggered for this project as
                                                                          procurement of pesticide or use of pesticide is
                                                                          not envisaged, and project is not expected to
                                                                          affect pest management (no biological/
                                                                          environmental pest control or use/reliance of
                                                                          synthetic chemical pesticides).
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes          Chance finds at civil work sites are likely and
                           BP 4.11                                        the project may need to manage this risk.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                          Adverse impacts on any locally important
                                                                          cultural property would be examined, if any, for
                                                                          appropriate mitigation measures during
                                                                          planning and implementation stages.
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes          Indigenous and vulnerable communities exist
                                                                          throughout Nepal. Since the exact locations of
                                                                          sub projects are not known, the policy has been
                                                                          triggered. Consultations with these communities
                                                                          will disseminate information regarding the
                                                                          proposed project, potential impacts, possible
                                                                          risk mitigation measures, and the likely positive
                                                                          impacts of project investments.
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes          To the extent possible, DoLIDAR will consider
                           4.12                                           alternative designs and locations that minimize
                                                                          land acquisition and adverse social impacts.
                                                                          Project investments may require minor changes
                                                                          in road alignments, widening, or other
                                                                          improvements that make land acquisition
                                                                          necessary. This may cause loss of land,
                                                                                                                                 temporary or permanent loss of income or
                                                                                                                                 income sources.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            OP 4.37 is not triggered as this project will not
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 construct of new dams or undertake activities
                                                                                                                                 that are concerned with safe functioning of
                                                                                                                                 existing dams.
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            OP 7.50 will not be triggered for this project as
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            there are no interventions planned/proposed
                                                                                                                                 over or around an international waterways that
                                                                                                                                 could cause a potential conflict. There are also
                                                                                                                                 no activities that may affect the use of or pollute
                                                                                                                                 such waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             OP 7.60 will not be triggered for this project as
                                 7.60                                                                                            the project activities will not be implemented in
                                                                                                                                 any disputed area.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 16-Aug-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      It is expected that the safeguard-related studies will be completed during the preparation phase of
                                      the project.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: A.K. Farhad Ahmed
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Zia Al Jalaly (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 03-Apr-2013
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Karla Gonzalez Carvajal (SM)                                                                                         Date: 18-Apr-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
