                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC2564

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-May-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Jun-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Georgia                          Project ID:       P133828
                            Project Name:       Irrigation and Land Market Development Project (P133828)
                            Task Team           Peter Goodman
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           04-Feb-2014                      Estimated         03-Apr-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      ECSAR                            Lending           Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Irrigation and drainage (90%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector
                                                (10%)
                            Theme(s):           Rural services and infrastructure (90%), Land administration and management
                                                (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     79.00                      Total Bank Financing:          50.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                                 Financing Gap:                   0.00
                              Financing Source                                                              Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                             10.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                          25.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                    25.00
                              International Fund for Agriculture Development                                 19.00
                              Total                                                                          79.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve the delivery of irrigation and drainage
                           services in selected areas and to ensure owners of irrigated or drained land in selected areas have
                           registered land titles.
                         C. Project Description
                         The Project will consist of three components: (i) Component 1 - Irrigation and Drainage
                         Improvement; (ii) Component 2 -Land Market Development; and (iii) Component 3 - Project
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Management. The Project budget will be US$75 million including US$50 million (IDA/ IBRD), US
                         $15 million (IFAD) (to be confirmed), plus a government contribution which is assumed to be US
                         $10 million (to be confirmed). The allocation of funding is provisionally expected to be as follows:
                         Component 1 - Irrigation and Drainage Improvement (US$70 million); (ii) Component 2 - Land
                         Market Development (US$ 4 million) and (iii) Component 3 Project Management (US$1 million).

                         Component 1: Irrigation and Drainage Improvement Component ($74 million):
                         This Component will involve three sub components: (i) Irrigation and Drainage Rehabilitation and
                         Modernization; (ii) Institutional Strengthening of Irrigation and Drainage Institutions; and (iii) Water
                         User Capacity Building on On-Farm Water Management and Agronomy.

                         (i)      Irrigation and Drainage Rehabilitation and Modernization Sub Component:
                         This subcomponent would finance the rehabilitation and modernization of selected irrigation and
                         drainage systems. It would support the rehabilitation of primary and secondary (off-farm) canals,
                         tertiary (on-farm canals), small dams where necessary, and any other major structures as needed in
                         the project areas. The Project will restore previously irrigated and drained areas only, and not build
                         new schemes. Based on an assumed average cost of US$1500 per ha, (according to the recent IFAD
                         supplementary financing design report) project funding would be sufficient to rehabilitate
                         approximately 49,000 ha. While a large part of the rehabilitation will involve reconstruction of
                         original systems, there will be opportunities to modernize water control and delivery structures,
                         including automation of headworks or introduction of SCADA (supervisory control and data
                         acquisition) to monitor and control water distribution in some of the larger canal systems. Low-
                         pressure drip and sprinkler systems may also be employed in some schemes to improve water use
                         efficiency.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The United Amelioration Service Company of Georgia (UASCG) is currently undertaking a detailed
                         inventory of infrastructure and preparing preliminary assessments of rehabilitation needs on all
                         irrigation and drainage schemes which will inform the selection of schemes throughout the Project.
                         Based on information collected to date, three schemes have been provisionally selected from a short-
                         list of 15 schemes, subject to further legal, socio-economic and technical assessments. The three
                         schemes proposed for rehabilitation include:

                         - Zeda Ru (3,581 ha, 4,300 beneficiaries). Repair and rehabilitation of the entire on-farm system
                         including cleaning and lining of secondary and tertiary canals, and structures along them such as
                         intakes, cross-regulators, hydro-posts, outlets, crossings and culverts.
                         -        Kvemo Samgori (22,000 ha, 23,000 beneficiaries): Initially, the headworks for Kvemo
                         Samgori Irrigation Scheme that requires replacement of the electro-mechanical works including
                         connection to the power grid, installation of a standby power generator, replacement of obsolete
                         electric and mechanical equipment, installation of an automatic control system for headworks
                         operation, and construction and rehabilitation of structures such as water measurement devices.
                         Further rehabilitation of off-farm and on-farm systems will follow in subsequent contracts.
                         - Algeti Reservoir and Tbilisi-Kumisi Irrigation System (4,800 ha, 4000 beneficiaries):
                         Rehabilitation and reconstruction of exiting dam structures and irrigation system primary and
                         secondary canals including installation of equipment for instrumentation and monitoring of dam
                         performance, rehabilitation of a dam gate, rehabilitation of a spillway, and cleaning and lining of
                         canal structures along it such as intakes, cross-regulators, hydro-posts, outlets, crossings and culverts.

                         (ii)     Institutional Strengthening of Irrigation and Drainage Institutions Sub Component:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This Sub Component will strengthen the capacity of key institutions, including the UASCG and
                         Water User Associations (WUAs) to promote more sustainable management of irrigation and
                         drainage systems. To improve the efficiency of water delivery, build capacity for design and
                         rehabilitation, improve maintenance of irrigation and drainage systems and raise cost recovery, the
                         Project will finance:

                         - Off-Farm System Management including: (a) The development of proposals for organizational
                         restructuring of the UASCG to undertake rehabilitation, maintenance, water delivery, WUA
                         development and the preparation of operating procedures for the resulting department staff.
                         Restructuring will include transformation of the existing UASCG water user support unit in UASCG
                         into a WUA Support Unit (WUASU) discussed further below; (b) Design and installation of
                         improved UASCG data management systems for asset operation and maintenance, water delivery,
                         billing and financial management and associated training for UASCG staff; (c) Training of UASCG
                         staff in modernization of irrigation schemes and funding of study tour to learn about the application
                         of new technology in other countries; (d) Upgrading and equipping UASCG offices, procurement of
                         vehicles and irrigation maintenance equipment subject to an assessment of the current inventory.
                         - On-Farm System Management including: (a) Legal reviews and drafting of legal amendments for
                         the improvement of the legal framework for Water User Associations; (b) Establishment of WUASU
                         field offices including the purchase of office facilities, equipment and vehicles; (c) Operating costs
                         for the WUASU to undertake public awareness, social mobilization, and support legal registration of
                         WUAs; (d) Operating costs of the UASCG WUASU to provide of legal, organization development,
                         financial and technical advice and training to WUA once established; (e) Establishment of WUA
                         including the costs of office facilities and equipment; (f) Provision of machinery and equipment to
                         WUA (or alternatively local service providers) for irrigation maintenance.
                         - Improvement of Design Capacity: Long term maintenance of rehabilitated systems will also require
                         improved design capacity. There are currently an insufficient number of irrigation design engineers
Public Disclosure Copy




                         in Georgia, particularly with skills in modernization of irrigation systems. The Project will finance
                         the costs of employing and training young interns in Georgian Water Project during the life of the
                         Project, to gain experience in irrigation design and help create a cadre of designers which can be
                         contracted by Georgian Water Project, UASCG or WUA in future.

                         (iii)    Water User Capacity Building on On-Farm Water Management and Agronomy Sub
                         Component:
                         It is expected that other donors (notably USAID) are likely to take a lead in the institutional
                         development of a public agricultural extension service. The Project will fund the preparation of
                         extension material and delivery of specific advice to water users on target irrigation schemes on: (i)
                         efficient on farm water-use; and (ii) opportunities for diversification post-irrigation rehabilitation;
                         and (iii) associated agronomic practices. Training will include a focus on addressing issues of
                         particular relevance to women and will encourage strong participation of women. This would be
                         delivered by the emerging public extension servi ce and agricultural service centers in close
                         cooperation with donors supporting their development.

                         Component 2. Land Market Development:
                         The Project will support: (i) the establishment of land rights based on land surveys and registered
                         titles in areas benefiting under the Irrigation and Drainage Improvement Component; and (ii)
                         creation of a land information system – to improve the quality of land information available to buyers
                           and sellers and as a basis for improved MOA planning. The National Agency for Public Registry
                           (NAPR) will be the key Project partner for this component.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Component 3. Project Management Component:
                           This component would finance overall project management, including coordination and technical
                           supervision of the implementation, financial management, procurement, and monitoring and
                           reporting on implementation progress.

                           The Project triggers several safeguard policies: OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment, OP4.09 Pest
                           management, OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary resettlement, and OP/BP 7.50 Projects on International
                           waterways. A need for triggering Op/BP 4.37 Safety of Dams and OP/BP 7.60 Projects in Disputed
                           Areas will be examined during the Project preparation and the final decision will be taken by
                           appraisal.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The Project will be implemented county-wide. Individual investments may be made in any irrigated
                           and drained area of the country. Most of these investments will not be finally selected by the time of
                           Project preparation. Schemes provisionally selected for the Project support in the early stage of
                           implementation are located within Tetriskaro, Marneuli, Sagarejo, Sighnaghi, Gurjaani, Kareli and
                           Gori.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The MoA of Georgia will be the Project implementing agency. It has acted in this capacity for
                           several World Bank supported projects in the past. This Ministry also has vast experience of
                           collaborating with other multilateral and bilateral development agencies. It is expected that a Project
                           Implementation Unit (PIU) will be established (most likely within the MoA) and will be responsible
                           for fiduciary management, monitoring and evaluation. Key technical partners will be the
                           Amelioration Policy Department and the Land Department of the MoA, as well as the NAPR.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Darejan Kapanadze (ECSEN)
                           Joanna Peace De Berry (ECSSO)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The Project will help to improve irrigation and
                           BP 4.01                                               drainage efficiency in several existing
                                                                                 deteriorated schemes. This would imply
                                                                                 rehabilitation or replacement of damaged
                                                                                 hydraulic structures, and cleaning and lining of
                                                                                 canals. No new schemes will be constructed and
                                                                                 no new agricultural areas will be covered with
                                                                                 irrigation/drainage services. Scheme
                                                                                 rehabilitation will improve service provision to
                                                                                 the areas currently covered and could allow
                                                                                 service delivery to some of the areas previously
                                                                                 served, but later cut-off due to deterioration of
                         the infrastructure. The Project will improve
                         efficiency of water use by decreasing water loss
                         during transportation through the rehabilitation
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and upgrading of damaged canals, and by
                         educating, training and advising farmers on
                         optimal planning of irrigation and the use of
                         new technologies. Activities proposed for the
                         Project support trigger OP/BP 4.01
                         Environmental Assessment. Based on the nature
                         and scope of the planned physical works, the
                         Project is classified through environmental
                         screening as Category B. Its expected
                         environmental and social impacts are low to
                         medium. The Project does not carry risks of
                         destroying natural habitats, damaging forest
                         stands, significantly altering hydrology of the
                         natural waterways, or affecting other
                         ecosystems in any tangible and/or irreversible
                         ways.

                         The Project will support works on the schemes
                         most of which are not identified at the Project
                         preparation phase, though the nature and scope
                         of these works are well known upfront and will
                         be mostly similar in various locations. An
                         Environmental and Social Management
                         Framework (ESMF) will be developed to cover
                         all key aspects of screening, risk assessment,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         environmental evaluation and management
                         planning of the schemes to be rehabilitated.
                         Environmental screening of sub-project
                         proposals will be part of their selection for the
                         Project support. Screening will imply
                         examination of water availability for the
                         proposed irrigation schemes. ESMF will
                         provide sufficient information on the expected
                         impacts and needed mitigation measures of all
                         proposed investments. Depending on the
                         complexity and associated risks of individual
                         sub-projects, their environmental assessment
                         (EA) may be required, resulting in the
                         production of an EA report, including an
                         Environmental Management Plan (EMP). In
                         most cases, though, it is expected that
                         completion of a simplified Environmental
                         Management Checklist for Small Construction
                         and Rehabilitation Activities would be
                                                                 sufficient. ESMF will carry detailed guidance
                                                                 on the selection and application of relevant tools
                                                                 for environmental review and mitigation
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 planning. It will provide instructions on the
                                                                 calculation and establishment of water intake
                                                                 limits for the selected irrigation schemes, so that
                                                                 the minimal ecological flow is preserved for
                                                                 protecting aquatic ecosystems of rivers.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes   The project aims at improving water availability
                                                                 and drainage for the serviced areas and,
                                                                 possibly, restoration of some agricultural areas
                                                                 back to irrigation/drainage. It is anticipated that
                                                                 because of improved services delivery,
                                                                 agriculture will intensify in the coverage areas,
                                                                 which could entail more intensive usage of
                                                                 pesticides. Hence, OP 4.09 Pest Management is
                                                                 triggered despite the fact that the Project will
                                                                 not finance their purchase and/or support to
                                                                 their application. While there is no need to
                                                                 develop a Pest Management Plan, promotion of
                                                                 good pest and pesticide management practices
                                                                 will be included into the Project design.
                                                                 Namely, brochures, fliers, and posters on the
                                                                 sound and safe handling of pesticides, including
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 information on the Integrated Pest Management
                                                                 (IPM), will be disseminated within the Project
                                                                 coverage areas. Linkages will be established
                                                                 with other donor-supported programs
                                                                 supporting development of agricultural
                                                                 extension services and vocational training in
                                                                 order to examine options for supplemental
                                                                 coverage of the project beneficiary farmers with
                                                                 TA aimed at the promotion of good agricultural
                                                                 practice and IPM. Water User Associations will
                                                                 play pivotal role in promotion of good
                                                                 agricultural practice to farmers.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   The rehabilitation of primary-, secondary- and
                         4.12                                    tertiary-level irrigation infrastructure may
                                                                 necessitate land acquisition, although every
                                                                                                                                 attempt will be made to agree rehabilitation
                                                                                                                                 design plans that minimize land acquisitions.
                                                                                                                                 The policy is triggered and a Resettlement
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared for
                                                                                                                                 the project and disclosed in country and via the
                                                                                                                                 World Bank prior to Appraisal. Should land
                                                                                                                                 acquisition be required, the RPF will guide the
                                                                                                                                 development of site specific Resettlement
                                                                                                                                 Action Plans (RAPs) to ensure that the possible
                                                                                                                                 risks of resettlement, loss of land and loss of
                                                                                                                                 income are mitigated.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         TBD

                                 Projects on International                                         Yes                           Most of the irrigation schemes of East Georgia,
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            including those provisionally identified for the
                                                                                                                                 Project support, abstract water from trans-
                                                                                                                                 boundary rivers Mtkvari and Alazani, or their
                                                                                                                                 tributaries. Water drained from the agricultural
                                                                                                                                 lands in West Georgia is discharged to the rivers
                                                                                                                                 draining into the Black Sea. Project
                                                                                                                                 interventions will not increase water intake or
                                                                                                                                 discharge beyond the designed parameters of
                                                                                                                                 the existing schemes, because they will be
                                                                                                                                 strictly limited to the rehabilitation of the
                                                                                                                                 existing irrigation and drainage infrastructure
                                                                                                                                 without altering of their original capacities.
                                                                                                                                 Therefore, while OP/BP 7.50 Projects on
                                                                                                                                 International Waterways is triggered,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 communication between the riparian states on
                                                                                                                                 the project interventions is deemed unnecessary.
                                                                                                                                 A waiver on the notification will be sought by
                                                                                                                                 the Project team from ECAVP.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP TBD
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Aug-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      ESMF will be drafted, publicly disclosed and discussed with the national stakeholders before
                                      appraisal. Site-specific EAs, as required, and/or EMPs for three schemes included in the first year
                                      work plan will also be drafted, disclosed, and discussed with stakeholders, with the emphasis on
                                      consultation with local communities. EAs/EMPs for other schemes will be developed later, during
                                      the Project implementation phase, once the schemes are identified and their designs become
                                      available.

                                      RPF will be drafted, disclosed, and discussed with national stakeholders by appraisal. Site-specific


                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             RAPs will be prepared, as required, for individual investment activities once the designs are ready
                             and resettlement needs are known. RAPs will be disclosed and discussed with stakeholders once
                             drafted, will be finalized, and implemented prior to commencement of works at any given site.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:       Name: Peter Goodman

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name:                                                    Date:
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Dina Umali-Deininger (SM)                          Date: 18-Jun-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
