                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC2933

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Jul-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Jul-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Nigeria                          Project ID:      P143842
                            Project Name:       Nigeria Global Partnership for Education Fund Grant (P143842)
                            Task Team           Olatunde Adetoyese Adekol
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           29-Jul-2013                      Estimated        03-Feb-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      AFTEW                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Primary education (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for all (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       100.00                   Total Bank Financing:           0.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                                 Financing Gap:                  0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                        0.00
                              Education for All Supervising Entity                                          100.00
                              Total                                                                         100.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The PDO is to improve access to quality basic education in selected States with particular attention to
                           girls’ participation. The GPE grant would finance selected aspects of the State's sector programs that
                           contribute to the achievement of this development objective and are aligned with ongoing and
                           planned investments by the Local Education Group (LEG). The GPE grant builds on ongoing
                           government expenditures and commitments, IDP activities and experience and provides a targeted
                           program of support reflecting the critical areas needed to improve education service delivery as well
                         as a means for coordinating interventions among government and development partners. It also
                         reflects GPE strategic priorities.
                         C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1. The proposed project is a US$100 million Specific Investment Loan (Grant) to the Federal
                         Government of Nigeria, which in turn will disburse funds to the five selected Project states through
                         subsidiary financing agreements to support the education programs of participating states. The grant
                         will support implementation of the GPE project over the period from Feb 2014 to Feb 2017. The
                         project consists of three major components: (a) Component 1- financing selected priorities within
                         State programs to promote school effectiveness and improvement of quality of education through
                         school grants and inservice teacher training; (b) Component2- financing for the States towards
                         improving access to basic education, particularly for girls through scholarships, conditional cash
                         transfers, support for female teacher upgrading; and (c) Component 3 a federal and State technical
                         assistance component which would finance essential advisory, technical, and capacity-building
                         support for State and Federal agencies, particularly focusing on monitoring and evaluation,
                         assessment and education service coordination.

                         Component 1- Promoting School effectiveness and Quality of Education through School Grants (US
                         $ 45 million).

                         2.      The aim of this component is to improve the management and service delivery of pre-
                         primary and basic education at the school level. The GPE would support a decentralized mechanism
                         for funding of non-salary expenditures to finance activities related to improving learning and
                         teaching in the classroom. School grants and SBMC training would provide discretionary funding
                         and decision making about school level investments. As the key input to improving quality of
                         teaching, teachers will be supported through In-Service Training (INSET) in core subject areas.

                         3.        School Grants: School Grants have been piloted in all five of the proposed States through
                         government and some IDP activities. Therefore, the GPE will need to explore how to complement
Public Disclosure Copy




                         any ongoing school grant programs, expand, or enhance these programs. Experience indicates that
                         reliable and consistent funding to augment schools’ operating costs and non-salary expenditures have
                         improved the quality of the learning environment. School Grants could be provided annually to all
                         pubic basic education schools (in selected States) based on a per capita formula aligned with national
                         norms. School Based Management Committees have received significant training through ESSPIN
                         and GEP with school grants also piloted in some of the states (Jigawa, Katsina, Sokoto). The GPE
                         would learn from these different programs to calibrate the yearly allocations, targeting, and expected
                         expenditures guided by a quality menu to increase learning in the classrooms, particularly at primary
                         level. It was agreed that Islamiyya schools also could be included in those States where government
                         is already supporting these schools. A functioning and trained School Based Management Committee
                         (SBMC) would be required in order to transfer resources. Training for SBMCs has been ongoing for
                         several years with support from ESSPIN. But not all schools might be ready at the commencement of
                         the project and to receive grant funding. This would ensure some phasing of school grants as new
                         SBMCs are strengthened. The grants would match ongoing allocations from existing budget lines
                         through State budgets and UBEC investment funds to ensure that parallel critical investments in
                         infrastructure and textbooks are forthcoming. This matching grant system would encourage greater
                         coordination among the multiple sources of financing, create new “rules of the game? for more
                         efficient allocation of federal resources, and encourage greater impact of the investments by ensuring
                         complementary funding. In addition, the link between school grants and federal and state resources
                         would strengthen the sustainability of decentralized financing. This platform allows for States and
                         schools to tailor their interventions to the challenges of their particular States. For example, some
                         States may opt to focus on top ups for Early Childhood Care and Education/pre-primary school,
                         others may need more interventions for girl's participation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4.       School Grants could focus on quality improvements at the school level, with a possible menu
                         of learning materials (in local languages and English), classroom libraries, remedial education,
                         school based In-Service Training (INSET), minor rehabilitation, foundation skill support (reading
                         and math), etc. The grants may also support teacher participation in Strengthening of Math and
                         Science Education (SMASE) training (developed with support from JICA), community sensitization,
                         school enrollment drives, etc. A school grant manual would offer a mensu of evidence-based
                         activities, linkages to donor-supported sprograms and guidance on more effective implementation of
                         school g rants through easy to use templates, SBMC reporting, etc.

                         5.       Teacher Quality: The GPE would complement on-going efforts by ESSPIN, DFID, USAID
                         and JICA to improve the quality of teaching in the five states. DFID will be rolling out a program in
                         June 2013 to improve the skills of 66,000 teachers through in-service training in math, English and
                         science and technology. In addition, colleges will be supported to improve pre-service training. JICA
                         is supporting a cascading training program to train teachers in math and science education using
                         activity based learning and ultimately school based continuous cluster training with support from
                         NTI. The program has been piloted in Kaduna, but could be scaled to the other four GPE states.
                         ESSPIN has developed quality lesson plans in primary 1-3 to teach reading and writing in Kano,
                         Kaduna and Jigawa. Under the GPE, these materials could be translated from English to Hausa to
                         encourage greater use by northern teachers in teaching reading and writing in early primary grades.
                         Continuing the training to School Support Officers would be critical for ensuring greater support for
                         classroom teachers in the use of these new materials. The GPE also would support the upcoming
                         USAID Reading-For-All project by expanding the reading skills training in GPE schools. The GPE
                         may also explore the possibility of linking school grant top ups to improve selected service delivery
                         indicators such as teacher attendance reported and validated by NGO monitoring.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2: Improving Girls Access to Quality Education (estimated cost: US$35 million)

                         6.       The aim of this component is to support the inclusion of all children especially for girls and
                         out of school children in basic education in the selected beneficiary States. The primary means to
                         encouraging an increase in enrolment and retention in basic education would be through
                         interventions focused on incentives for girls participation. Scholarships and CCTs are potential
                         programs, both being implemented in several of the States. A social assessment is being conducted to
                         elaborate on the factors affecting girls access to education services that will contribute to further
                         design of potential GPE interventions. Currently, the Girl’s Education Program (GEP) supported by
                         DFID and UNICEF is in its third phase providing demand and supply incentives to encourage greater
                         enrolment and retention of girls in school. The program aims to increase girl’s enrolment through
                         advocacy, community mobilization and provision of educational materials and minor infrastructure
                         for selected schools. In addition the GEP supports teacher scholarships for trainee female teachers
                         from rural areas where gender imbalances are significant. Most recently the GEP has included cash
                         transfers for needy families to send girls to school as well as school grants to improve the quality of
                         education. The program also aims to encourage integration of Quranic schools with the national core
                         curriculum (Katsina and Sokoto). A Conditional Cash Transfer (CCT) program in Kano initiated
                         under the World Bank supported SESP has also contributed to increased girls enrolment. Scholarship
                         programs in Jigawa, Kaduna, Sokoto provide uniforms, materials and transportation for girls to
                         attend school. This component would therefore focus on supporting and expanding some of these
                         transfer programs and/or scholarship programs to increase girl enrolment and retention. In addition,
                         activities would be supported to increase the number of female teachers in these areas by expanding
                         the teacher upgrading of uncertified female teachers. Support for girls clubs, enrolment drives, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         closer monitoring and data disaggregation would also be supported. While CCTs are currently on-
                         going in several of the States, the extensive analysis and due diligence to expand and sustain these
                         programs may be beyond the scope of the three-year GPE intervention especially with significant
                         funding already secured from other IDPs and the World Bank YESSO project. Therefore, the project
                         is likely to support CCTs only in exceptional cases where the commitment and readiness of the State
                         demonstrate high probability of impact over the GPE period.

                         Component 3: Management, M&E and Assessment (estimated cost: US$20 million):

                         7.       The objective of this component is to provide capacity building and technical assistance as
                         well as operational resources for managing, monitoring and supervising the GPE activities at all
                         institutional levels. Support would enhance key institutional capacities and provide targeted training,
                         particularly at the decentralized levels. The GPE would finance the standard project management
                         activities such as audits, annual reviews, impact evaluation, surveys and quarterly reporting. In
                         addition, this component aims to support State level civil society to support supervision and
                         monitoring. An independent monitoring agency could be supported at the Federal level to validate
                         performance and provide specialized reviews, assessments, surveys as needed. With possible security
                         challenges for supervision, this component could also support new technologies to review and report
                         on school level data through mobile GPS mapping and verification. This component could also
                         finance strengthening of learning assessment systems that continue to receive technical assistance
                         from DFID and USAID. Additional activities could include research and studies on key reform areas
                         as well as data collection and analysis
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will focus on the states of - Kaduna, Kano, Katsina, Sokoto and Jigawa.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         Nigeria has demonstrated its commitment to mitigating adverse social and environmental impacts in
                         the implementation of a range of World Bank projects including category A projects. There are
                         adequate legal and institutional frameworks in the country to ensure compliance with World Bank
                         safeguards policies triggered in the country to ensure compliance with Ministry of environment
                         (FMEnv) is responsible for setting policy guidelines on environmental issues and ensuring
                         compliance with national environmental standards. It has different departments with field offices in
                         every region of the country. At state level, the Federal Ministry of Education will be responsible and
                         accountable for all safeguard issues.

                         An existing ESMF is used by the implementing agencies to govern safeguards for other education
                         projects in Nigeria. It has been agreed that this ESMF will be revised and updated to incorporate
                         proposed interventions under the Nigeria GPE grant.
                         F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                         Alexandra C. Bezeredi (AFTSG)
                         Joseph Ese Akpokodje (AFTN1)
                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                                 Safeguard Policies                                                Triggered?                    Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Environmental Assessment OP/                                      Yes                           While there is no construction involved in the
                                 BP 4.01                                                                                         project, there is the need to prepare an
                                                                                                                                 Environmental and Social Management
                                                                                                                                 Framework (ESMF) which will provide details
                                                                                                                                 on the processes and procedures for
                                                                                                                                 environmental safeguards and proper review
                                                                                                                                 procedures for any minor works or
                                                                                                                                 rehabilitation. This document will be disclosed
                                                                                                                                 in the event that minor school repairs/
                                                                                                                                 maintenance will need to be done through the
                                                                                                                                 proposed school grants under the project.
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No                            The Project does not involve or have impacts on
                                                                                                                                 natural habitats.
                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No                            The project does not involve forests or forestry.

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No                            The project does not involve pest management.

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No                            The Project will not affect physical cultural
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         resources.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            There are no indigenous people in the project
                                                                                                                                 area.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            The Project does not involve land acquisition
                                 4.12                                                                                            leading to involuntary resettlement and/or
                                                                                                                                 restrictions of access of resources and
                                                                                                                                 livelihoods.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project does not involve dams.

                                 Projects on International        No                                                             N/A
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             N/A
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 23-Sep-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The ESMF will be prepared and disclosed prior to project appraisal.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Olatunde Adetoyese Adekol

                                 Approved By:



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Regional Safeguards Name:                             Date:
                         Coordinator:
                         Sector Manager:     Name: Peter Nicolas Materu (SM)   Date: 18-Jul-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy
