                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC2308

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Mar-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 25-Mar-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Afghanistan                     Project ID:      P128048
                            Project Name:      Afghanistan Access to Finance (P128048)
                            Task Team          Guillemette Sidonie Jaffr
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          06-Jun-2013                     Estimated        27-Aug-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASFP                           Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Microfinance (45%), SME Finance (45%), General finance sector (10%)
                            Theme(s):          Other Financial Sector Development (10%), Micro, Small and Medium
                                               Enterprise support (90%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     50.00                    Total Bank Financing:         50.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                               Financing Gap:                 0.00
                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                50.00
                              Total                                                                      50.00
                            Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           17. The proposed Development Objective of the project is to increase micro, small and medium
                           enterprises’ access to financial services, notably credit.
                           C. Project Description
                           Component 1: Improving access to financial services for micro and small enterprises
                         This component aims to provide continuing support to the microfinance sector through Microfinance
                         Investment Support Facility for Afghanistan (MISFA), as well as, supporting MISFA to take on a
                         broader role as a catalyst for innovations to increase access to financial services to the lower end of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the market (notably micro and small enterprises) as per its new strategic plan under preparation.

                         Despite the recent difficulties of the microfinance sector, it is important to continue providing
                         support to the sector, which is playing a key role in providing access to financial services to low-
                         income households and micro-enterprises. The number of microfinance clients is estimated at over
                         400,000 by the Afghanistan Microfinance Association as of December 2012, of which 38 percent are
                         women. MISFA microfinance partners count 136,717 clients (with 19 percent of women). MISFA is
                         recognized as a strong institution which has – in recent years – taken the difficult role of leading the
                         consolidation of the microfinance sector.

                         Under its proposed new strategic plan, MISFA intends to pursue its role of wholesale lender to the
                         microfinance sector (having learnt the lessons from the past microfinance crisis) and further expand
                         financial sector development initiatives, with a focus on developing new financial products for a
                         diversity of institutions (including community-based institutions). MISFA also intends to develop
                         specific initiatives targeted at underserved groups, most notably women and youth.

                         The microfinance sector crisis (and ensuing consolidation) has shown that in spite of ten years of
                         capacity building efforts, the microfinance sector still remains fragile and significant efforts at
                         capacity building are still required. It should be noted that MISFA currently has sufficient available
                         resources for on-lending and, as such, does not require additional funds for on-lending.

                         This component will include the following activities:
                         •        Innovation fund: this fund will allow MISFA to support innovations to improve access to
                         financial services proposed by MFIs and other institutions which have a focus on access to finance.
                         As such, this fund would cover the testing and piloting of new financial products (small enterprise
                         finance, agricultural credit, savings, sharia-compliant products, insurance, etc.) as well as the use of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         technology to improve access to financial services. This sub-component will not include on-lending
                         funds as MISFA has currently enough resources for on-lending (which could be mobilized in parallel
                         by the applying institutions, if needed).
                         •        Systems strengthening fund for MFIs: this fund will support efforts from MFIs to strengthen
                         their systems and their human resources (MIS, internal control, risk management, etc.) based on a
                         detailed capacity strengthening plan. This fund will also support systems strengthening of MFIs
                         aiming to become Deposit taking MFI (DMFI), once the regulation is approved. This sub-component
                         will not include on-lending funds.
                         •        Research and development at MISFA: this sub-component will help MISFA develop
                         innovative programs, as incubator, to better serve under-served groups, notably women and youth.
                         Under its proposed new strategic plan, MISFA intends to develop a Women Empowerment Program
                         as well as a Youth Entrepreneurship Program (combining financial and non-financial services). This
                         component will also support the establishment of a Knowledge Management Department at MISFA
                         to document best practices, lessons learned, and provide timely and relevant information to
                         stakeholders by commissioning research and studies. This Department would also be tasked to
                         develop a Progress out of Poverty Index (based on international experience) to better track
                         microfinance impacts. MISFA will also strengthen its Client Profile database to have more accurate
                         information on clients and avoid multi-lending to clients and over-indebtedness.
                         •        Targeting the Ultra Poor Program: This sub-component will support the national scale up of
                         the Targeting the Ultra Poor (TUP) program pilo ted by MISFA in Bamyan and Badakshan. The
                         TUP program aims at “graduating? participants from safety nets programs to income-earning
                         activities, linking them with microfinance programs. Building on the lessons learned from the pilots
                         and from international experience, the program will provide TUP beneficiaries a two-year package of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         inputs which includes the transfer of productive assets (such as livestock) as well as training
                         (classroom and hands-on);a subsistence support (monthly stipend, as short term income support); and
                         basic health care through community-based health workers.
                         •        Support to Policy, Regulation and Advocacy: this sub-component will provide support to
                         agencies in charge of policy, regulation and advocacy, namely: the Ministry of Finance, which has
                         the responsibility to set the policy direction for financial sector development in Afghanistan; the
                         Central Bank of Afghanistan (DAB) which once the Deposit taking MFIs regulation will be approved
                         will be responsible for regulating these institutions and the Afghanistan Microfinance Association
                         (AMA) which is the representative body for the microfinance sector.
                         •        Institutional strengthening: This sub-component will support institutional strengthening at
                         MISFA to ensure it is able to fully implement its new strategic plan. It will also support project
                         implementation at MISFA (with a focus on fiduciary aspects). It will also support coordination
                         efforts between various initiatives with a focus on access to finance supported by development
                         partners (notably USAID, with FAIDA and ABADE) and the World Bank (such as Financial Sector
                         Strengthening Project, New Market Development Project, Rural Enterprise Development Project,
                         Skills Development Project and Justice Service Delivery Project).

                         Component 2: Improving access to financial services for small and medium enterprises

                         The credit guarantee facility implemented by DEG has demonstrated that – with well-designed
                         support, i.e. loan guarantee facility and tailored technical assistance – commercial banks are
                         interested in increasing their lending to the SME market segment. As of October 2012, the Credit
                         Guarantee Facility has mobilized loans of a total value of $89.8m to more than 2,500 businesses, the
                         outstanding guaranteed loan portfolio stood at $20.8m. The Facility is active in 12 provinces. The
                         portfolio quality is excellent, with a Portfolio at Risk over 30 days amounting to 1.1 percent. The
                         average net loss rate has been around 1 percent per annum since 2006.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The aim of the component is to increase commercial bank lending to SMEs, as well as to strengthen
                         commercial banks from within. International experience with such “downscaling? programs has
                         shown that the improvements made in the SME lending departments of commercial banks (better
                         credit risk appraisal, stronger credit monitoring, better delinquency management, stronger credit
                         approval process, etc.) often permeates to other departments (such as corporate or consumer
                         departments). It is therefore expected that the technical assistance provided to commercial banks in
                         the context of the Credit Guarantee Facility will gradually help strengthening the banks “from
                         within?: audits of ten commercial banks financed by the World Bank have revealed significant
                         weaknesses across all banks. In addition, the banking sector sustains high level of liquidity. Such a
                         guarantee facility can therefore support commercial banks make a more productive use of their
                         liquidity, i.e. in investing their liquidity in the Afghan private sector.

                         This component will therefore support the expansion of the DEG credit guarantee facility, along the
                         following activities:
                         •       Operational improvements and volume growth with existing partner banks (the Facility
                         currently works with 3 partner banks);
                         •       Cooperation with additional partner banks (an increasing number of commercial banks have
                         expressed an interest for support to develop SME lending);
                         •       Regional expansion;
                         •      New product development, including trade finance, rural/agricultural SME lending, sharia
                         compliant SME lending, start-up lending, as well as adapted products to female entrepreneurs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component will provide a contribution to the guarantee fund managed by DEG (the current
                         guarantee fund of US$8.6m is almost fully committed). It will also finance technical assistance for
                         new product development (such as trade finance or agricultural finance, as highlighted in the
                         paragraph above) and support the Guarantee Facility operating costs in Afghanistan (including the
                         opening of offices in Mazar-e-Sharif and Herat). DEG is currently in discussions with the German
                         and Afghan governments on options to institutionalize the guarantee fund.

                         A critical aspect of the Credit Guarantee Facility – and a key reason of its success – is the technical
                         assistance provided by the Facility to partner commercial banks to lend to SMEs. Commercial banks
                         are usually wary of SME lending, as SMEs are not able to provide the financial information required
                         by commercial banks (i.e. audited financial statements, business plans). SMEs also often lack
                         sufficient collateral. Commercial banks therefore need to develop new lending approach to deal with
                         SMEs. This requires the establishment of SME Unit within commercial banks, the development of
                         appropriate lending methodology and training of staff. Under this component, the Credit Guarantee
                         Facility will provide technical assistance on SME lending to partner banks, until the Facility
                         considers that the partner banks no longer require the technical assistance, as well as technical
                         assistance on new product development (trade finance, agricultural finance). Under this component,
                         the Credit Guarantee Facility also intends to pilot reverse factoring (also known as supply chain
                         financing).

                         The component triggers OP 8.30: Financial Intermediary Lending. The OP 8.30 compliance annex
                         will be prepared in accordance with the World Bank’s procedure.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed activities under the project will be across Afghanistan.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The IDA funds will be channeled from Government of Afghanistan (GoA) to one implementing
                         agency (MISFA) and one implementing partner (DEG).

                         The government’s capacity in safeguard policies is generally weak, and political awareness in
                         environmental issues is limited.

                         MISFA has a long track record of supporting the Afghan microfinance sector and has implemented
                         one ARTF funded project (Microfinance Support for Poverty Reduction Project) and one IDA
                         funded project (Expanding Microfinance Outreach and Improving Sustainability Project). Under the
                         IDA funded project, MISFA prepared an Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF).
                         The ESMF was prepared in accordance with World Bank EA OP4.01 and pertinent to the Afghan
                         laws and regulations. The purpose of the ESMF is to ensure that all activities that the micro loan
                         supports are environmentally and socially sound and are in compliance with requirements of
                         pertinent Afghan laws and regulations as well as World Bank environmental policies, bearing in
                         mind the characteristics of micro loans that support household level economies. By definition, micro
                         loans require very short turn around time and transaction costs must be kept very low. As such
                         ‘subprojects’ are limited to those that have no or little environmental impacts and therefore need no
                         formal Environment Assessment. The implementation of the ESMF by MISFA has been satisfactory.
                               DEG is a member of the KfW Group and one of the largest European development finance
                               institutions – with a focus on financing and structuring investments of private companies in
Public Disclosure Copy




                               developing and transition countries. The Afghanistan Credit Guarantee Facility has been
                               implemented by DEG since 2006. The Facility currently counts three partner commercial banks. As
                               SMEs that will benefit from the Credit Guarantee Facility to be financed under the Project are not
                               identified, the Project will prepare an ESMF to manage any potential adverse environment and social
                               impacts, in compliance with the World Bank environment and social safeguards, and national laws.
                               F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                               Asta Olesen (SASDS)
                               Mohammad Yasin Noori (SASDS)
                               Obaidullah Hidayat (SASDI)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                                 Safeguard Policies                                                Triggered?                    Explanation (Optional)
                                 Environmental Assessment OP/                                      Yes
                                 BP 4.01
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No
                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 11-Apr-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      N/A
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Guillemette Sidonie Jaffr

                                 Approved By:


                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Regional Safeguards Name: Zia Al Jalaly (RSA)       Date: 20-Mar-2013
                         Coordinator:
                         Sector Manager:     Name: Henry K Bagazonzya (SM)   Date: 25-Mar-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy
