                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC3932

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Aug-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 29-Aug-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Uganda                            Project ID:      P133590
                            Project Name:      Kampala Institutional & Infrastructure Development Project 2 (P133590)
                            Task Team          Martin Onyach-Olaa
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          02-Dec-2013                       Estimated        20-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTU1                             Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (90%), Sub-national government
                                               administration (10%)
                            Theme(s):          City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (70%), Municipal governance and
                                               institution building (30%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    175.00                      Total Bank Financing:        175.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                                 Financing Gap:                 0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                              0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                   175.00
                              Total                                                                         175.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           14.      Project Development Objective (PDO) - The proposed project development objective (PDO)
                           is to ? deepen the institutional reforms and enhance city infrastructure to improve urban mobility and
                           foster economic development?.
                           C. Project Description
                         17.      This project is part of a series of projects which was originally an APL (Kampala
                         Institutional Infrastructure Development Project (KIIDP) - P078382 approved by Board on
                         November 6, 2007. The Project Development Objective is to improve the institutional efficiency of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Kampala Capital City (KCC) through implementation of the Strategic Framework for Reform of the
                         KCC. Both the objectives of KIIDP 1 and triggers to move to KIIDP 2 have been met. As of April
                         2013 the project had achieved the following intended outcomes: (i) overdue liabilities were reduced
                         to zero (baseline - UGX8.9 billion, and project target – UGX0.5 billion), (ii) share of KCCA own
                         source revenue spent on service delivery – 39% (baseline 18%, target – 34%), (iii) KCCA own
                         source revenue increased to UGX 45.687 billion (base line – UGX 22 billion, and target – UGX 33.5
                         billion). The only targets which have not yet been achieved, because of the delays in the civil works,
                         are those associated with public satisfaction in service delivery in (a) Roads, (b) Drainage, and (c)
                         solid waste from 18%, 22% and 44% (baseline) to 50%, 80%, and 70% respectively (targets).
                         Current public satisfaction, as measured by the last Citizen Report Card were 29%, 22% and 46%
                         respectively. In addition, the triggers have been met as follows: (i) KCCA New organizational
                         system is in place and operational, (ii) establish and implementation of a formal public consultation
                         process, (iii) implementation of financial recovery action plan (FRAP), (iv) a comprehensive O&M
                         plan for infrastructure in place, and (v) effective implementation of the infrastructure rehabilitation
                         and maintenance in place. Given the change in investment lending policy, the team intends intends to
                         move to a Series of projects (SOP).

                         18.     In order to deepen the institutional reforms and enhance city infrastructure for improved
                         urban mobility and foster economic development, the interventions through KIIDP 2 will build on
                         achievements under KIIDP 1 while taking into consideration the following (i) The Kampala
                         Transport Improvement Plan (2003), (ii) The Kampala Drainage Master Plan (2003), (iii) The
                         Kampala Physical Development Plan (2012), (iv) The new corporate strategy of KCCA (2012), (v)
                         The proposed Bus Rapid Transport (BRT) system for the GMKA, (vi) The Kampala – Entebbe Super
                         highway (2013), and (vii) the findings and recommendations of the Uganda Urbanization Review
                         (2012) conducted as part of “Promoting Inclusive Growth? study.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         19. Project Components - The project will have two components: (i) support to City Wide Roads
                         Infrastructure and associated investments, and (ii) Institutional and Systems Development Support.
                         The preliminary descriptions of the components are presented below.

                         20.      Component 1: City Wide Roads Infrastructure and associated investments (Approx. US
                         $190m). The objective of this component is to improve the quality of roads infrastructure and
                         associated investments in Kampala City so as to improve mobility and enhance economic viability of
                         the city. This component will complete some of the infrastructure investments which were designed
                         but could not be implemented under KIIDP 1 due to inadequate funding. The component will
                         therefore focus on roads up-grade and traffic management (Motorized and NMT) and associated
                         primary and secondary drainage improvements. Selection of roads to be upgraded will be based on
                         their economic viability and complementarity to the BRT so as to improve mobility within the city
                         and reduce congestion.

                         21.      Given the inter-linkages between roads, drainage and traffic flow, this component will
                         address these three transport elements in an integrated manner. Traffic improvement plans have been
                         developed for the CBD and elsewhere in the City, in order to reduce congestion and improve road
                         safety . The proposed plans range from changes in traffic circulation and introduction of one-way
                         streets to major junction improvements and road widening schemes to remove traffic bottlenecks.
                         22.      About 200 KMs of roads in the City have attained the traffic thresh hold of 300vpd and need
                         to be upgraded to bitumen standard. In addition, to reduce traffic accidents the designs of the roads
Public Disclosure Copy




                         need to make provisions for non-motorized transport (NMT) means in the city. The component will
                         therefore be used to widen and upgrade about 100 Kms - 200 Kms of city roads from gravel to
                         bitumen standards. The Component will also work on associated primary and secondary drains which
                         are linked to the roads net work to be upgraded. In addition, the component will support KCCA in
                         activities associated with the civil works implementation such as engineering designs,
                         implementation supervision, and preparation of future follow-on operation (funding for design/
                         prepare bidding docs/ESMPs for future investments in the next project in the SOP).

                         23.       Component 2: Institutional and Systems Development Support (Approx. US$10m). The
                         objective of this component is to develop KCCA organizationalcapacity, revenue capacity, financial
                         management, promotion of alternative service delivery mechanisms, and management of urban
                         development. In doing this, the proposed KIIDP 2 will support KCCA to train its staff and use ICT as
                         a means of automating its business processes to achieve real time responses to service delivery needs
                         of its clients and citizens. Supporting the urban planning function of the city is so critical to ensure
                         orderly urban planning, reduce the city's environmental footprint and boost economic development
                         of the city. In order to enhance its own source revenue (OSR), KCCA will need to update its revenue
                         data bases, refine its collection methodologies, procedures, and operations to reap the maximum
                         result from the existing revenue sources which potentials are not yet fully utilized. KCCA has also
                         started on the process of lobbying for the review of the Rating Act 2004 to make payment of the
                         property tax mandatory to all people with properties in Kampala City. To improve the image,
                         responsiveness to clients’ demand and credibility of KCCA, this component will also support social
                         accountability activities such as KCCA day – once a year, CSOs and non-state engagements, and
                         complain/grievances handling mechanisms. This Component will also support project audit and
                         MTR.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is to be implemented in Kampala Capital City Authority, comprising of five
                         administrative divisions. All the 5 division will be covered by the project. The civil works activities
                         under Component 1 are relevant to safeguards analysis. The civil works include up-grade and
                         expansion of roads from earth/murram to bitumen status, traffic management (Motorized and NMT)
                         and associated primary and secondary drainage improvements. The roads to be worked on have not
                         yet been selected. Selection of roads to be upgraded will be based on their economic viability and
                         complementarity to the BRT so as to improve mobility within the city. The project will also support
                         implementation of the traffic improvement plans developed for the CBD in order to reduce
                         congestion and improve road safety in the city. The proposed plans range from changes in traffic
                         circulation and introduction of one-way streets to major junction improvements and road widening
                         schemes to remove traffic bottlenecks. The scope of civil works by project site will be elaborated by
                         appraisal and reflected in the PAD . Under Component 2 - urban management, the project is
                         envisaged to support physical planning of some parts of the city. This process will be expected to
                         take into consideration the environmental and social aspects associated with the various land uses.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The implementing agency for this project is Kampala Capital City Authority. The safeguard policies
                         implementation is undertaken by the Department of Public Health and Environment. The
                         implementing agency has experience of undertaking World Bank supported projects, having
                           participated in the ongoing KIIPD 1. However, implementation of KIIDP APL 1 started with KCC
                           which has been succeeded by KCCA mostly with having the majority of new staff being new and
                           therefore will may need require training in understanding the safeguards policies and management of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the social and environmental impacts of the civil works. Therefore, During appraisal KCCA will
                           undertake an internal review of the performance of the safeguards implementation performance of
                           the safeguards under KIIDP 1 as well as of its current capacity to manage the tasks of implementing
                           the environmental and social safeguards satisfactorily to inform KIIDP 2. It is expected that technical
                           assistance will be provided throughout project implementation to ensure environmental and social
                           due diligence and compliance with Bank policies and national legislation.

                           It is recommended that KCCA reviews and updates the Environmental and Social Management
                           Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement Framework (RPF) of KIIDP 1 and adopts them to KIIDP 2 to
                           address the environmental and social safeguard aspects.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Herbert Oule (AFTN3)
                           Constance Nekessa-Ouma (AFTCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             OP/BP 4.01 is triggered because the project will
                           BP 4.01                                              have potential adverse environmental impacts
                                                                                associated civil works (road works, drainage
                                                                                works, road widening, road safety measures,
                                                                                urban planning, land use).

                                                                                The ESMF of KIIDP 1 will be reviewed,
                                                                                updated and adopted for KIIDP 2 to guide
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                implementation of environmental and social
                                                                                aspects of the project. Guidelines for
                                                                                mainstreaming environmental aspects into the
                                                                                Urban Management/physical planning
                                                                                component of the project will also be
                                                                                incorporated into the ESMF. After identification
                                                                                of the project sites/roads and associated
                                                                                drainage channels, respective ESMPs will be
                                                                                prepared. The updated ESMF will be consulted
                                                                                upon and disclosed before appraisal.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No              The project will not affect or involve natural
                                                                                habitats.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No              The project is not expected to affect the
                                                                                management of forests and neither will it
                                                                                support forest nor logging operations.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09              No              The project will not involve use of pesticides.

                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/      Yes             The project through the civil works and urban
                           BP 4.11                                              planning activities may affect PCRs. A
                                                                                                                                 framework for development of the PCRs
                                                                                                                                 management plan will be provided in the
                                                                                                                                 ESMF. A PCRs assessment will be undertaken
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 by KCCA and (if necessary) a PCRs
                                                                                                                                 management plan developed/included under the
                                                                                                                                 ESMPs and POM.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
                                                                                                                                 area.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           Under component 1, the civil works included
                                 4.12                                                                                            are expected to involve widening of roads and
                                                                                                                                 drainage channels. This may lead to
                                                                                                                                 displacement of people and land uses.
                                                                                                                                 Therefore, KIIDP 1 Resettlement Policy
                                                                                                                                 Framework (RPF) will be reviewed and adopted
                                                                                                                                 to KIIDP 2 to guide the implementation of the
                                                                                                                                 involuntary resettlement and related social
                                                                                                                                 aspects of the project. The reviewed RPF and
                                                                                                                                 PAD will also describe land tenure
                                                                                                                                 arrangements, scope of the impact of the project
                                                                                                                                 and any social impacts that could affect access
                                                                                                                                 to resources and possible loss of livelihoods as a
                                                                                                                                 result of the project.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project will not support or depend on dams.

                                 Projects on International        No                                                             N/A
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             N/A
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 12-Nov-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The updated ESMF and RPF will be prepared in September 2013 and disclosed in October 2013
                                      both in country and at infoshop, prior to appraisal.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Martin Onyach-Olaa

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name:                                                                                                                      Date:
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Rosemary Mukami Kariuki (SM)                                                                                         Date: 29-Aug-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
