                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC744

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 20-Jul-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Peru                             Project ID:      P131029
                            Project Name:      PE Social Inclusion TAL (P131029)
                            Task Team          Alessandra Marini
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          17-Sep-2012                      Estimated        15-Nov-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     LCSHS-DPT                        Lending          Technical Assistance Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector:            Other social services (100%)
                            Theme:             Nutrition and food security (20%), Social safety nets (50%), Poverty strategy,
                                               analysis and monitoring (20%), Other human developmen t (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        10.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Total                                                                        10.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The development objective of the proposed project is to improve the effectiveness of the social
                           inclusion policy in Peru. This will be achieved by supporting the necessary reforms to strengthen the
                           management capacity of MIDIS to oversee the socialinclusion policy and effectively coordinate and
                           enhance the performance of the five MIDIS programs. The operation will finance technical
                           assistance needed to support the policy reforms that will be included/supported by the SI DPL II to
                           be prepared in 2014. The SI DPL II would be a follow-on operation to the SI DPL I that will be
                           presented to the Board with this proposed project. The outcome indicators proposed for the TAL are:
                           a.       Mechanisms of monitoring and evaluation are incorporated under SINADIS;
                           b.       Families eligible of more than one MIDIS program are beneficiaries of those programs;
                           c.       MIDIS programs are regularly using quality performance standards with respect to service
                         provision.
                         C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project will support four key components and areas of work of the new Ministry of Development
                         and Social Inclusion:

                         Component 1: Improving the Quality of MIDIS Programs. This component will finance technical
                         assistance to design and pilot a series of activities aimed at improving the quality control of
                         programs. It will continue supporting Policy Area 2 of the Second Social Inclusion DPL on
                         Enhancing the inclusiveness and effectiveness of key social programs. Specifically, this component
                         will include:

                         Sub-component 1.1: Development of Users’ Participation and Satisfaction Mechanisms. This sub-
                         component would finance technical assistance for the development of user satisfaction mechanisms,
                         such as scorecards, to collect users’ feedback that systematically informs the quality control system
                         of the programs. These mechanisms will support dissemination of service quality standards to users
                         and then collect their informed-feedback based on the perception of their experience. They would
                         also include the establishment of a complaints collection and resolution system. This subcomponent
                         would also finance communication mechanisms to enhance the involvement and participation of the
                         feeding programs staff in the fulfillment of the program’s new goals and quality standards.

                         Sub-component 1.2: Strengthening Payment system. This sub-component would support the design
                         of a new payment system for JUNTOS and one for Pension 65 that promote the use of financial
                         instruments in areas where they are available and the identification of innovative solutions in other
                         areas (including the design and implementation of pilots). It will also support the implementation of a
                         new differentiated payment system at national level for JUNTOS, based on the results of an ongoing
                         pilot.

                         Sub-component 1.3: Overall elderly income protection policy. Development of a strategic approach,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         including other government agencies in the discussion, towards solutions for middle aged
                         individuals.

                         Component 2: Strengthening knowledge and information management of MIDIS. This component
                         will finance technical assistance to strengthen the information system that would allow the collection,
                         processing and production of multi-sectoral information to support the decision making process of
                         actors participating in the strategies within SINADIS. This component will continue supporting the
                         three Policy Areas of the second Social Inclusion DPL with special emphasis on Policy Area 3
                         (Social Inclusion Policy Reform by MIDIS—approaches and systems). The component will include:

                         Subcomponent 2.1. Developing an Information Strategy for Social Policy – This sub-component
                         would finance technical assistance to determine availability, reliability and frequency of data to
                         facilitate effective decision-making. Based on rapid diagnostics of supply and demand of
                         information, a strategy will be developed to address the information gaps identified. The strategy will
                         focus both on the consolidation of information related to MIDIS programs as well as social policy
                         through SINADIS. The strategy will be supplemented with technical assistance to improve the
                         quality of administrative records, which proves critical to the functioning of an M&E system.

                         Subcomponent 2.2. Support to MIDIS Targeting System and Beneficiary Registry – This sub-
                         component would support:
                         A. Strengthening of SISFOH targeting system, including: evaluation of robustness of index and its
                         adequacy for social programs; testing alternatives; development of auditing protocols for quality
Public Disclosure Copy




                         standard, security and confidentiality; implementation of general household census in 9 regions in
                         2013; implementation of an institutional strengthening strategy for the 406 districts without local
                         targeting units (Unidades Locales de Focalización);
                         B. Unique beneficiary registry: setting the basis for the development and timely update of the unique
                         beneficiary registry for MIDIS programs.

                         Subcomponent 2.3. SINADIS Integrated Information Platform – This sub-component would finance
                         the design of an integrated multi-sectoral information platform for decision-making under the
                         framework of SINADIS. It would integrate specific interfaces of the main planning and budgeting
                         administrative systems in the Peruvian state (such as SIAF, SIGA, and SNIP) as well as other
                         relevant information systems (such as the MIDIS M&E system, Unique Beneficiary Registry,
                         cadastral systems, INEI Open data initiative and other social programs’ systems). The design of the
                         platform would be preceded by a rapid assessment of the functioning and main bottlenecks of the
                         planning, budgeting and implementation systems (SIAF and SIGA). The platform would require the
                         development of information technology that (in real-time) collects, articulates and analyzes
                         information on planning, budgeting and implementation of social policies operating under SINADIS.

                         Subcomponent 2.4. Strengthening the Management Information Systems (MIS) of the feeding
                         programs, JUNTOS and Pension 65:

                         A. The feeding programs’ MIS – This sub-component would assess and redesign the feeding
                         programs’ management information system with the objective of improving the quality of
                         information and the establishment of transparency mechanisms with special focus on the program’s
                         food purchasing-delivery chain. To this end, the assessment will identify obstacles in the delivery of
                         timely, relevant and reliable reports to inform quality control and decision making processes. It will
                         also identify and propose mechanisms to improve transparency and the credibility of the program;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         B. Pension 65’s MIS – This sub-component would finance the development of an information
                         system for Pension 65 to operate in coordination with the MIDIS systems;
                         C. JUNTOS’ MIS – This sub-component would finance technical assistance for the development of
                         a methodology to articulate JUNTOS’ information with data from health and education sectors. The
                         development of this technological interface would support the verification of compliance with co-
                         responsibilities.

                         Component 3: Strengthening the result orientation and monitoring and evaluation capacity of MIDIS.
                         This component would provide support to the development and implementation of the planned
                         National System of Monitoring and Evaluation for Social Policy, known as Evidencia, which would
                         be a key component of the SINADIS Integrated Information Platform. The system, led by MIDIS,
                         would seek to improve the performance of social programs and policies by providing opportune
                         information and rigorous evidence, capacity building on M&E among SINADIS stakeholders, and
                         greater transparency to promote effective public management and decision-making. This component
                         will continue supporting the three Policy Areas of the second Social Inclusion DPL with special
                         emphasis on Policy Area 3 (Social Inclusion Policy Reform by MIDIS—approaches and systems).
                         The project will support:

                         Sub-component 3.1. Monitoring of Target Groups and Programs: This sub-component will finance
                         the conceptual and operational development of tools and instruments to collect data and analyze
                         indicators on key MIDIS programs and social policies operating within SINADIS, and facilitate
                         decision-making and transparency. Specifically, it would support:
                         A. Monitoring of target populations: Monitoring systems will be improved in order to follow the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         characteristics and responses of actual and potential beneficiaries in different stages of programs’
                         implementation (registration, participation and performance). Technical assistance will focus on the
                         development of methodological protocols and operational guidelines to strengthen the monitoring of
                         these stages to improve implementation, management and, as a consequence increase the
                         effectiveness of MIDIS.
                         B. Monitoring dashboard will be developed as a user-friendly instrument to allow for the collection
                         and manipulation of data related to indicators of key social policies. The dashboard will focus
                         initially on ministerial and regional interventions operating within the SINADIS framework, which
                         follow a results-based budgeting approach. This will involve both the conceptual and technological
                         development of the tool, which builds on and scales up the dashboard established for MIDIS
                         programs developed under the NLTA/IDF. In addition to the instrument itself, the technical
                         assistance will support the mechanisms for analysis and use of the information produced.
                         C. Creation of an “Elderly Observatory? to promote a better understanding of needs and
                         characteristics of the elderly in Peru.
                         D. Mapping for Social Policy Results will be reinforced and improved to generate interactive maps
                         and other on-line tools to facilitate the decision-making processes for the social policy through a
                         geographical approach based on the mapping for results approach and the design and implementation
                         of a pilot for "On Track" initiative.

                         Sub-component 3.2. Evaluation of Social Policy and Programs: MIDIS seeks to institutionalize a
                         range of evaluation methodologies and guidelines, taking into account the call to respond to different
                         performance information needs of a variety of stakeholders, as well as the need to generate useful
                         and feasible evidence-based recommendations. In addition, in order to ensure the implementation of
                         the recommendations, adequate incentives and mechanisms will be developed to facilitate the
                         application of evidence produced through M&E. Technical assistance will support the following
                         activities:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         A. Evaluation Planning and Use: As part of its steering role, MIDIS will strengthen the institutional
                         mechanisms for the definition of an agenda of evaluation among the interventions operating within
                         the framework of SINADIS, as well as the design and implementation of mechanisms to promote
                         greater use and application of evaluation findings.
                         B. Methodological Tools and Protocols for Implementation of Evaluation: As part of its
                         implementing role, MIDIS will establish technical tools to facilitate the quality, consistency and
                         regularity of evaluations. This will include the development and dissemination of standards
                         regarding process, results and impact evaluations, in addition to systematic reviews and meta-
                         analysis. Also, it includes the design and dissemination of methodological tools to formulate
                         recommendations based on evidence and protocols to use the evidence in the decision-making
                         processes for social policy.
                         C. Impact Evaluation of Coordination among MIDIS Programs: In order to assess the effects of the
                         coordinating and convening role of MIDIS, large impact evaluations will be conducted to determine
                         the impacts on beneficiaries of multi-MIDIS programs in a single territory.
                         D. Process Evaluation of the effective coordination of Social Policy – This sub-component would
                         finance the evaluation of the articulated planning, budgeting and implementation processes of social
                         policies operating within the framework of SINADIS.

                         Component 4: Strengthening human resource capacity of MIDIS programs and social policy
                         stakeholders. This component will finance the development and implementation of a plan of
                         continuous capacity building and training for the technical and professional teams of the institutions
                         participating in the MIDIS multi-sectoral strategies. The component would also support the
                         reorganization of human resources in JUNTOS and the feeding programs, promoting coordination
Public Disclosure Copy




                         between different programs at local level. This component will continue supporting the three Policy
                         Areas of the second DPL with special emphasis on Policy Area 3 (Social Inclusion Policy Reform by
                         MIDIS- approaches and systems). Specifically, it will include three sub-components:

                         Sub-component 4.1 – Development of Targeted Continuous Training – This subcomponent would
                         finance the development of capacity-building programs for MIDIS staff and sub-national government
                         technical teams leading social policy planning, budgeting and implementation at the local level.
                         Technical assistance will support:
                         A. Strengthening capacity of MIDIS staff: This tool would fill the gap with respect to the
                         educational and training needs of MIDIS staff, by designing a modular curriculum to cater the
                         training needs of different actors, making a platform for education and training available and
                         accessible to staff (through distance, classroom, and on-line learning), and organize a common
                         training program for all MIDIS staff.
                         B. Strengthening regional and local government capacity: Design a program (plan and methodology)
                         to identify capacity-building needs and conduct continuous training for the management of social
                         policies and programs. The program would be an integral part of the implementation of SINADIS
                         and its objective of strengthening the management capacity of technical teams in regional and local
                         governments of social policies and programs.

                         Sub-component 4.2 – New Role for the JUNTOS’ Promoters – This subcomponent would finance
                         the technical assistance needed for the development of a component of family counseling, which
                         includes redefining the role of the local promoter of the program (gestor local) who would play a key
                         role in connecting families with local opportunities of benefits and services.

                         Sub-component 4.3 – Capacity-building and Certification Program of Professionals for Local
                         Government Management Strengthening – This sub-component would support the design of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         program, continuous course modules and management of the certification and registry of qualified
                         local professionals for regional and local government coaching. The program would be an integral
                         part of the implementation of SINADIS and its objective of strengthening the management capacity
                         in regional and local governments of social policies and programs. This would operate via the
                         creation of a private network of MIDIS-certified local professionals that could be hired by sub-
                         national governments as consultants (in a mixed arrangement) to provide coaching and personalized
                         technical assistance on case-specific management issues. A pre-selection process would take place
                         through a national evaluation (conducted by a private party), and selected professionals would
                         qualify to the course conducted by qualified public and private universities.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the            safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented nationwide, with the support of a technical assistance loan.

                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         This project triggers the OP/BP 4.10, only. Peru has now approved a consultation law and its bylaws.
                         The law provides an appropriate legal framework for prior and informed consultations to Indigenous
                         Peoples. The Vice Ministry of Intercultural Affairs is responsible for supervising the enforcement of
                         the law and, in the case of this operation, the Ministry of Social Inclusion will be responsible for
                         carrying out the consultations and for the approval and implementation of the Indigenous Peoples
                           Plan. To this end the Ministry has designated a social safeguard coordinator under the General
                           Bureau of Cooperation and Participation. The TAL will assist MIDIS to enhance its current capacity
                           to assess and consider the intercultural dimensions affecting social inclusion of the social programs
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and will include a set of support actions through Components 3 and 4.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        No               The project activities do not include any
                           BP 4.01                                              physical investments or acquisitions that could
                                                                                lead to adverse impacts on the environment.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No               The project activities do not include any
                                                                                physical investments or acquisitions that could
                                                                                lead to adverse impacts on natural habitats.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No               The project activities do not include any
                                                                                physical investments or acquisitions that could
                                                                                lead to adverse impacts on forests.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09             No               The project activities do not include any activity
                                                                                that could result in the need for procurement of
                                                                                pesticides.
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No               The project activities do not include any
                           BP 4.11                                              physical investments or acquisitions that could
                                                                                lead to adverse impacts on physical cultural
                                                                                resources.
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       Yes              The proposed operation is expected to trigger
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                the Bank's Indigenous Peoples Policy (OP 4.10).
                                                                                Although it is not likely that the project will
                                                                                have negative impacts on Indigenous
                                                                                households, its success will, largely, depend on
                                                                                how well the project manages to meaningfully
                                                                                involve and empower Indigenous communities,
                                                                                and adopt the use of intercultural formats in
                                                                                communications with the users and the delivery
                                                                                of services by the programs under MIDIS
                                                                                management and supported by the operation.
                                                                                With Bank support, the government will: (A)
                                                                                conduct a social assessment that would include
                                                                                the following activities: (i) a review and
                                                                                analysis of existing literature, relevant analytical
                                                                                work, and evaluations from the current social
                                                                                protection programs as they relate to impacts
                                                                                and benefits of these programs for Indigenous
                                                                                peoples, (ii) an institutional assessment of the
                                                                                new Ministry's proposed structure to ensure
                                                               inclusion and adaptations for Indigenous
                                                               peoples, (iii) a review of Peru's relevant legal
                                                               framework and requirements both for the IP
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                               Strategy (see below) and for the implementation
                                                               of the social protection programs, and (iv) a
                                                               participatory process with Indigenous leaders,
                                                               beneficiaries, and organizations, as appropriate,
                                                               to receive feedback and recommendations to
                                                               improve program design. (B) The elaboration of
                                                               an Indigenous Peoples Strategy that would
                                                               outline actions, budget and timeframes
                                                               (integrated to the extent possible within the
                                                               activities of the TAL) to implement the key
                                                               recommendations from the social assessment
                                                               and participatory processes specifically on:
                                                               institutional structure, strengthening, program
                                                               design and adaptations. (C) A validation
                                                               meeting (similar to what we would do with a
                                                               Framework) with a group of representatives,
                                                               preferably the same people consulted during the
                                                               social assessment, to present and consult the
                                                               proposed IP Strategy. And (D) A revised
                                                               Strategy, incorporating the feedback from the
                                                               validation meeting, disclosed prior to appraisal.
                                                               During implementation the TAL would
                                                               implement the recommendation of the IP
                                                               Strategy with close Bank safeguards
                                                               implementation support. To the extent possible,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                               the TAL should incorporate indicators to
                                                               measure the Strategy's implementation and
                                                               include the Strategy's activities within the
                                                               annual POAs.
                                                               The Bank team is also supporting MIDIS
                                                               management in the design of a strategic
                                                               framework for the ministry to improve the
                                                               results of social programs for indigenous
                                                               communities and households.
                                                               The PAD will include a summary of the
                                                               Indigenous Peoples Strategy, and a write up
                                                               describing main findings of the social
                                                               assessment and the results of the consultations.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   No   The project activities do not require any
                         4.12                                  acquisition of land and will not result in any
                                                               restriction in access to protected areas.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No   The project activities do not lead to any
                                                               intervention related to dams.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The project activities do not lead to any
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            intervention in international waterways.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project activities do not lead to any
                                 7.60                                                                                            intervention in disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 07-Sep-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The specific studies will be completed by September 2012.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Alessandra Marini

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                                                                                             Date: 23-Jul-2012
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Mansoora Rashid (SM)                                                                                                 Date: 24-Jul-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
