                                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                  CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                          Report No.: ISDSC2998

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Apr-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 28-Apr-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:        Burkina Faso                    Project ID:      P143993
                            Project Name:   FIP - DECENTRALIZED FOREST AND WOODLAND MANAGEMENT
                                            PROJECT (P143993)
                            Task Team       Hocine Chalal
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       16-Sep-2013                     Estimated        10-Jan-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                 Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: AFTN1                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                            Instrument:
                            Sector(s):      Forestry (60%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%), Other
                                            Renewable Energy (10%), Public administration- Agricul ture, fishing and
                                            forestry (10%)
                            Theme(s):       Climate change (40%), Land administration and management (20%), Other
                                            environment and natural resources management (20%), Micro, Sma ll and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                            Medium Enterprise support (10%), Other rural development (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     26.00                 Total Bank Financing:           0.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                            Financing Gap:                  0.00
                              Financing Source                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                  0.00
                              Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                             16.50
                              EC European Commission                                                    9.50
                              Total                                                                    26.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a       No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                         C. Project Description
                         An integrated, inclusive approach to forest and woodland management. The Decentralized Forest and
                         Woodland Project is designed to achieve an integrated, inclusive community forest and woodland
Public Disclosure Copy




                         management regime that is based on improving livelihoods and reducingpoverty while
                         simultaneously enhancing carbon sequestration potential. Through a combined approach of tailored
                         local action, developed in close coordination with local stakeholders, and actions on a regulatory and
                         legal framework the project will support activities that contribute to improving livelihoods and
                         mitigating, as well as building resilience to, climate change.

                         A focus on addressing drivers of deforestation and degradation in and out of forests and woodlands.
                         The sites considered for intervention will be areas experiencing a dynamic of significant forest
                         degradation, yet holding a high potential for reforestation. These targeted zones will capture some or
                         all of the following dynamics: deforestation linked to the supply fuelwood for major cities;
                         deforestation caused by extensive agricultural practices; afforestation/deforestation caused by
                         anthropogenic pressure (subsistence farming in densely populated area for example) and; areas of
                         high biodiversity and water resource value. The project will implement actions both within the forest
                         sector and outside the sector, focusing on enabling activities such as land use planning and rural
                         development planning.

                         Working through collaborative partnerships efforts to increase the positive impacts of investments.
                         The project will be developed as part of a collaborative initiative between the World Bank and the
                         African Development Bank under the Forest Investment Program that seeks to build synergies to
                         reinforce the impact of investments while avoiding the duplication of effort. The Participatory
                         Management of Protected Forest Areas Project (US $12 million FIP financing) executed by the
                         African Development Bank will focus on areas within classified protected forest areas.

                         The World Bank executed project, the Decentralized Forest and Woodland Management Project, will
                         be developed in partnership with the European Union's CLIM-GDDF project in areas around
Public Disclosure Copy




                         protected forests through an investment of €8 million (approximately USD 9 million) the European
                         Union. The EU is supporting strategic priorities related to improving climate governance that will
                         lead to sustainable management of forests and woodlands to support socio-economic development
                         and increasing their ability to sequester carbon as well as reducing pressures on forest ecosystems.
                         Through the identified priorities of i) integrating climate change into country sectoral strategies, ii)
                         reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation and concerted activities at national and
                         local levels, and iii) adaptation to climate change, the objectives of the EU are integrated into the
                         World Bank executed project.

                         The project supports an innovative approach to sustainable land, forest and woodland management
                         by making it part of the decentralization process. The projects supports the decentralization process
                         that officially plans to transfer natural resource management to the local (commune and village)
                         level. The supports comprehensive land use mapping as part of a local integrated natural resource
                         management plan. The project focuses on the landscape as an integrated, productive, forest and
                         woodland mosaic with the development of a territory rather than just one sector and supports
                         planning and decision-making through local institutions like Village Development Committees
                         (CVD).

                         Targeting a multi-faceted approach to forest and woodland management to deliver transformational
                         impact. By targeting the multi-faceted drivers of deforestation and forest and woodland degradation
                           this project, in conjunction with initiatives on classified forests in the immediate surroundings (AfDB
                           executed FIP project). The project seeks to deliver a robust approach that will have a
                           transformational impact in the targeted sites. While there have been successful experiences on
Public Disclosure Copy




                           integrated land use or the development of alternative livelihoods they have often been developed in
                           isolation. The project takes the critical step of moving beyond a focus on forest resources in isolation,
                           towards a broad strategy to both reduce pressures on forests and woodlands and reduce poverty by
                           promoting sustainable land and forest management.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project will intervene in specific locations that are currently being defined based on criteria such
                           as complementarity with AfDB interventions, commitment of local authorities and local communities
                           and credible potential for significant carbon sequestration increase.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Government of Burkina Faso has gained significant experience in implementing projects that are
                           similar to this project and using, in a satisfactory manner, the World Bank safeguards instruments.
                           Since the thematic areas under the new proposed project are relatively similar to past projects, the
                           team is confident that the Government has the appropriate capacities to properly prepare and enforce
                           Safeguards Policies. The project will be partly implemented by CONEDD and DDD, however the
                           structure of implementation is not yet finalized, and will be further discussed before QER. Particular
                           attention will be given to identify potential weaknesses and include measures to strengthen capacity.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Lucienne M. M'Baipor (AFTCS)
                           Maman-Sani Issa (AFTN2)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The project under sub component 2.2 expects to
                           BP 4.01                                               support income-generating activities that use
                                                                                 forest resources in selected sites. These
                                                                                 activities may have environmental impacts on a
                                                                                 limited scale. An ESMF will be prepared,
                                                                                 consulted upon, and disclosed before appraisal.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          Yes              Some of the forest and woodlands to be targeted
                                                                                 are undoubtedly critical ecosystems; the project
                                                                                 will enhance the quality of the management of
                                                                                 these critical ecosystems and reduce risks
                                                                                 associated with potential economic
                                                                                 development. The ESMF will provide guidance
                                                                                 on avoiding or mitigating impacts on natural
                                                                                 habitats.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   Yes              Forest policy and management are a primary
                                                                                 focus of this project. While the project will
                                                                                 explore integrated forest management as part of
                                                                                 a strategy of increasing carbon sequestration
                                                                                                                                 potential the expected results are of improved
                                                                                                                                 forest management. The ESMF will include
                                                                                                                                 guidance on managing forestry issues.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   TBD                           This policy could be triggered if the project
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         activities promote actions in areas containing
                                                                                                                                 sites deemed physical cultural resources by the
                                                                                                                                 local communities (e.g. holy/secret sites such as
                                                                                                                                 sacred groves, sacred forests, etc.). Though it is
                                                                                                                                 not anticipated that the project will have
                                                                                                                                 negative impacts on any such sites, the
                                                                                                                                 existence of any such sites and the
                                                                                                                                 corresponding need to trigger this policy will be
                                                                                                                                 determined once the targeted zones are
                                                                                                                                 confirmed further guidance will be sought
                                                                                                                                 during the review meeting.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     TBD                           The team will seek further guidance on whether
                                                                                                                                 this should be triggered during the review
                                                                                                                                 meeting.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    TBD                           No involuntary resettlement or limitation of
                                 4.12                                                                                            access is anticipated, however the team will
                                                                                                                                 seek further guidance on whether this should be
                                                                                                                                 triggered during the concept review meeting.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Jul-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      An ESMF (and possibly a RPF) will be prepared, consulted upon and disclosed by appraisal.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Hocine Chalal

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name:                                                                                                                      Date:
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Benoit Bosquet (SM)                                                                                                  Date: 28-Apr-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
