                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA1918
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Jun-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Jun-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Mexico                            Project ID:    P131709
                            Project Name:     Coastal Watersheds Conservation in the Context of Climate Change Project
                                              (P131709)
                            Task Team         Adriana Goncalves Moreira
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       10-Jun-2013                         Estimated   14-Nov-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: LCSEN                                Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            GEF Focal
                                              Multi-focal area
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):        Forestry (40%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%), Public
                                              administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (20 %)
                            Theme(s):         Biodiversity (30%), Climate change (30%), Other environment and natural
                                              resources management (20%), Participation and civic engageme nt (10%), Other
Public Disclosure Copy




                                              rural development (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     267.80           Total Bank Financing:                0.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                       Financing Gap:                       0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                      Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                     228.28
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                       39.52
                              Total                                                                                  267.80
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?



                                                                     Page 1 of 11
                         2. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                         The project global environmental objective (GEO) is the same as the project development objective
                         (PDO): To promote integrated environmental management of selected coastal watersheds as a means
Public Disclosure Copy




                         to conserve biodiversity, contribute to climate change mitigation, and enhance sustainable land use.
                         3. Project Description
                         Project activities will be coordinated through watershed-level planning in regions expected to be
                         highly affected by climate change, with high biodiversity and opportunities to leverage existing
                         institutional presence and programs to address climate change, land degradation, and sustainable
                         forest management. Since the watersheds (selected according to a process described in Annex 9) are
                         large areas, activities will concentrated in protected areas and surrounding areas where carbon stock
                         depletion is highest, biological connectivity is essential and institutional capacities are highest.
                         Activities include: (i) conserving sites of high priority for biodiversity in protected areas; (ii)
                         implementing PES to support the conservation of forests at high risk for fragmentation and
                         degradation in surrounding areas; (iii) supporting ejidos, communities and individual landowners to
                         implement biodiversity and forest-friendly practices in plots essential for connectivity and forest
                         conservation; (iv) collection and management of data related to ecosystem health, through processes
                         that engage and develop the capacities of local communities to implement integrated watershed/sub-
                         watershed action plans (IWAPs), and (v) testing and mainstreaming innovative approaches to inter-
                         institutional collaboration and learning. These activities will provide examples of improved land use
                         within the watersheds and it is expected that they will trigger investments from other sources to
                         implement the IWAPs. This approach, including social participation and efforts directly aimed at
                         mainstreaming investments, will address some important drivers of carbon and biodiversity depletion
                         while improving local livelihoods. IWAPs will also provide a framework to ensure that carbon and
                         biodiversity depleting activities are not merely displaced to other sites.
                         Activities supported by the project are organized in five components. Component 1, protected areas
                         conservation, will be implemented by CONANP and FMCN, following the model developed in
                         earlier GEF projects (SINAP 1 and 2). Component 2 will support CONAFOR’s existing PES
Public Disclosure Copy




                         program as well as a program for forestry and agricultural sub-projects for sustainable land and forest
                         management projects through FMCN. INECC will lead Component 3, engaging local communities
                         and coordinating with national and state agencies to collect and manage watershed health data.
                         Component 4 mechanisms for inter-institutional collaboration, promoting social participation
                         monitoring and evaluation, and engaging implementing agencies in strengthening channels for
                         coordination and learning. Component 5 covers project management from a fiduciary perspective.
                         Requested GEF funds include endowment funds, to be invested in the existing Biodiversity Fund at
                         CONAFOR with NAFIN as the administrative entity, and in an FMCN investment account, the Fund
                         for Coastal Watersheds (FCC). Non-endowment funds will be administered by FMCN for activities
                         that require immediate attention and can leverage additional short-term investments. Endowment
                         funds, in the experience of CONANP and FMCN, leverage matching capital resources, which
                         guarantee the long-term future of project results. Project components will include the following
                         activities:


                         Component 1. Creation and consolidation of Protected Areas
                         Subcomponent 1.1. Supporting the creation of new Protected Areas and strengthening management
                         effectiveness of new and existing Protected Areas through financing of biodiversity conversation
                         activities included in the Annual Operating Plans.
                         Subcomponent 1.2. Carrying out fundraising activities to obtain additional non-GEF funding to be


                                                                      Page 2 of 11
                         deposited by FMCN in FCC to finance biodiversity conservation activities in Protected Areas and
                         selected watersheds.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2. Promoting sustainability within watersheds
                         Subcomponent 2.1. Reducing deforestation and forest fragmentation through Payments for
                         Ecosystem Services by CONAFOR’s Fund for Biodiversity (FB). These PES will conserve the forest
                         remnants within the watersheds.
                         Subcomponent 2.2. The carrying out of Agro-ecosystem Sub-projects. These sub-projects will reduce
                         pressure on forest remnants through improved land use practices.
                         Subcomponent 2.3. The carrying out of Sustainable Forestry Management Sub-projects. These sub-
                         projects will improve local capacities for sustainable forest management around relevant forest
                         fragments, and support implementation of practices that will contribute to reduced deforestation.

                         Component 3. Enabling adaptive management by strengthening monitoring capacities
                         Strengthening of community monitoring systems in selected watersheds including, inter alia: the
                         development of models of watershed components and ecosystems services with the aim of
                         establishing priority sites for project implementation and producing integrated watersheds and/or
                         sub-watersheds land management actions plans (IWAPs); and carrying out within Protected Areas
                         and priority sites in the selected watersheds: (a) monitoring of deforestation and ecosystem
                         degradation; (b) regular community hydrological monitoring; (c) biodiversity monitoring; (d) carbon
                         monitoring; and (e) workshops to analyze findings, data and share experiences at the watershed level.

                         Component 4. Innovative mechanisms for inter-institutional collaboration and promoting social
                         participation

                         Carrying out inter-institutional coordination activities (including networks, forums and learning
                         communities) at the regional and local levels, involving state and municipal governments, civil
                         society, academic institutions to promote cross-section coordination, participation and oversight of
                         sub-watersheds land management actions plans (IWAPs).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 5. Project management

                         Support for implementation of the project, including inter alia, costs for project coordination,
                         technical assistance, support of the Technical Project Committee and regional PCUs, supervision of
                         safeguards implementation, financial management, procurement and audits.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will operate in 10 watersheds along the Gulf of California and 6 along the Gulf of
                         Mexico, selected because of their high biodiversity values, presence of protected areas, importance
                         for the implementing institutions, local capacity, matching fund potential, and inter-institutional
                         collaboration in the watershed. The watersheds were selected jointly by the four implementing
                         agencies. INECC identified 17 coastal watersheds along the Gulf of California and 15 along the Gulf
                         of Mexico that meet the basic criteria of high biodiversity values and existing or potential protected
                         areas. The implementing agencies then scored the candidate watersheds according to additional
                         criteria and selected six high priority watersheds along the Gulf of Mexico for the GEF. he selected
                         watersheds show high variability, with degradation prevalent along the Gulf of Mexico;59.9% is
                         devoted to cattle ranching, 39.2% to agriculture and 1% is urban. Increasingly, natural ecosystems in
                         these watersheds are being pressured by competing land uses: expansion of low intensity cattle


                                                                      Page 3 of 11
                         ranching, slash-and-burn agriculture, sugar cane, and hydro-electric dams, as well as general coastal
                         development. Negative these land use changes include carbon emissions, loss of biodiversity,
                         erosion and other land degradation effects, and less sustainable livelihoods for communities within
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the watersheds. In terms of social development, the project area in the Gulf of Mexico comprises 2.7
                         million inhabitants (51% women) distributed in 4,771 localities in 112 municipalities of the states of
                         Veracruz, Tabasco, Chiapas, Hidalgo, Puebla and Campeche. The majority of this population
                         (85.37%) is located in Veracruz. Approximately 10% are indigenous peoples including: Tzeltal,
                         Chol, Chontal, Nahuatl, Popoluca, Totonaca, Otomí and Tepehua. These communities in particular
                         face high levels of marginalization and low social indicators.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Kristyna Bishop (LCSSO)
                         Marcelo Hector Acerbi (LCSEN)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes               Given the essentially environmental
                         BP 4.01                                              conservation characteristic of the project, a
                                                                              category B is proposed. This policy has been
                                                                              triggered due to the potential minimal impact of
                                                                              subprojects to be financed mainly under
                                                                              component 2. The Project has prepared a single,
                                                                              project-level Environmental and Social
                                                                              Management Framework (ESMF). One of the
                                                                              functions of the ESMF is to define the screening
                                                                              procedures and criteria that the Recipient will use
                                                                              to determine what, if any, further environmental
                                                                              analysis and instruments will be required for all
                                                                              subcomponents activities and defines the specific
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              EA procedure during Project implementation.
                                                                              From an environmental assessment point of view,
                                                                              the project is expected to generate positive
                                                                              benefits.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          Yes               This safeguard is triggered primarily because of
                                                                              the positive benefits to natural habitats that the
                                                                              project could bring about. Given the focal areas
                                                                              of the project, there may also be some minor,
                                                                              adverse impacts to natural habitats as well,
                                                                              depending on the form of the ultimate activities to
                                                                              be developed under component 2. The instrument
                                                                              that treats these issues at the project level is the
                                                                              ESMF. If the ESMF’s screening process
                                                                              determines that subcomponent activities may
                                                                              result in adverse impacts to natural habitats, these
                                                                              impacts will be addressed in subsequent specific
                                                                              management measures. In general, the project is
                                                                              expected to be beneficial to biodiversity,
                                                                              especially by maintaining corridors to connect



                                                                      Page 4 of 11
                                                                         protected areas and other important natural
                                                                         habitats. This connectivity will be especially
                                                                         important for wildlife as part of a climate change
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         adaptation strategy.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes             This safeguard is triggered due to the potential
                                                                         for changes in forest management as a result of
                                                                         the project. The ESMF includes the measures to
                                                                         address the eventual impacts related to forests. In
                                                                         general, the project is expected to have a positive
                                                                         impact on forests. Protected areas are a proven
                                                                         tool for slowing deforestation rates. The PES and
                                                                         sustainable forest management components will
                                                                         create incentives for community-based
                                                                         organizations and learning to support the
                                                                         implementation of agro-ecological practices that
                                                                         sustain livelihoods while minimizing loss of
                                                                         forest cover, and in many cases, restoring and
                                                                         improving forest, soil, and watershed conditions.
                                                                         The institutional strengthening and coordination
                                                                         components will enhance the ability of
                                                                         management agencies at many levels to detect
                                                                         changes, identify appropriate practices, and
                                                                         engage communities in valuing and enhancing
                                                                         forest and hydrological ecosystem services.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes             This safeguard is triggered as some subproject-
                                                                         supported activities (e.g., forest management)
                                                                         could potentially involve the use or purchase of
                                                                         pesticides or other agricultural chemicals. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         ESMF incorporates measures to ensure
                                                                         compliance with the policy.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes             The ESMF includes a safeguard provision for
                         BP 4.11                                         chance findings of “historical sites and/or
                                                                         archeological sites.? These safeguard measures
                                                                         also cover other physical cultural resources such
                                                                         as sacred sites, burial sites and other resources
                                                                         that are of significance to local communities. No
                                                                         Physical Cultural Resources will be affected by
                                                                         the project and it is unlikely that its activities may
                                                                         cause any damage to cultural assets. However, the
                                                                         policy has been triggered as a preventive measure
                                                                         to ensure that all participants respect the rich
                                                                         cultural heritage of the region. In case of chance
                                                                         findings, to handle such findings, Mexico has a
                                                                         well-developed legislative and normative
                                                                         framework, which is under the oversight of the
                                                                         National Institute for Anthropology and History
                                                                         (INAH). The screening and action procedures for


                                                                 Page 5 of 11
                                                                        chance findings would be incorporated into the
                                                                        environmental screening section of the ESMF.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    Yes             This policy is triggered because there are
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        indigenous peoples in the watersheds in the Gulf
                                                                        of Mexico region. A social assessment and
                                                                        consultation process was undertaken during
                                                                        preparation in order to better understand their
                                                                        socio-economic and demographic circumstances
                                                                        and to gather inputs, concerns and suggestions for
                                                                        the preparation of an Indigenous Peoples
                                                                        Planning Framework (IPPF). None of the
                                                                        watersheds that are being considered by the
                                                                        project in the Gulf of California region include
                                                                        indigenous communities within the protected
                                                                        areas, but consultation will be conducted as
                                                                        needed and an IPP prepared if necessary during
                                                                        project implementation. An Indigenous Peoples
                                                                        Plan Framework (IPPF) has been prepared for
                                                                        Components 1 and 2 per the requirements of OP
                                                                        4.10. The IPPF was shared with a representative
                                                                        group of indigenous leaders from the Gulf of
                                                                        Mexico as well as other relevant stakeholders and
                                                                        their concerns and their inputs have been
                                                                        incorporated into the final version, which has
                                                                        been disclosed on the websites of the four
                                                                        executing agencies and on the Bank’s Infoshop.
                                                                        The IPPF prepared for the Forests and Climate
                                                                        Change project will be used for the CONAFOR-
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        executed part of Component 2 and IPPs prepared
                                                                        for those activities as agreed with CONAFOR.
                                                                        The IPPF prepared by CONAFOR was disclosed
                                                                        prior to the approval of the Forests and Climate
                                                                        Change project in Nov 2011 and it was re-
                                                                        disclosed on the FMCN website.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes             This policy has been triggered in order to
                         4.12                                           address possible impacts resulting from
                                                                        restrictions on access and use of natural resources
                                                                        in the new and existing protected areas that will
                                                                        be supported in Component 1. In particular, it is
                                                                        anticipated that new regulations to protect fragile
                                                                        habitats or endangered species may result in some
                                                                        restriction. As required by OP 4.12, a Process
                                                                        Framework has been prepared to provide
                                                                        operational guidance regarding the screening
                                                                        mechanism and mitigation measures and and
                                                                        training in the safeguard policies will be provided
                                                                        to the technical staff in the regional UCP.


                                                                Page 6 of 11
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No                The project does not involve dam safety issues.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International        No                   The project does not involve international
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                   The project does not involve disputed areas.
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               It is expected that the project will have overall positive impact on the environment and for the
                              populations living in the Gulf of Mexico and Gulf of California. The creation of new protected
                              areas and strengthening the management of existing ones will conserve forest and watershed
                              resources and support the economic and social development of these regions. Outcomes and
                              conservation status of areas supported by the project will be monitored through the GEF tracking
                              tools, national protocols and through the development and implementation of community-based
                              monitoring methods, with baseline and subsequent data captured in CONAFOR and CONABIO’s
                              national database. These monitoring tools are captured in the Project’s ESMF.

                              The sustainable management practices supported in Component 2 are expected to reduce
                              deforestation pressure in fragmented landscapes by engaging local community members in forest
                              conservation, reforestation, and sustainable forest management, reducing pressure for land use
                              change and also reducing soil erosion. These lands are currently at high risk of conversion.

                              Component 3 will enhance local communities’ capacity to participate in monitoring and to better
                              understand forest and watershed ecosystem services, and is expected to generate further
Public Disclosure Copy




                              opportunities for enhancing livelihoods through sustainable management and use of natural
                              resources.

                              Finally, the enhanced institutional collaboration supported by Component 4 is expected to
                              strengthen local governments’ capacity to monitor and manage watershed resources, and create
                              opportunities for synergy and enhanced application of practices to achieve the desired outcomes
                              envisioned in the Conventions on Biological Diversity and Desertification, and the UNFCCC.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                                It is expected that the project will have an overall positive impact on the environment and for the
                              inhabitants of the selected watersheds in the Gulf of Mexico and the Gulf of California. However,
                              some of the activities that will be supported by the project may result in changes in how the
                              communities use these resources and the transition may be difficult. The transition will be
                              mitigated by the various activities included in the general social strategy, extensive training for the
                              technical staff in the region UCP who have the responsibility for screening for negative impacts
                              per the Process Framework and the participatory planning process that will be undertaken each
                              year as part of the preparation of the Annual Operating Plans.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.


                                                                         Page 7 of 11
                             Given the nature of the project and the intense environmental risks facing the watersheds, the
                           project supports strong evidence-based activities that are intended to avoid continued degradation
                           and therefore no project alternatives were seriously considered. However, as indicated above, it is
Public Disclosure Copy




                           expected that some of the activities will require changes in behavior and these have been
                           considered and mitigation measures to address them are reflected in the social strategy, safeguard
                           instruments and the overall design of the project.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             The Project has prepared a single, project-level Environmental and Social Management
                           Framework (ESMF). One of the functions of the ESMF is to define the screening procedures and
                           criteria that the Recipient will use to determine what, if any, further environmentaland/or social
                           analysis and instruments will be required for all subcomponents activities and defines the specific
                           EA procedure during Project implementation. From an environmental assessment point of view,
                           the project is expected to generate positive benefits. The protected area strategies supported by
                           previous projects and extended in the proposed project have been shown to be effective in
                           conserving forest and watershed resources. Existing protocols for establishment of protected areas
                           include studies of ecological and social conditions, opportunities, and risks, and measures for
                           enhancing positive outcomes and mitigating risks. Management plans and monitoring systems
                           provide for detecting and addressing environmental and other impacts in real time. CONAFOR’s
                           Forests and Climate Change program, including systems for promoting best practices in
                           sustainable forest management and PES to support those practices, included a detailed
                           environmental assessment conducted in 2011 (Informe de Evaluación Ambiental, Proyecto
                           Bosques y Cambio Climático SIL, prepared for CONAFOR) and a detailed social assessment that
                           informed the development of an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework and Process
                           Framework. The extension of this program to new watersheds is expected to bring similar
                           outcomes, including learning about appropriate incentives for and the adoption of best forest
                           management practices; development and adoption of IWAPs; reforestation of degraded areas;
                           institutional strengthening of the entities responsible for forest and water resource management
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and regulation; capacity for early detection and management of changes; and enhanced efficiency
                           and synergies in the application of resources destined for natural resource management
                           improvements as well as improved conditions for the local populations. All Project activities are
                           subject to the environmental procedures defined in the ESMF and in compliance with the
                           requirements (as stated in the ESMF) of the General Law for Sustainable Forestry Development
                           (LGDFS) and its Regulations; the General Law for Ecological Balance and Environmental
                           Protection (LGEEPA); the General Law for Wildlife, the Sustainable Rural Development Act, and
                           the National Water Act.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The direct beneficiaries of the project will be landowners. ejidos and communities participating
                           in the project as well as local organizations working with them to provide technical assistance and
                           training . In the Gulf of Mexico, the project area (six watersheds/sub-watersheds) comprises 2.7
                           million inhabitants (51% women) distributed in 4,771 localities in 112 municipalities of the states
                           of Veracruz, Tabasco, Chiapas, Hidalgo, Puebla and Campeche, of which approximately 10% are
                           indigenous peoples. In the Gulf of California, where the project will be supported in large part by
                           counterpart and matching funds, target watershed/sub-watersheds and populations will depend on
                           areas to be selected in accordance with donor preferences. In both areas, knowledge sharing and
                           participatory monitoring and evaluation will empower community organizations to actively


                                                                     Page 8 of 11
                           participate in decision-making and develop their own mechanisms to improve governance in the
                           watersheds. Other direct beneficiaries will include landowners who receive direct compensation
                           for conserving forests within the selected watersheds and residents of communities whose
Public Disclosure Copy




                           livelihoods are enhanced by the economic flows resulting from establishment of protected areas.
                           Annex 2 summarizes the scope of the project.

                           During preparation, four workshops were conducted in the Gulf of Mexico watersheds. A total of
                           110 people participated from 27 organizations, 37 communities, 10 indigenous groups as well as
                           representatives from all three government levels. Their inputs were used to develop the ESMF and
                           the related safeguard instruments. The ESMF was disclosed on the FMCN webpage on April 1,
                           2013. Validation of the contents of the ESMF and the related safeguard instruments took place on
                           April 10th, 2013 via the auspices of the Consulting Board for Sustainable Development (Consejo
                           Consultivo de Desarrollo Sustentable) in Veracuz, which includes representatives of the federal,
                           state, indigenous, women, private, academic, youth, and no-profit sectors. Their inputs were
                           incorporated into the final version of the ESMF, IPPF and PF and they are available on the
                           CONANP, CONAFOR, INECC and FMCN webpages (in FMCN since 1 April 2013).
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      28-Apr-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   08-May-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Mexico                                                           01-Apr-2013
                           Comments: Documents disclosed on the FMCN website
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      28-Apr-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   08-May-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Mexico                                                           01-Apr-2013
                           Comments: Documents disclosed on the FMCN website
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      28-Apr-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   08-May-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Mexico                                                           01-Apr-2013
                           Comments: Documents disclosed on the FMCN website
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   NA
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      NA
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   NA




                                                                    Page 9 of 11
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?




                                                                     Page 10 of 11
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                             Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             and constraints been carried out?
                             Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             overcome these constraints?
                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Adriana Goncalves Moreira
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                             Date: 19-Jun-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Karin Erika Kemper (SM)                           Date: 19-Jun-2013




                                                                       Page 11 of 11
