                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA3156
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Apr-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Dec-2012, 27-Mar-2013, 08-Apr-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Vietnam                           Project ID:    P121643
                            Project Name:      Vietnam Inclusive Innovation Project (P121643)
                            Task Team          Nancy Chen
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          18-Jan-2013                       Estimated   13-May-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASFP                             Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         SME Finance (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (60%), Technology diffusion
                                              (40%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      55.63           Total Bank Financing:                  55.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                       Financing Gap:                          0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          0.63
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                55.00
                              Total                                                                                      55.63
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to adopt, upgrade and develop inclusive innovations
                           for the benefit of the Base of Pyramid population. This will be achieved by strengthening Vietnam's
                           capacity to undertake inclusive innovation, including financing the development, adaptation,
                           adoption, scaling up and commercialization of inclusive technologies, and improving RDIs' and


                                                                       Page 1 of 7
                         SMEs' technological and innovation capabilities.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Project Components

                         The IDA Credit for the proposed Project is expected to be US$ 55 million. The Project will consist
                         of the following four components:

                         I.      Developing Inclusive Technologies
                         II.      Scaling up and Commercialization of Inclusive Technologies
                         III. Capacity Building and Global Knowledge Transfer
                         IV. Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation

                         Component I: Developing Inclusive Technologies. The project will support the development of
                         inclusive technologies that will help address the problems/needs of the BoP population, through
                         competitive grants, based on public calls for proposals and transparent selection criteria. This
                         component will provide support for: (i) developing technological solutions to address a few National
                         Development Challenges (NDCs) that are specific to Vietnam; (ii) developing, acquiring, adapting
                         and upgrading inclusive technologies by R&D institutions, enterprises and grassroots innovators.
                         The project will focus on key priority themes which could have a quick and significant impact on the
                         BoP population and in which Vietnam has a strong tradition, capacity and strategic interest, as
                         reflected in Vietnam’s 2011-2020 Social and Economic Development Strategy (SEDS). Under
                         Component I (i), the priority themes to be supported under the project have been selected by a
                         National Development Challenges Council in Vietnam as: (i) Traditional Herbal Medicine (THM);
                         (ii) Information and Communications Technologies (ICT) Applications (as a tool for the delivery of
                         services to the BoP); and (iii) Agriculture/Aquaculture applications. Other themes may be
                         considered during project implementation by the Project Steering Committee (PSC). While
                         developing actual solutions, the project will also provide ancillary benefits in the strengthening of the
                         capacity (see Component III) of the key participating institutions
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component II: Scaling up and Commercialization of Inclusive Technologies. This component will
                         provide loans and matching grants to private enterprises for upgrading, scaling up and
                         commercialization of inclusive technologies. This will include: (i) support for scaling up,
                         commercialization and sustainable production of inclusive technologies dealing with manufacturing
                         of products and delivery of services for the BoP; (ii) funding to private sector SMEs* for the
                         acquisition, adoption and use of technology and innovations in priority areas with significant
                         potential for technological upgrading and growth.

                         *SMEs are those defined in Decree 56/2009/ND-CP dated 30 June 2009.

                         The general eligibility criteria for sub-project selection under Component I and II include: a) existing
                         or new technologies applicable to Vietnam; b) readiness for adoption/adaptation and cost reduction
                         potential; c) providing solutions to address the needs of the BoP that are affordable, durable, and
                         environmentally friendly; d) time-bound deliverables with 2-3 years to reach the prototype stage, or
                         having the potential to commercialize in Vietnam within 2 years; e) multi-disciplinary applications of
                         new ideas/technologies; f) collaboration among RDIs, enterprises, local and international partners,
                         researchers/innovators to ensure quality and commercialization potential.

                         Component III: Capacity Building and Global Knowledge Transfer. The project will support


                                                                       Page 2 of 7
                         capacity building of key Vietnamese national institutions* such as the National Institute of Medicine
                         Materials (NIMM), the National Hospital of Traditional Medicine (NHTM), NAFOSTED, Vietnam
                         Academy of Sciences and Technology (VAST), Hanoi University of Science and Technology
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (HUST) for the sustainable development and delivery of inclusive technologies in the priority areas
                         supported under the project: a) enhancing technology, quality and clinical trials of traditional herbal
                         medicine products; b) enhancing innovation grant management capacity; c) enhancing capacity in
                         technology transfer and commercialization, and intellectual property rights protection.

                         *These institutions have the mandate, track record and commitment to developing inclusive
                         technologies and solutions in Vietnam and received substantial capacity building during project
                         preparation.

                         Component IV: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation. The project will provide support
                         to EDA PMU and PIUs in NAFOSTED and PFIs for proje ct management, coordination, capacity
                         building, oversight, monitoring and evaluation, reporting and audits to enable them to perform their
                         responsibility for project coordination and management.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         National scope so activities could take place anywhere in Vietnam.

                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Silvia Del Pilar Larreamendy Ricardo (EASVS)
                         Thuy Cam Duong (EASVS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The project is considered to trigger OP 4.01 on
                          BP 4.01                                             Environmental Assessment. The project intends
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              to trigger the development of new technologies
                                                                              and promote them, possibly at large scale. It is
                                                                              impossible to further quantify what kinds of
                                                                              impacts might be generated as the kinds of
                                                                              innovative technologies to be promoted are
                                                                              unknown at this time and could be in almost any
                                                                              conceivable sector.

                                                                               The project will develop an Environmental
                                                                              Management Framework (EMF) to screen all
                                                                              innovation technology proposals for their
                                                                              potential positive and adverse environmental and
                                                                              social impacts, to develop relevant measures to
                                                                              mitigate adverse impacts, and to ensure
                                                                              compliance with applicable national laws and
                                                                              regulations, emission and discharge standards.

                                                                               A Category "B" for safeguards purposes is
                                                                              suggested because the potential adverse
                                                                              environmental impacts, if any, would not be


                                                                      Page 3 of 7
                                                                              irreversible and will be mitigable by design
                                                                              measures to be incorporated into the design of
                                                                              any given innovation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No                Although the exact nature of innovative ideas to
                                                                              be supported is not currently known, it is not
                                                                              considered possible that any proposal would be
                                                                              supported that would have a negative impact on
                                                                              natural habitats. Appropriate screening measures
                                                                              would be included in the project's EMF to avoid
                                                                              impacts on critical natural habitats and mitigate
                                                                              any other impacts on natural habitats.
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                No                No impact on forests or changes in management
                                                                              of forest resources will be contemplated under the
                                                                              project.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09           No                No procurement of pesticides will be
                                                                              contemplated or facilitated under the project. No
                                                                              innovation would be supported that would lead to
                                                                              a significant increase in pesticide use for
                                                                              agricultural activity or any other purpose.
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No                An appropriate chance finds procedure will be
                            BP 4.11                                           included in the EMF.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No                There is no reason to believe that any innovation
                                                                              supported under the project would involve any
                                                                              ethnic group so the policy is not triggered.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No                No land acquisition or involuntary resettlement
                            4.12                                              will be supported under the project; this will be
                                                                              included as a criterion for eligibility of support.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No                The project will not support or invovle any dams
                                                                              in any way.
                            Projects on International        No                 The project will not have any impact or effect on
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                              any international waterway.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 No investment of the project will take place in
                            7.60                                              any internationally disputed area.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               OP/BP 4.01.The Project triggers the OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment due to potential
                              negative environmental impacts associated with the Project activities. The Project will support
                              Research, Development and Technology Institutions (RDTIs) and private SMEs to adopt, upgrade
                              and develop new technologies and innovation for a few NDCs to improve the lives of BoP
                              population. The priority themes under NDCs could include: Traditional Herbal Medicine (THM);
                              Information and Communications Technologies (ICT) and Agriculture/Aquaculture Productivity.
                              The project will include a number of innovative sub-projects under grant and /or loan under


                                                                      Page 4 of 7
                          component 1 and 2. In addition, it includes upgrading activities of laboratories from two RDTIs
                          under component III. Given that the exact nature and location of innovative subprojects under
                          component I and II are not identified prior to appraisal; the relevant impacts associated with these
Public Disclosure Copy




                          sub-projects are mostly unknown. The known impacts may include safety issue and disposal of
                          waste from RDTIs and SMEs during sub-project implementation and operation. The impacts
                          relating to upgrading of laboratories under component III may include during construction minor,
                          short term impact relating to generation of noise, dust, and waste and safety concerns; and during
                          operation the issue of waste management and laboratory safety.

                           The sub-projects’ potential impacts, if any, are expected to be localized, minor and can be
                           managed through good design and good management practices during Project implementation and
                           operation. The Project is therefore classified as environmental category B.
                           OP/BP 4.09. The project will provide finance support for RDTIs and SMEs for priority themes
                           under NDCs which include agriculture activities. By design, the project will not trigger the policy
                           on pest management OP/BP4.09 and will not allow: (i) financing and procurement of pesticide and
                           pesticide equipment; and (ii) financing of activity that may affect pest management in a way that
                           harm could be done. As such, the project will screen to exclude subprojects or activities that lead
                           to substantial increased pesticide use, are not in accordance with an integrated pest management
                           (IPM) approach, and/or pose significant health and environmental risk.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             There could be potential long-term impacts relating to waste generation as the SMEs and RDITs
                           sub-projects go into operation. Regarding this, the sub-project owner shall ensure compliance with
                           national requirements on solid waste management and good management practices as described in
                           the Word Bank Group’s Environmental, Health & Safety (EHS) General Guidelines
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             N/A
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             As part of Project preparation, the Ministry of Planning and Investment (MPI) has prepared an
                           Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to ensure that the Project
                           implementation and operation shall comply with national environmental legislation and the World
                           Bank safeguard policies.

                          The ESMF is in accordance with the Bank’s safeguard policies and national regulations on
                          environmental assessment and management. The ESMF lays out procedures which include: (i)
                          screening mechanism to exclude environmentally and socially ineligible subprojects, (ii) impact
                          assessment and development of mitigation measures for minor civil work (ECOPs); (iii)
                          preparation and clearance of EA safeguard documents per Government of Vietnam’s (GoV)
                          regulations and Bank safeguard policies and for those subprojects which EA reports are already
                          available – an internal due diligent of EA reports followed by an EMP preparation as necessary;
                          (iv) safeguard implementation, monitoring and reporting, (v) institutional arrangement, capacity
                          building program and cost for safeguard implementation.

                          The project will be implemented in a decentralized manner by relevant agencies (based on the
                          contents of the programs) under the overall coordination and oversight of EDA under MPI.


                                                                     Page 5 of 7
                           Regarding safeguard, EDA will be responsible for ensuring safeguard compliance relating to
                           upgrading selective laboratories under component III. NAFOSTED will be responsible for
                           ensuring safeguard compliance for the whole grant/loan subprojects under both Components I and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           II. Beneficiary RDTIs and SMEs will be responsible for implementation of safeguard requirements
                           as specified in relevant safeguard documents.

                           The MPI/EDA has some previous experience in carry out Bank financed projects e.g., Urban
                           Water Supply and Waste Water (P119077), Second Northern Mountains Poverty Reduction
                           Project (P113493). However, the staff that had experience on safeguard management of the
                           previous projects may not be available to be assigned as Staff Officer for VIIP project. On the
                           other hand, NAFOSTED staff does not have experience on either the World Bank or the GoV
                           safeguard policies. The safeguard capacity of implementing agencies is therefore considered to be
                           limited.
                           The Project will require the allocation of qualified environmental staff to EDA and NAFOSTED
                           to oversee environmental and social safeguard issues and necessary training will be carried out to
                           strengthen capacities of EDA and NAFOSTED in implementing safeguard requirements.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             In addition to the MPI, EDA, NAFOSTED, and beneficiary SMEs and RDITs who are mainly
                           responsible for the safeguard implementation, other key stakeholders are PFIs, people’s
                           committees, local authorities, local communities, and general public.

                           During preparationof ESMF, meaningful consultations have been conducted with key stakeholders
                           of VIIP project including EDA, NAFOSTED, one potential PFI and some institutions i.e. Vietnam
                           Academy of Science and Technology (VAST), National Institute of Medical Materials (NIMM),
                           National Hospital of Traditional Medicine (NHTM). The concerns/feedbacks from the
                           stakeholders have been incorporated into the final ESMF.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The final draft of the ESMF has been disclosed locally at NAFOSTED, EDA and one potential
                           PFI Offices and at Vietnam Development Information Center (VDIC) in Vietnamese language and
                           in the WB InfoShop in Washington DC in English language prior to the appraisal mission.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      04-Dec-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   05-Dec-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Vietnam                                                          04-Dec-2012
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:




                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Nancy Chen
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: James Seward (SM)                            Date: 08-Apr-2013




                                                                       Page 7 of 7
