                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSA801
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Jun-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Pakistan                           Project ID:    P130835
                            Project Name:      PK South Area Development Project (P130835)
                            Task Team          Tahira Syed
                            Leader:
                            Estimated                                             Estimated   31-Oct-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASDL                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector:            General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (40%), Irrigation and
                                               drainage (20%), Sub-national government administration ( 20%), Other social
                                               services (20%)
                            Theme:             Participation and civic engagement (40%), Rural services and infrastructure
                                               (20%), Other rural development (20%), Conflict preventio n and post-conflict
                                               reconstruction (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                               Financing Source                                                              Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Borrower                                                                         0.00
                              MDTF for Crisi Affected Areas of NWFP/FATA/Balochistan                          18.00
                              Financing Gap                                                                    0.00
                              Total                                                                           18.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           To strengthen the capacity of the poor to improve their livelihood options and access to social and
                           productive infrastructure using participatory approaches in the selected districts of southern Khyber
                           Pakhtunkhwa province.
                            3. Project Description
                           The PDO will be achieved by enhancing the opportunities for livelihood support for vulnerable
                           groups and poorest households, building social capital – in particular through skill development and


                                                                        Page 1 of 8
                         organization of youth groups, delivery of cost effective productive infrastructure, and capacity
                         building of local governments. Additionally, the project would be based on community driven
                         development approach and the key principles would include flexible design with effective
Public Disclosure Copy




                         monitoring for result to scale up the project.
                         Specifically, the proposed grant would help finance basic lost assets such as livestock, feed, seeds,
                         fertilizer and farm tools. Along with this, facilities for basic agriculture need to be restored to provide
                         essential services (expertise, support, credit), particularly related to animal health; and fruit, forest
                         and fish nurseries. Supporting the reconstruction and rehabilitation of selected key infrastructure
                         destroyed or damaged during the military operation. The project components include:

                         Component A: Community Development Support (US$ 2.1 million): The objective of this
                         component would be to help the communities mobilize into Economic Interest Groups (EIGs) and
                         federate at Tehsil level into Clustered Economic Interest Groups (CEIGs). A parallel or advanced
                         Technical Assistance for Implementation Readiness is being procured to: (i) prepare the operations
                         manual; (ii) identify and recruit staff (Facilitators and EDO-CDD); and (iii) provide training to all
                         tiers of project staff ahead of implementation stage. The TA would ideally be launched ahead of
                         project approval and lead up to identification of staff that are selected through a competitive process
                         and are in a ready state after receiving training and understanding of the project objectives,
                         implementation arrangements and operations manual, to begin implementation once the project is
                         approved and signed. The Component A would have following sub-components:

                         Sub-component A1 – Facilitation: The project would hire and train Facilitators to guide the EIGs and
                         CEIGs to undertake social mobilization, capacity building and community planning process through
                         inclusive transparency, participatory planning process leading to developing CAP which will be the
                         basis on which project financing will be funded. The CAP will comprise at a minimum: (a) an agreed
                         list of priority private and public infrastructure sub-projects that are technically and economically
                         feasible, environmentally sustainable, and will contribute towards raising the productivity and
                         incomes of participating EIGs; (b) a list of constraints and opportunities to be addressed through
                         advisory services with respect to enterprise production and marketing; (c) agreed mechanisms for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         financing the operations and maintenance of subproject investments; (d) a plan for training and
                         building the capacity of CEIGs in financial management, community-based procurement, social and
                         environmental impact screening of sub-projects, conflict mitigation and management and other
                         aspects of organization and management of the associations; (e) identification of recipients for a
                         matching grant if applicable; and (f) an agreed mechanism to manage and resolve conflicts,
                         especially concerning user group rights.

                         Sub-component A2 – Advisory Services and Input Support: The Advisory Services would be
                         provided to the farmers (organized into various EIGs) and their federations (CEIGs). The project
                         would provide support to empower EIGs comprising of crop farmers or livestock farmers and other
                         economic affinity based groups, working within their own villages and through their respective
                         CEIGs, to purchase advisory services from both public and private sources. The Input Support would
                         include adoption of new technology by the farmers to enhance their financial capacity to purchase
                         farm inputs (mainly seeds, fertilizers, farm tools, etc.). The project would build capacity of CEIGs
                         and their constituent EIGs, so that they are equipped to access Advisory Services and Input Support.
                         This training support will also give them the skills and know-how to carry out participatory planning
                         as well as to implement, operate and maintain sub-projects.

                         Sub-component A3 – Communications and Knowledge Program: The sub-component would also
                         finance a communications and knowledge program to be used to reach the local communities and

                                                                        Page 2 of 8
                         other stakeholders and will include the use of print and electronic media including FM radio,
                         sensitization meetings, advocacy visits to communities, use of handbills and posters, use of
                         traditional institutions, and use of folk songs, street theatre, cultural displays, etc. The target groups
Public Disclosure Copy




                         for the communication education program will include community members, opinion leaders and
                         traditional authorities, religious leaders, CBOs, NGOs, district government and councilors, etc.

                         Component B: Community Driven Investment Program (US$ 14 million): This component has three
                         sub-components that respond to the social infrastructure, productive infrastructure and addressing the
                         asset building needs of the ultra-poor and most vulnerable groups including women headed
                         households, disabled, elderly, and other socially and economically marginalized groups. A clear
                         distinction between public and private infrastructure would derive from social and productive nature
                         of these infrastructures. The social infrastructure would mostly include public goods e.g. schools,
                         health facilities, water, sanitation, access/feeder roads. Whereas the productive infrastructure has a
                         larger menu that revolves around productive activities leading to livelihood opportunities. A positive
                         list of schemes aligned to the productive nature of infrastructure would be identified in the operations
                         manual. The Component B would have following sub-components:

                         Sub-Component B1 – Social Infrastructure (US$ 2.8 million): This would include rebuilding and
                         improving pre-crisis social service infrastructure. The project would finance social infrastructure
                         identified in the CAPs that are public-good sub-projects for example local schools, feeder roads,
                         culverts, bridges, drifts and stock routes, boreholes (with or without pumps), community health
                         facilities, potable water supply facilities, rural electrification, community water storage tanks, etc.

                         Sub-Component B2 – Productive Infrastructure (US$ 9.8 million): This sub-component would
                         operate on an open menu and provide small-scale infrastructure as engine of growth in the affected
                         communities. The project would finance small scale physical and socio-economic infrastructure,
                         income-earning assets and extension service-type sub-projects. But most of the sub-projects will
                         revolve around livelihood related activities in the agriculture and livestock sectors and focus on farm
                         activities, youth income generation and sustainable livelihood. The examples may include vocational
Public Disclosure Copy




                         training/skill development centers, community grain storage facilities, community agro-processing
                         facilities, cattle trough, small to medium irrigation schemes, resting points (along stock trading
                         routes), livestock water pools, etc. Additionally on-farm technology improvement such as solar
                         convergence of water pumps, drip and sprinklers for small scale irrigation, agricultural machines
                         (power tillers and processing equipment e.g. maize shellers, oil press, rice thresher, drying platforms,
                         fruit processing/packaging equipment, etc.) would be financed.

                         Sub-Component B3 – Asset Building for Ultra-Poor (US$ 1.4 million): This would focus on
                         recognizing the need to specifically address the development needs of the ultra-poor and most
                         vulnerable groups in the targeted villages, particularly groups not covered by the government safety
                         net programs. Emergency assistance to vulnerable groups would include re-acquisition of lost asset e.
                         g. home/shelter or income source (livestock, poultry, etc.). The objective would be to relieve the
                         stress from the vulnerability in order for these groups to regain their lost assets and rejoin the
                         economic activities. The assessment of vulnerability and guidelines for categories of asset related
                         sub-projects will be specified in the Project Operations Manual.

                         Component C: Project Implementation Support (US$ 2 million): This component would include: (i)
                         project management through establishing an efficient, effective and responsive entity for successful
                         project implementation at the provincial, district and sub-district level; (ii) development of a
                         communications strategy together with a governance and accountability framework to ensure that

                                                                        Page 3 of 8
                         adequate and appropriate mechanisms are in place to monitor and support project implementation;
                         and (iii) development of an effective monitoring and evaluation system that will take regular stock of
                         project performance and inform any course correction. Additionally, this sub-component would
Public Disclosure Copy




                         explore introduction of new/innovative approaches for community-government partnerships.
                         Examples of these innovations may include introducing ICT-based technologies for monitoring and
                         community O&M.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project would finance activities that would be implemented in three districts: (i) Dera Ismail
                         Khan (DIK), (ii) Lakki Marwat, and (iii) Tank. The implementation will be at village level using
                         community action plan (CAP). Each CAP would include investments for both ‘physical’ goods,
                         works and services, as well as ‘soft’ activities such as technical assistance. The social infrastructure
                         and productive investments would be ‘soft’ activities that will cause minor impacts. The safeguard
                         analysis therefore takes into account the current situation of conflict and the fact that the area is
                         basically a hilly terrain with dominant dry barren mountains coupled with an uncontrolled grazing
                         and timber extraction for commercial usage and fuel wood. The inability of barren hills to retain soil
                         and water is not only causing land erosion in the area but affecting the quality and quantity of fodder
                         for livestock, drawing down of water table, besides increasing incidences of flash floods. Quality of
                         fresh water resources is also under stress due to over exploitation and inappropriate disposal of
                         wastes. Generally, the project activities will have limited scope at the existing sites and therefore are
                         not being treated as serious safeguards issues. Safeguards treatment will primarily concern
                         environmental conditions and social impact resulting from the small works to be undertaken in the
                         social infrastructure in the rehabilitation of public goods in component B. Social issues that are
                         relevant to the project objectives are mostly in relation to social impacts of the recovery and
                         rehabilitation needs in three (3) districts in the Southern KP province i.e. DIK, Tank and Lakki
                         Marwat that are adversely affected by the crisis (no resettlement is expected and investment will take
                         place within existing facilities).
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Chukwudi H. Okafor (ECSS4)
                         Javaid Afzal (SASDI)
                         Tahira Syed (SASDA)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes
                          BP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                          BP 4.11
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No




                                                                       Page 4 of 8
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
                            4.12
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential l arge scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                a.     The proposed interventions under Component B could potentially cause adverse
                              environmental and social impacts triggering Bank’s environment policy OP 4.01. KP-SADP has,
                              therefore, been rated as Environment Category B project. Most of the environmental impactsare
                              likely to occur during the rehabilitation and reconstruction of basic productive and or social
                              infrastructure and may include water and soil contamination; higher dust and noise levels;
                              temporary odor issues; some minor loss of productive land etc. Some of the operations related
                              impacts are health related and may result due to the inadequate water source for water supply
                              schemes, water contamination due to inadequate water distribution system, and localized water
                              logging due to poorly maintained irrigation channels etc. Most of these impacts are expected to be
                              temporary and confined to local environment and would be direct, reversible and of short duration.

                              b.       The project will avoid those sub-projects that may require land acquisition and/or
                              displacement or damages to private assets/public utilities. There are no indigenous people residing
Public Disclosure Copy




                              in the project area so none of the Bank’s social safeguard policies will trigger. All efforts will be
                              made to avoid using/taking productive land for any sub-project investments. It will ensured that
                              the land donation do not cause adverse impacts on the income of any households. In case, if land
                              may come up as an issue for a priority investment, the project will ensure that it is voluntary land
                              donation (since the project does not envisage any land acquisition) and that the process for
                              voluntary land donation will be documented and monitored. The procedures for essential
                              consultations and agreements with owners/affected persons will be laid down in the Operations
                              Manual. In case of disagreements with owners/affected persons, the project will not take/used such
                              lands.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                                No indirect or long term adverse environmental impacts are expected to be associated with the
                              proposed project interventions, other than those related to the usage/operation and maintenance of
                              the services/infrastructure. No involuntary resettlement impacts will occur due to this project.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                                a.     The only other alternative is ‘no-project’ option, which could have detrimental effects by
                              denying basic services to the rural population of the project areas. In addition the restoration of
                              such services is linked with enhancing confidence of the local populace in the State and will


                                                                         Page 5 of 8
                           contribute towards peace building efforts. The ‘no-project’ alternative would though avoid the
                           insignificant, minor and temporary adverse environmental impacts associated with the
                           rehabilitation, expansion and/or up-gradation and construction of the community infrastructure and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           services; however, would also result in continued environmental degradation; health hazards for
                           the population associated with non- or poorly-functioning services such as water supply and waste
                           management; and less opportunities for livelihood strengthening.

                           b.       At preliminary stage of every sub-project technical design, different design options will be
                           considered to avoid resettlement impacts and minimize other social and environment impacts.
                           However, all identified and selected sub-projects will be subject to environmental and social
                           (including resettlement) impact screening in accordance with the ESIA and detailed procedures for
                           these will be included in the project’s Operations Manual. The PMU, line directorates and local
                           community groups in consultation with tribal elders/Jirga and Political Administration will be
                           responsible for following the procedures described in the Operations Manual, in a transparent
                           manner without duress. Those sites will be selected which involve minimum loss of productive
                           land and other resources from the construction and operations of infrastructure.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             a.     The project is being processed as an Emergency Operation under OP 8.0. The project is
                           guided by the overall Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment Framework (ESSAF)
                           for MDTF, which defines the environmental and social impact assessment (ESIA) requirements,
                           the planning approach and requirements for assessing and mitigating adverse environmental and
                           social impacts. The Implementing Agency will be responsible for compliance with requirements as
                           set out in the ESSAF. In pursuance of the ESSAF requirements, all sub-project investments will
                           subject to environment and social screening at the design stage, comprehensive environment and
                           social screening reports detailing the procedures and evidences will be prepared, reviewed and
                           cleared by the Bank’s safeguard secretariat and disclosed prior to initiating implementation. The
                           Directorate of Projects will prepare a project-specific Environmental and Social Impact
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Assessment (ESIA) for all interventions which will include appropriate mitigation measures to
                           address the potential adverse impacts of the project activities. ESIA will be cleared by the Bank
                           and disclosed before the project goes into implementation. The ESIA will be disclosed in Urdu
                           and English to the general public and locally to project beneficiary communities, local
                           organizations and will be shared with all relevant agencies, line directorates, and made available at
                           the websites of Government of KP. The Project Director, PMU will be overall responsible for the
                           compliance of the World Bank safeguards policies and ESIA.

                           b.      Currently, PMU lacks institutional capacity to manage environmental and social issues.
                           The Directorate of Projects will appoint safeguards specialist and each line directorate/district will
                           also designate safeguard coordinator to ensure effective utilization of ESSAF for the development
                           of ESIA and its judicious implementation. Capacity building of safeguard specialist/coordinator
                           and other related personnel (such as the relevant staff of line directorates and local administration),
                           as well as awareness raising of the remaining Project staff will be needed for better management of
                           environmental and social issues of the Project, particularly for the effective implementation of
                           ESIA. The PMU will also engage third party consultants/organization for external monitoring of
                           the ESIA implementation.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.



                                                                       Page 6 of 8
                            a.       Stakeholders of this project will involve Directorate of Projects-KP Secretariat, line
                           directorates, political administration, beneficiary population, local/indigenous structures
                           including agency development councils, peace (aman) committees, tribal elder (Maliks), Jirga
Public Disclosure Copy




                           (council of elders), existing community organizations, and other formally or informally organized
                           community groups. The Directorate of Projects has established the Project Management Unit
                           (PMU) which will ensure that all relevant stakeholders are fully informed of ESSAF, ESIA and
                           the World Bank Safeguard Policy requirements. Consultations will be mainstreamed in the
                           preparation of new sub-projects under this project. Before the preliminary technical design of
                           each sub-project, the IA and line agencies will consult the potentially affected groups on the
                           potential environmental and social issues, and will take their views into account. The IA will
                           initiate these consultations right after the identification of sub-projects. For the initial consultation,
                           the IAs will provide a summary of the proposed sub-project's objectives, description, and potential
                           impacts.

                           b.       The ESSAF has been shared with the KP Secretariat and Directorate of Projects. It has
                           been disclosed locally by the KP Secretariat on March 28, 2012 on its website and also will be
                           disclosed at the project specific InfoShop after the decision meeting. The project-specific ESIA
                           will also be disclosed locally and copies will also be sent to InfoShop for its disclosure. Despite
                           the fact that the project is a low-risk category B project, the client intends to undertake public
                           consultations to assess the perceived environmental and social risks associated with the project and
                           to suggest and recommend grievance redressal mechanism.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      21-May-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  20-Jul-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   20-Jul-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:

                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
                         ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [           ]   No [    ]    NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the    Yes [           ]   No [    ]   NA [     ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [            ]   No [    ]   NA [     ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?


                                                                        Page 7 of 8
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Tahira Syed
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Zia Al Jalaly (RSA)                            Date: 27-Jun-2012
                            Coordinator:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Simeon Kacou Ehui (SM)                         Date: 13-Sep-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 8 of 8
