INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA575
b  Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Feb-2012
0
1 1. BASIC INFORMATION
U)    1. Basic Project Data
0
0
Q      Country:               Georgia                      Project ID:             P126033
.      Project Name:         Regional Development Project (P126033)
Task Team Leader:     Ahmed A. R. Eiweida
Estimated Appraisal Date: 08-Feb-2012               Estimated Board Date:   20-Mar-2012
Managing Unit:         ECSS6                        Lending Instrument:     Specific Investment Loan
Sector:                General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (60%), Urban Transport (30%), Sub-national government
administration (8%), Voc ational training (2%)
Theme:                Infrastructure services for private sector development (30%), City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (25%),
Cultural Heritage (25%), Urban Economic Development (10%), Regional integration (10%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Financing Source                                                                      Amount
Borrower                                                                                 15.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                   60.00
Total                                                                                    75.00
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
Is this a Repeater project? Yes
2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective is to improve infrastructure services and institutional capacity related to the tourism economy in the tourism
and heritage circuits of the Kakheti region.
3. Project Description
0
0      The Project has two components:
a)    Component 1: Infrastructure Investment (WB: $56.3m; Borrower: $14.1m)
0     Component 1.1: Provision of financial resources to local self-governments (LSGs) to carry out Investment Subprojects for the following activities:
O     - Urban regeneration: An integrated approach is proposed for urban transformation of Telavi, Kvareli and the heritage village of Dartlo. This
includes a) the rehabilitation of municipal infrastructure and utilities in the central historical areas, b) conservation and upgrading of public spaces
o     and cultural buildings, and c) conservation of building facades with vernacular architecture. The proposed conservation and upgrading activities
will help improve livability and hospitality in a culturally-informed manner, enhance attractiveness for visitors, revitalize the urban and rural nuclei,
and attract increased volume of private sector investments.
- Tourism circuit development: Integrated approach to culture heritage site upgrading and management in the most attractive 13 cultural heritage
sites located along the main tourism circuit in Kakheti. These include a) improved urban landscaping and public parking; b) construction of info
kiosks, cafes and public toilets; and c) improving access roads. The main tourism and culture heritage circuit has been identified in the Kakheti
Tourism Development Strategy connecting the following culture heritage sites: Ujarma, New Shuamta, Old Shuamta, Ikalto, Kvareli, Alaverdi,
Signangi, Bodbe, Gurjaani, Mirzaani, Ninotsminda, Khirsa and David Gareja
The proposed circuit combines a rich and varied experience of cultural and natural heritage, as well as culinary tourism, thus projecting an
increase in -average over-night stays and tourism spending in Kakheti.
The estimated cost of this sub-component is about $57.9 million, of which the World Bank will provide $46.3 million, the Borrower will provide
$11.6 million counterpart funding. The Swedish International development Agency (SIDA) is considering providing about $7-8 million co-financing
to this subcomponent, subject to finalizing the Administration Agreement between SIDA and the Bank.
Component 1.2: Provision of financial resources to LSGs to provide public infrastructure to private sector investments in tourism and food
processing.
To encourage private sector investments in the region, this component is to support a selected number of private sector entities which show
interest and capacity to invest in Kakheti in a selected number of tourism and food processing, but seek complementary public infrastructure
necessary to make their investments viable (e.g. public facilities within vicinity of the investments, road/sidewalk, water/sanitation, etc). They would
be subject to screening by a selection committee and there will be appropriate conditions tied to that.
A package of incentives will be provided to selected domestic and international investors to locate in Kakheti, including transparent and
competitive selection, streamlined business start up procedures, provision of public infrastructure.
The estimated cost of this sub-component is about $12.5 million, of which the World Bank will provide $10 million, the Borrower will provide $2.5
million counterpart funding.
Page 1 of 5


﻿Component 2: Institutional Development (WB 3.7 m; Borrower: $0.9m)
Enhancing the institutional capacity and performance of the Georgia National Tourism Administration, the Agency for Culture Heritage
Preservation of Georgia (ACHP), the Project Implementing Entity (MDF), and other local and regional entities to carry out the following activities:
*       Destination management and promotion, including local outreach campaign
*       Geotourism routes and tourism portal;
*       Skilled workforce development and capacity building;
*       Construction supervision and sustainable site management of cultural heritage; and
0     *       Performance monitoring & evaluation activities.
C)
a      4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)
O     The project will be implemented in various locations within Kakheti Region, Georgia. Proposed sites of subprojects include: urban areas of Telavi,
U
U),   Kvareli, the settlement of Dartlo, and vicinities of the cultural heritage sites of Ujarma, New and Old Shuamta, Ikalto, Alaverdi, Bobde, David Gareji,
Gremi, and Nino Tsminda.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Darejan Kapanadze (ECSS3)
Kosuke Anan (ECSS4)
6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01  Yes        The project carries investment components in support to infrastructure
development and therefore triggers OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment. Due
to the demand-driven nature of the Project, all investments to be financed under it
cannot be determined upfront. Sub-project applications will be coming on the
rolling basis after the approval of the Project. Sub-projects will be financed through
the Municipal Development Fund of Georgia (MDF), which is a non-banking
financing institution. Therefore, the project is classified as environmental Category
Fl. Most of investments to be financed under the project are expected to qualify for
environmental Category B. No Category A sub-projects will be financed under the
project.
The Strategic Environment, Cultural Heritage, and Social Assessment (SECHSA)
was carried out for this regional development program, followed by the
development of an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) to guide the
preparation of sub-project-specific Environmental Assessments (EAs) and/or
Environmental Management Plans (EMPs). The SECHSA identified risks and
opportunities associated with the overall development program, in view of existing
conditions and trends and will support the planning and decision-making
processes underlying the selection and prioritization of sub-projects to be financed.
The SECHSA assessed institutional capacity to apply all triggered safeguard
policies in the course of the project implementation, analyzed gaps, and
recommend capacity building measures which are now included in the project.
Site-specific EAs and/or EMPs will be prepared for individual investments,
0                                                      disclosed, and discussed with the stakeholders prior to commencement of works at
each site. MDF will review and approve all incoming EMPs.
Q      Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         Yes         The project is likely to invest and/or stimulate private investment in the areas
surrounding protected areas and/or stimulate development of tourist and hospitality
infrastructure in the natural sites of high aesthetic value. Although no activities
inside the boundaries of the protected areas will be supported, the likelihood of
distorting ecological balance of the natural habitats existing outside the designated
protected areas can not be excluded. Therefore, the OP/BP 4.04 is triggered to
ensure that any non-transformed and non-degraded natural areas picked for any
kind of infrastructure development are assessed from the viewpoint of their value
as living environment for rare and valuable species of flora and fauna.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No
Pest Management OP 4.09            No
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11  Yes     The project aims at attracting increased flow of tourists to the natural and cultural
heritage sites of Kakheti region. This would imply improvement of access to these
sites and development of tourist infrastructure around them. Conduct of civil works
in the immediate proximity to the historical monuments and other elements of the
cultural heritage carries the risk of affecting their aesthetic value, accidental
damage, or gradual deterioration. Also, development of tourist infrastructure and
improving access to the cultural sites will imply earth works carrying high likelihood
of chance finds. OP/BP 4.11 is triggered to ensure that no element of cultural
heritage is affected negatively neither during construction nor operation of the
infrastructure provided under the project.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No
Page 2 of 5


﻿Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12  Yes       OP/BP 4.12 is triggered in light of temporary impacts of anticipated civil works and
in case land acquisition is required under connectivity or targeted investments.
Because the location and footprint of these investments will not be known until
implementation the MDF developed a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF).
Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) for individual sub-projects will be prepared as
needed in line with the RPF and resettlement measures implemented prior to
commencement of civil works at any given sub-project site.
0
U      Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No
a      Projects on International Waterways OP/BP  No
U)     7.50
0
Z5     Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60  No
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
significant andlor irreversible impacts:
The Regional Development Project (RDP) will finance infrastructure rehabilitation and development activities that according to the OP/BP 4.01
are classified as environmental Category B (or C, which is unlikely). Because Category A activities are excluded, no large scale significant
adverse environmental impacts are expected from the project implementation. Some of the civil works to be supported under the project are
typical and carry environmental implications which are common for small to medium scale infrastructure projects. The project implementing
entity, MDF, has vast experience in preparing and applying environmental mitigation measures to such type of civil works.
The resettlement related impacts that may occur during project implementation is expected to be limited to temporary relocation, income loss
and loss of productive assets during construction work. Some of the affected households may choose to live in temporary dwelling premises
for the period of rehabilitation works (in safe and undisturbed conditions) and in that case, compensation of their additional expenses related to
the temporary change of residence will be provided in line with the entitlement matrix of the Resettlement Policy Framework. None of the
proposed investments so far would involve activities that would cause demolition of residential or commercial structures which result in
permanent relocation. There were no visible instances of informal structures, occupants, nor street vendors observed in the premises of
anticipated project sites at the time of project appraisal.
In addition to the described typology of sub-projects, RDP will invest in the upgrade and development of infrastructure in the historical
settlements as well as in the immediate proximity to the cultural and natural heritage sites. Such interventions carry additional risks of damaging
monuments in case the design and methodological approaches used are unfit for conservation of the historical and aesthetic value of these
sites or if tourist visitation of these sites, increased as a result of the project interventions, is not managed in a sustainable manner. Cumulative
impacts of developing various elements of infrastructure in and around historical settlements and in the proximity to the protected areas, in or
around natural sites of recreational and aesthetic value also add to the potential risks of the project. The SECHSA identified important short,
medium and longer-term measures to manage environmental and social risks and opportunities associated with tourism development in the
region. Ongoing strong involvement of the Georgian Agency for Culture Heritage Preservation of Georgia (ACHP) in the project design and
0        implementation is another key means of risk mitigation applied to RDP.
a)       The resettlement related impacts that may occur during project implementation will be limited to temporary relocation, income loss and loss of
standing crops and other productive assets during construction work. Due to the demand driven nature of the project, however, it cannot be
0        fully ruled out that municipalities propose sub-projects that are likely to significantly improve citizens' livelihood but require land acquisition. The
cn       borrower confirmed that none of the proposed investments will involve activities that would cause demolition of residential or commercial
Q        structures.
2. Describe any potential indirect andlor long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
Project implementation will have long term positive impact on the economic growth in Kakheti region through increased tourist visitation,
improved infrastructure and utilities in the selected municipalities, and enhanced business activity. This is expected to improve livelihood of the
residents of municipalities selected for direct interventions as well as to make some positive change in the incomes of communities residing in
the proximity to the cultural and natural monuments targeted as part of the priority tourist circuits. Indirect longs term risks of the stimulated
visitation and investment along such circuits and individual heritage sites is the possibility of exceeding their carrying capacity as well as
potential loss of the ecological balance and/or aesthetic value of the landscapes surrounding tourist sites due to over-development in their
buffer zones. Potential long-term social impacts of the project would be related to: gentrification of the communities in Telavi and Kvareli led by
increased prices of goods and services as well as increased property values, and large influx of investors and other migrants attracted by the
new economic opportunities. These impacts could affect the local population by (i) encouraging them to sell their properties and leave the area,
(ii) generating a clash of lifestyles between the locals and new-comers, and (iii) intruding the authenticity of their culture and tradition. Such
changes can result in damaging cultural tourism resources, including traditional artisanship and other types of intangible cultural heritage.
Since wine tourism involves consumption of alcohol, increased risks of road safety is another subject of concern. The influx of migrants and the
increased number of visitors to the area can also create long-term impacts such as increased traffic (disruption of local traffic, safety risks for
pedestrian and vehicles, emissions, dust, noise, and pollution related to fuel leakages), increased demand on energy and water supply,
increased waste generation, and contamination related to improper management of toilets and sewerage system.
The SECHSA provides an overview of the medium and long term risks which may arise from induced development in the project area and from
cumulative impacts of its implementation. Such risks are moderate in the medium term perspective, because (i) economic activity and - in most
parts of Kakheti - tourism as well is currently lower than the levels at the Soviet times, (ii) given the natural characteristics of Kakheti region and
the existing common vision of its future, the development to be brought about or induced by project interventions in this region will be based on
the small and medium business model and will evolve around a number of tourist circuits as opposed to a model with a concentrated brand
resort with large chain hotels and satellite businesses, and (iii) the project aims to support responsible tourism and development of tourist
products for the target type responsible tourists interested in history, culture, fine arts, quality wine, and adventurous natural settings, which
Page 3 of 5


﻿tend to create less social pressure and bring more benefits to the host areas as compared to other types of tourism. A longer term vision of risk
mitigation includes development of master plans and zoning for regional development that is currently under development by the region with
technical assistance from the Government of Germany, enhancing utilities and other public services, and strengthening governance at the
regional and municipal levels - which are equally applicable to the regional development in Kakheti as well as to the State policy for regional
development nationwide.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
No alternatives to the general design of the project have been considered with the specific purpose of decreasing its potential adverse
o        impacts. Analysis of alternatives and prioritization will occur at the stage of review and approval of individual investment ideas and proposals
0        which will be considered in the course of the project implementation. Policy recommendations provided in the SECHSA and sub-project
a)       screening and selection criteria provided in the Environmental Management Framework (EMF) will be followed for the purposes of the review of
site-specific investment alternatives and for their approval.
0
Z)     4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
-U)      and implement the measures described.
Q
o         Because the intended project interventions are viewed as the first phase of a broader regional development program which has the potential
for impacts on the natural environment, cultural heritage, and social strata of the entire region of Kakheti, the methodological approach to
safeguards work included conduct of SECHSA which provided input for, the development of an EMF to guide the preparation of sub-project-
specific Environmental Assessments and/or Environmental Management Plans (EMPs). The SECHSA identifies risks and opportunities
associated with the overall development program in view of the existing conditions and trends and will support the planning and decision-
making processes underlying the selection and prioritization of sub-projects to be financed. SECHSA is to be applied at both - the program and
the project levels to support investment in sustainable tourism and other business development and to exclude or discourage investors
interested in exploitative projects for short-term gain.
Under the umbrella of SECHSA, the project implementing entity updated the Environmental Management Framework (EMF) prepared for the
past and current Bank-supported operations currently in use. The new iteration of the EMF is supplemented with the detailed guidance on
handling cultural and social aspects of the project implementation. It is included into the Operations Manual of the project implementing entity.
EMF translates the main principles outlined in the SECHSA into technical guidance for day-to-day application in the course of the project
implementation. To handle the anticipated temporary impacts of sub-projects and as a precautionary measure to address other possible
resettlement issues, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared in line with OP 4.12. EMF and RPF will be used for the
development of investment-specific EMPs and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs), if required, once the nature and detailed actions plans for
such investments are provided in the course of the project implementation. These documents will be subject to the Bank approval prior to
commencement of physical works at any individual project site. The local municipalities will be responsible for the implementation of the RAPs,
with the assistance of the project implementing entity, while implementation of EMPs will be enforced on works contractors directly by the
project implementing entity.
Municipal Development Fund of Georgia (MDF) is the implementing agency for RDP. MDF has long history of implementing World Bank
supported projects with a good track record of safeguard compliance. Implementation of RDP is considered more challenging, though, due to
its multi-sectoral nature, diversity of its components, and interventions planned in the historical settlements, as well as nearby cultural heritage
and natural sites, and protected areas. MDF's institutional capacity for meeting these challenges will be enhanced through (i) direct
involvement of the Government entities responsible for conservation of cultural heritage and natural environment into decision making,
designing, and implementing individual investments, (ii) delivering safeguards training of MDF's in-house staff, and (iii) using supplemental
external consultancy for technical supervision of works (including environmental and social monitoring of works).
0L
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
a       on potentially affected people.
Population of the Kakheti region in general is the main beneficiary of the project. Municipalities and businesses of the region as well as
O        potential future investors are also stakeholders of the project. Municipal Development Fund of Georgia (MDF) is a designatedimplementing
entity. At a higher level, the national Government of Georgia is directly involved in designing of the project and establishing institutional set-up
Q        for its implementation because RDP is viewed as an important element and an integral part of the national strategy for regional development.
From the very initial stage of the project preparation, the top management and technical staff of the national line agencies as well as those of
the regional and municipal governments have been directly involved in the consideration of all aspects of the proposed project. Involvement of
the local communities residing in Kakheti started at the stage of SECHSA, which included consultations on the project design and its
implications for the natural environment, cultural heritage, and social conditions of the groups of population. Public consultations on the RPF,
SECHSA and EMF were held in Kakheti and in Tbilisi and attended by a wide array of stakeholders including participating agencies, NGOs and
local residents. Advanced drafts of the documents were disclosed on January 31, February 8 and February 8, respectively. Final versions will
be disclosed when completed. The site-specific EMPs and RAPs (if required) will be subject to mandatory in-country disclosure and
consultation with the affected communities in the areas of individual project sites. These site-specific documents will be developed, reviewed,
and approved prior to commencement of any physical works under individual investments. The MDF has also agreed with local municipalities to
inform the occupants of every structure affected by urban regeneration work through individual visits and obtain a written consent prior to
commencement of works.
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   23-Jan-2012
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                               08-Feb-2012
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                08-Feb-2012
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors
Page 4 of 5


﻿Resettlement Action PlanlFramework/Policy Process
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                  Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                    23-Jan-2012
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                31-Jan-2012
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                 31-Jan-2012
0      If the project triggers the Pest Management andlor Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
C-)    disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Auditior EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
O
0
Q      C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?  Yes [ x ]  No [  ]  NA [
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) natural  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
habitats, does the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts on  Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the  Yes [ X ]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?  Yes [ X ]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language  Yes [ X ]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for  Yes [ X ]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?  Yes [ X ]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard  Yes [ X  No  NA[
impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
0
U        Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same  Yes [  No  NA[
a)       been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?
O  Ill. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader:           Ahmed A. R. Eiweida
.0     Approved By:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Name: Agnes 1. Kiss (RSA)                            Date: 08-Feb-2012
Sector Manager:             Name Benoit Paul Blarel (SM)                              Date: 08-Feb-2012
Page 5 of 5


