                                                                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                             APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA607
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Apr-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        Africa                                   Project ID:                       P113266
                              Project Name:                   WAPP APL4 (Phase 1) - Côte d'Ivoire, Sierra Leone, Liberia, and Guinea Power System Re-development
                                                              (P113266)
                              Task Team Leader:               Fanny Kathinka Missfeldt-
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 28-Mar-2012                                    Estimated Board Date:             31-May-2012
                              Managing Unit:                  AFTEG                                    Lending Instrument:               Adaptable Program Loan
                              Sector:                         Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (90%), General energy sector (10%)
                              Theme:                          Infrastructure services for private sector development (50%), Regulation and competition policy (25%), Conflict
                                                              prevention and post- conflict reconstruction (25%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                         Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                           4.35
                                   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                                176.00
                                   African Development Bank                                                                                                   133.10
                                   EC European Investment Bank                                                                                                105.20
                                   GERMANY KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU (KFW)                                                                                40.80
                                   LOCAL BENEFICIARIES                                                                                                         13.05
                                   Total                                                                                                                      472.50
                              Environmental Category:         A - Full Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No
Public Disclosure Copy




                              2. Project Objectives

                              The project development objectives for the two sub-projects are (i) to reduce the cost of and increase the electricity supply at utility level, and to
                              increase the export capability of Côte d’Ivoire, and (ii) to increase the technical integration of the WAPP network.

                              3. Project Description

                              The project consists of two sub-projects and is estimated to cost US$472 million (including physical and price contingencies, but excluding duties
                              and taxes), of which IDA is financing US$176 million.

                              Sub-project 1 – WAPP CLSG Power Interconnection

                              Component 1.A: Power interconnection between Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Guinea

                              Under this component, the infrastructure of the 1,349 km transmission interconnection between Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Guinea is
                              being financed. The component will be implemented by the CLSG Regional Transmission Company for the project, and it will be financed by AfDB,
                              EIB, KfW, IDA, and the CLSG Governments.

                              Component 1.B: Institutional framework and project oversight

                              Under this component key institutional features of the project will be supported and developed that will ensure the sound implementation of the
                              WAPP CLSG transmission interconnector. This includes financing of the Owner’s Engineer who will supervise the construction of the CLSG
                              transmission interconnector. The component will be implemented and administered by the CLSG Regional Transmission Company for the project,
                              and it will be financed by IDA.

                              Sub-project 2 – Supply and Technical Integration of the WAPP Network

                              Component 2.A: Supply Alternative Studies

                              Under this component key studies will be conducted to ensure that in the medium to long-term the generation capacity along the line will be
                              developed in a timely manner and in accordance with least cost principles. This component will be implemented by the WAPP, and it will be
                              financed by IDA.


                                                                                                                                                                            Page 1 of 5
                         Component 2.B: Technical Assistance and Integration of WAPP network

                         This component proposes to support the integration of WAPP networks and provide technical assistance. This component will be implemented by
                         the WAPP and financed by IDA.

                         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         The total length of the 225 kV transmission line across the WAPP Interconnection, which covers Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Guinea,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         is 1,349 km, including two 66 kV distribution lines (in total 50 km) from Mount Coffee to Bushrod Island and Paynesville in Liberia. World Bank
                         environmental and social safeguard missions visited almost the entire length of the transmission and distribution lines.

                         Côte d’Ivoire: The WAPP Interconnection line segment from Man in Côte d’Ivoire via Danane to the Liberian border is flat to hilly and passes
                         through farm-bush, which is fallow land and is part of the agricultural system in the area. In this section there are no sensitive forest areas. One
                         protected forest area, one sacred forest and one sacred water body have been avoided.

                         Liberia: The line section from the Côte d’Ivoire/Liberian border to Yekepa passes mostly through flat to hilly country consisting of farm-bush. The
                         only sensitive forest area on this line stretch is the East Nimba Reserve, one of the last remaining biodiversity hotspots in West Africa and
                         supported by a World Bank funded GEF project, has been completely avoided. The line route will not increase access in this sensitive area, which
                         could result in an increase in illegal logging and poaching, since the line follows the existing main road.

                         The line segment from Yekepa to the Guinea border passes through the valleys of a mountainous area consisting mainly of farm-bush. On the
                         mountain slopes most of the economically valuable trees have already been logged. The area can be accessed through bush roads, which are
                         used by trucks and leading to the border control in Bololewee village, a recently constructed border crossing in Liberia and the Yalenzou border
                         town in Guinea. The construction and presence of the transmission line will provide some improved access. Impacts such as increased illegal
                         logging and poaching have been assessed as very limited since most of the area of the RoW is already accessible and almost all economically
                         valuable trees have already been removed.

                         The line segment in Liberia from Yekepa to Buchanan, mostly along the existing railway and on to Mt. Coffee and Mano passes entirely through
                         farm-bush. This area is accessible from existing roads. There are no sensitive forest areas on this stretch. The Right-of-Way on this line segment
                         avoids two proposed Ramsar sites. The line route segment from Mano in Liberia to Kenema in Sierra Leone passes through farm-bush.

                         The two 66 kV distribution lines pass from the Mt. Coffee Power Hydropower Plant site through flat farm-bush into the direction of Monrovia. The
                         last few kilometers of these lines pass through the urban and peri-urban sections of Monrovia.

                         Sierra Leone: After the Liberia/Sierra Leone border, the line passes the Gola Forest National Park on its western side. The area can be accessed
                         through existing bush roads. Impacts such as increased logging and poaching have been evaluated as limited.

                         The line segment in Sierra Leone from Kenema to Binkongor and on to Bumbuna and Kamakwie passes through farm-bush. The protected area of
                         Nimini Hills Forest Reserve has been avoided. The impacts of this line segment on illegal logging and poaching have been evaluated as minimal.
                         The last stretch of the line in Sierra Leone to the Guinea border avoids the Outamba-Kilimi National Park within Sierra Leone. The RoW passes
                         through flat farm-bush. Cattle herders heavily use the entire area.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Guinea: The line segment in Guinea from Yalenzou, at the north eastern border with Liberia, to Nzérékoré is hilly. The line on this stretch passes
                         entirely through farm-bush. There are no sensitive forest areas on this stretch in Guinea. The site for the new sub-station in Nzérékoré, a town of
                         around 800,000 inhabitants, is suitably located outside the town and does not pose a problem from an environmental or social point of view. The
                         line segment from the Guinea/Sierra Leone border to Linsan is flat and consists of farm-bush. The site for the new sub-station near Linsan does
                         not pose any environmental or social risk. The same can be said for all the other new sub-station sites.

                         The biodiversity hotspots in Sierra Leone are Gola Forest National Park, Nimini Hills Forest Reserve and Outamba-Kilimi National Park, and in
                         Liberia, the East Nimba Nature Reserve, one of the remaining high biodiversity areas in West Africa, Gbedin Wetlands, a proposed Ramsar site
                         and the proposed Lake Piso Multiple Protected Area, which is also a proposed Ramsar site. The transmission line routing avoided these hotspots.
                         Nine alternative line routes for the three environmentally sensitive areas (biodiversity hotspots) in the Sierra Leone section; and eight alternative
                         line routes for the three biodiversity hotspots in the Liberia section were developed. The existing line routing avoids all the current segments in
                         hotspot areas, as well as the two future transboundary national park areas on the Sierra Leone – Liberia border and the Sierra Leone – Guinea
                         border. The additional costs for the avoidance of these biodiversity hotspots are approximately US$ 9 million.

                         The Consultant who did the Line Routing Study and identified the alternative routing took into consideration the potential impacts from a technical,
                         environmental, social, economic, and financial point of view. Although this was deemed appropriate by WAPP as an acceptable way of
                         demarcating the Right-of-Way line routing, and even though the feasibility study was carried out independently by AETS/SOGREAH, another
                         consulting company, the line route study was viewed nonetheless as part of the project’s technical feasibility. In this connection, a waiver is being
                         requested following the Bank’s policy in OP4.01 (Environmental Assessment, footnote 7). This waiver states that the Line Routing Study was
                         complemented by an “Analysis of Alternatives? survey to ensure that environmental and social impacts are independently assessed.

                         OP4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources) was triggered due to the length of the transmission line where “chance finds? procedures were included in
                         the construction contracts as guidelines in case there are areas with culturally and historically significant properties (e.g. artifacts, sacred sites).

                         The land and resources that will be affected by construction of the transmission line cover the following categories: (i) agricultural lands with
                         perennial crops (e.g. such as rubber trees and oil palms); (ii) agricultural lands with non-perennial crops; (iii) agro-forestry lands with trees (farm-
                         bush which is part of the slash and burn agricultural system); (iv) residential lands with housing and other structures (mostly in the urban and peri-
                         urban segments in and around Monrovia under the distribution lines) that will need to be physically relocated. A total of 1,634 households (10,158
                         people) will receive compensation based on a Project Affected Persons (PAPs) census (completed in November 2009, which was also the cut-off
                         date) and valuation of land and other assets. Of these, 71 households will be physically relocated and will move to areas identified by the local
                         communities near the substations. In addition, since the initial census was done in 2009, a field verification and series of consultations were held in
                         2011 to finalize the PAPs compensation. The final Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) were prepared for each Member Country and disclosed in-
                         country on January 27, 2012 and in the Bank’s InfoShop in January 30, 2012. The RAPs for Guinea and Côte d’Ivoire, where a second stage field
                                                                                                                                                                        Page 2 of 5
                               verification process could not be completed due to security problems in the border areas until March 2012, were disclosed on 30 March 2012 and
                               5 April 2012 respectively.

                               5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                               Maria Concepcion J. Cruz (AFTCS)
                               Robert A. Robelus (AFTWR)
Public Disclosure Copy




                               Paivi Koskinen-Lewis (SDV)

                               6. Safeguard Policies                            Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                               Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01              Yes             For Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) have been prepared
                                                                                                (one for each country) to address the environmental and social impacts during
                                                                                                construction and operation. The ESIA has been disclosed in-country on January
                                                                                                27th and in the Infoshop on January 30th. Environment and Social Management
                                                                                                Plans (ESMPs) have also been completed as part of ESIA preparation.
                               Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                      Yes             Following an analysis of alternative line routes, the transmission line routing was
                                                                                                fixed in such a way that it would fully circumvent several protected areas, some of
                                                                                                which with a high level of biodiversity. No offsets are required.
                               Forests OP/BP 4.36                               No              Following an analysis of alternative routes, the transmission line routing was fixed
                                                                                                to avoid any important forest areas. The ESIA proposes avoidance or mitigation
                                                                                                measures to minimize impacts on the small areas of secondary forests, which are
                                                                                                heavily used by thelocal population, in the Right of Way.
                               Pest Management OP 4.09                          No              Not applicable.
                               Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11           Yes             The ESIA did not identify any significant physical cultural resources. A sacred
                                                                                                forest area and a sacred body of water were avoided in Côte d’Ivoire. A “chance
                                                                                                finds procedure? will be included in the contracts of the transmission and
                                                                                                distribution line interconnection contractors, and if needed, work on the project will
                                                                                                be stopped in case historical or culturally significant sites or materials are
                                                                                                discovered. In such cases, the important sites will be salvaged following the
                                                                                                procedures outlined in OP4.11
                               Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                    No              The initial social assessment showed that there were no indigenous peoples in the
                                                                                                project’s right-of-way nor adjacent to the transmission line routing.
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12              Yes             A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) has been prepared for each country, covering
                                                                                                the entire 1,349 km of power line, including the 50 km distribution lines. The total
                                                                                                number of affected households in all four countries is 1,634, of which 71
                                                                                                households will be physically relocated to nearby lands. The RAPs for Liberia and
                                                                                                Sierra Leone have been disclosed in January 2012. The RAPs for Côte d’Ivoire
                                                                                                and Guinea have been disclosed on 5 April 2012 and 30 March 2012 respectively
                                                                                                due to delays in the fieldwork as there were security concerns. Displacement has
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                been minimized and appropriate compensation measures have been proposed for
                                                                                                the affected population. The participating countries will be responsible for financing
                                                                                                RAP implementation costs.
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                        No
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP        No
                               7.50
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60            No


                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                    Although the line route is 1,349 km long, including about 50 km of distribution lines, the actual affected area under construction and within the
                                  Right-of-Way is relatively small with total land covered at less than one sq. km (the Right-of-Way is 40 m wide). Eleven substations will be built
                                  in a small area of 200m x 200m. These are located in flat, well drained land, thus with no major topographic changes anticipated. The land for
                                  tower locations will be small (5 m x 5 m) and the surrounding areas remain usable for controlled and sustainable agricultural cropping, Since
                                  the exact locations of the towers will be determined during construction, the RAP will be updated to reflect the actual lands that will be affected.
                                  In Côte d'Ivoire, legislation prohibits any land use inside the Right-of-Way. The small segment of the transmission line that is not state-owned
                                  will therefore be purchased.

                                  Implementation of either the Project or any of its proposed alternatives would involve both temporary and permanent land disturbances in the
                                  transmission line route corridor. Permanent land disturbances due to land take for the towers (25m2 per tower) and the placement of
                                  substations (40,000m2 per substation) would be approximately 0.23km2. For the rest of the Right of Way some new or improved access and
                                  spur roads would require temporary land take during the construction period. Potential cumulative impacts from construction or rehabilitation of
                                  access roads may allow increased access to forest areas by poachers or loggers. These impacts have been assessed as very limited, but they
                                  will need to be monitored during construction and operation. Because the Right-of-Way does not overlap or affect any significant or primary
                                  forests, and induced impacts have been evaluated as very limited, OP4.36 was not triggered.

                                  The main potential impacts, which require mitigation measures, include loss of land; destruction of buildings, other structures and crops; noise
                                                                                                                                                                         Page 3 of 5
                           pollution; waste management; water pollution; impacts on flora and fauna; public safety and health; occupational safety and health issues and
                           socio-economic/socio-cultural issues. The line routing for the transmission and distribution lines avoided populated settlements and several
                           biodiversity hotspot areas. These hotspots include: in Sierra Leone -- Gola Forest National Park, Nimini Hills Forest Reserve and Outamba-
                           Kilimi National Park, and in Liberia – East Nimba Nature Reserve, which is one of the remaining high biodiversity areas in West Africa, Gbedin
                           Wetlands, a proposed Ramsar site and the proposed Lake Piso Multiple Protected Area, which is also a proposed Ramsar site.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                            The proposed project is expected to cause indirect impacts in the following environmental and social areas: (i) hydrology and water quality; (ii)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           socioeconomic conditions; (iii) land use and public recreation; and (iv) utilities. Environmental impacts and mitigation measures were reviewed
                           with respect to direct effects to air quality; biological resources; cultural resources; geology, visual intrusion, soils; noise; public health and
                           safety; public services; traffic and transportation and livelihoods.

                           Cumulative impacts - which refer to the impact on the environment which results from the incremental impact of the project when added to other
                           past, present and reasonably foreseeable future actions - are not substantial due to the selected transmission line routing, which covers mostly
                           unpopulated agro-forestry terrain (farm-bush). Generally, the land uses in the Right-of-Way are low-impact such as bush lands, fallow, small
                           agricultural cultivation and a small section of residences. The only high density areas are in the Right-of-Way for the two distribution lines in the
                           Mount Coffee to Monrovia segments, which is occupied by slum settlements and two markets. Although the Government of Liberia allows
                           occupation of the Right-of-Way under guidelines for acceptable land uses and a vertical clearance (7.0 m for a 66kV line), several institutional
                           structures such as schools, churches and a health center will be relocated in nearby lands that were identified by the communities.

                           There are expectations in the rural communities adjacent to the transmission line of receiving expanded electricity services. These expectations
                           will be managed by intensive information sharing and consultations, and linking these communities to ongoing or potential government rural
                           electrification programs. For some selected towns shield-wire connections will be provided to provide electricity to the local population.
                           Additionally, the project’s participating countries have allocated funds to cover the costs of implementing the ESMPs and RAPs. Most of the
                           cost for the ESMPs will be part of the contractor contracts.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                            Nine alternate transmission line routes were considered to take into account the three environmentally sensitive areas from the standpoint of
                           biodiversity importance. There were eight alternative line routes developed to avoid the three biodiversity hotspots in Liberia. These biodiversity
                           hotspots include in Sierra Leone the Gola Forest National Park, Nimini Hills Forest Reserve, and Outamba-Kilimi National Park. The hotspots in
                           Liberia are the East Nimba Nature Reserve, one of the remaining high biodiversity areas in West Africa, Gbedin Wetlands, a proposed Ramsar
                           site, and the proposed Lake Piso Multiple Protected Area, which is also a proposed Ramsar site. The chosen line route avoids all the potentially
                           affected protected areas for an additional cost of approximately US$ 9 million.

                           The line routing of the distribution line in Liberia avoided densely populated areas, especially in and around the Monrovia area. The distribution
                           line is in an existing Right-of-Way that the project will rehabilitate. The institutional structures inside the distribution line Right-of-Way will be
                           relocated to ensure health and safety of persons using schools, health centers and churches.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                            and implement the measures described.
                             The ESMP will be implemented by the PIUs to be established in each country and coordinated by the WAPP Secretariat, which will be spun
                           off to the CLSG Regional Transmission Company once the latter is set up. The SPC will own, maintain and develop the WAPP CLSG
                           transmission line. A project social coordinator and an environment coordinator will be hired to supervise the activities as listed in the ESMP and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           RAP. The responsibilities include oversight of the compensation process and carrying out the livelihood restoration program as outlined in the
                           RAP and implementation of the environment mitigation measures which are covered in the ESMP.

                           The project will have a separate grievance mechanism that will be managed in-country. Progress in the implementation of the mechanism,
                           including community consultations, will be reported to the WAPP Secretariat. In the participating countries the PIU will rely on a community-
                           based grievance filing system where disputes or concerns about the project will first be registered with the local leaders and elders, where
                           disputes will be resolved as appropriate. The second layer of grievance resolution will be at the district and local government levels where
                           existing dispute resolution systems will be used before the disputes are referred to the PIU in each country for final resolution.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                            on potentially affected people.
                             The project mainly affects rural and few urban communities, which are in the Right-of-Way of the transmission interconnection. In total there
                           are 1,634 households for the following categories of losses: (i) residential land and structures that will be physically relocated; (ii) land to be
                           acquired for roads and towers; (iii) agricultural lands with perennial crops; (iv) agricultural lands with non-perennial crops; (v) agro-forestry
                           (including fallow agricultural lands); and (vi) lands with buildings, houses, and other structures. Numerous consultation meetings were held at all
                           stages during project preparation and are recorded in the RAP annexes. Valuation sheets were prepared for all Project Affected Persons
                           (PAPs) with the exception of those areas in Guinea and Côte d’Ivoire that remained subject to serious security concerns.

                           The consultations with stakeholders involved in the preparation of the ESIA and ESMP included the environment agencies in government, local
                           environment civil society groups, and community leaders. The ESIA results were presented and discussed in several WAPP intergovernmental
                           meetings to ensure that feedback from Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Guinea (CLSG) were taken into account in the selection of the
                           Right-of-Way (RoW) avoiding high biodiversity areas, in the design of mitigation measures and in the calculation of reasonable budgets for
                           implementing the ESMPs and RAPs.

                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                              Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                 16-Jan-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                             27-Jan-2012


                                                                                                                                                                      Page 4 of 5
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                 30-Jan-2012
                              For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive                 13-Apr-2012
                              Directors
                             Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                              Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                                 Yes
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                    16-Jan-2012
                              Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                                27-Jan-2012
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                 30-Jan-2012
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                            disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                            Not applicable

                            C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                              Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                     Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                            OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                              If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) natural   Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              habitats, does the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                              Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts on               Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                              If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the             Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?                     Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language             Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for          Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?                     Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard           Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same               Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Task Team Leader:                     Fanny Kathinka Missfeldt-
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:      Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                Date: 16-Apr-2012
                            Sector Manager:                       Name Lucio Monari (SM)                                                           Date: 13-Apr-2012




                                                                                                                                                                        Page 5 of 5
