                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC921

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Mar-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 25-Mar-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Mongolia                         Project ID:       P125232
                            Project Name:       Third Sustainable Livelihoods Project (P125232)
                            Task Team           Andrew D. Goodland
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           19-Feb-2013                      Estimated         09-Jul-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      EASCS                            Lending           Adaptable Program Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%), Sub-national government
                                                administration (25%), Other social services (25%), M icrofinance (10%)
                            Theme(s):           Other environment and natural resources management (20%), Decentralization
                                                (20%), Rural services and infrastructure (20%), Other soc ial protection and risk
                                                management (20%), Participation and civic engagement (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     40.00                      Total Bank Financing:          30.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                                 Financing Gap:                    0.00
                              Financing Source                                                              Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                              0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                    30.00
                              SWITZERLAND Swiss Agency for Dev. & Coop. (SDC)                                10.00
                              Total                                                                          40.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           This would be the third phase of an APL. Objectives for the phases were set at the time of the initial
                           appraisal and remain valid:
                         SLP1: An effective approach to promoting improved, secure and sustainable livelihood strategies
                         developed, demonstrated, and validated in selected areas, and institutional capacity created so that
                         these strategies can be replicated and scaled-up in phase II of the program.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         SLP2: To enhance livelihood security and sustainability by scaling up institutional mechanisms that
                         reduce the vulnerability of rural communities throughout Mongolia.
                         SLP3: To fully institutionalize appropriate mechanisms utilized in phase I and II to reduce the
                         vulnerability of rural communities throughout Mongolia.

                         The Project Development Objective of the proposed project would therefore be to enhance livelihood
                         security and sustainability by supporting the emerging policy framework and creating the
                         institutional capacity to reduce the vulnerability of rural communities throughout Mongolia. The
                         focus would be to embed the principles of the Program into this emerging policy and institutional
                         framework.
                         C. Project Description
                         C. Project Description
                         The proposed project would be centered on supporting the implementation of the Integrated Budget
                         Law (IBL), and specifically supporting the implementation of Local Development Funds (LDF),
                         which were established under the IBL and will become effective from January 2013. LDFs will
                         provide capital budget to the soum (rural district) level for the financing of locally identified
                         investment priorities. The IBL explicitly specifies that local governments must utilize LDF
                         allocations in accordance with citizen priorities as identified through a robust process of community
                         participation in local government budget preparation and execution. Many of these processes have
                         been modelled on the approaches demonstrated under the previous phases of the Sustainable
                         Livelihoods Program. The passage of the IBL and the creation of the LDFs therefore constitutes a
                         major step in institutionalizing the approaches of SLP, which was the ultimate objective of the
                         program.

                         While the IBL is clearly aimed at promoting fiscal decentralization, good governance, community
Public Disclosure Copy




                         participation and equity in Mongolia, the LDF mechanism does not provide specific incentives for
                         improved local government performance. In this respect, the LDF allocations verge on entitlements,
                         and experience has shown both in Mongolia and many other countries that in the absence of
                         incentives and effective central monitoring and evaluation, revenue sharing often leads to sub-
                         optimal utilization of decentralized fiscal resources. Therefore, the proposed SLP3 is extremely well
                         positioned to institutionalize lessons learned and community participation processes tested over the
                         first two phases of the project.

                         The project would have the following components:
                         a.       Good Governance Capacity Building: capacity building support targeted to the local
                         governments that will be most challenged to meet the good governance objectives and processes set
                         out in the IBL;
                         b.       Good Governance Performance Grants: a complementary performance based incentive grant
                         that will reward well performing soum local governments and support MOF in institutionalizing
                         local government performance monitoring and evaluation; plus
                         c.       Project Management and Technical Assistance: supporting the implementation of the project
                         and the full institutionalization of SLP approaches, including for microfinance.

                         Component 1: Good Governance Capacity Building
                         Soum governments in particular will be challenged to effectively manage the significant increases in
                         governance responsibilities and investment planning and execution delegated through the IBL.
                         Based on experience gained in SLP1 and 2, it is proposed that SLP3 will include a four-year program
                         of capacity building, coaching and establishment of effective monitoring and evaluation systems to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         support all of Mongolia’s soums.

                         The objective of capacity building at soum level is twofold, touching political and administrative
                         decentralization. Politically, the objective is to make participative processes in soums strong and
                         functional in order to elicit citizen’s preferences and make sure that soums respond to these
                         preferences. Administratively, the objective is to have soums with an effective, efficient, transparent,
                         and robust financial management that is strategy-oriented, lawful and accountable at the same time.
                         To support this, training would be delivered in the necessary topics, including:
                         a.      Community participation
                         b.      Budget preparation and adoption
                         c.      Budget execution/performance/procurement
                         d.      Municipal treasury and audit
                         e.      Reporting/M&E and MIS/community supervision.

                         The detailed training curricula will be further elaborated by national service providers operating with
                         international backstopping. Furthermore, the service provider will elaborate manuals for the five
                         training components and training material for the five types of courses.

                         Component 2: Good Governance Performance Grants
                         To provide incentives for soums to achieve the IBL’s good governance objectives, a performance-
                         based grant mechanism to be financed by IDA is proposed for SLP 3. The objective of the
                         performance-based grants would be to enhance good governance in the entire budgeting process
                         starting with financial and policy planning, including budget preparation and adoption, budget
                         execution, accounting, reporting, internal and external control and public scrutiny. Financing and
                         execution of public capital investments at soum level and below is certainly an important part of the
                         budgeting process. Taking into account the objectives of SLPO and the weightings suggested by a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         previous performance-based grant proposal developed by SLPO in 2011, particular importance
                         would be given to citizen participation, alignment of soum budgets with bagh citizen priorities and
                         citizen satisfaction with the LDF process and outcomes, and on the alignment of investments in
                         pastoral risk management with soum level pastoral management plans. Based on the soum
                         performance monitoring system, all soums will be rated annually by independent experts against a
                         set of agreed performance indicators, covering: i) community participation; ii) budget planning; iii)
                         budget execution (including procurement); iv) reporting; v) financial management; vi) monitoring
                         and evaluation; vii) environment safeguards; viii) social safeguards; and ix) pastoral risk
                         management. Those soums meeting or exceeding agreed targets would receive a top up (estimated at
                         around 20-25 percent) to the prior year’s LDF allocation as budget support in the following financial
                         year. Each qualifying soum will be required to demonstrate that its ongoing capital investment
                         program is measurably pro-poor. Performance grants will be disbursed to qualifying soums through
                         MOF systems along with LDF allocations.

                         SLP3 would finance a TA contract for strengthening of performance monitoring in connection with a
                         system of good governance performance-based grants. The monitoring and assessment system for
                         performance-based grants would be implemented by SLPO on behalf of MoF. The MoF would need
                         to outsource the assessment and ranking of soum performance to a politically neutral third party
                         (referred to here as the Good Governance Performance Assessment Team). SLP3 would finance the
                         training the Good Governance Performance Assessment. SLPO would oversee the capacity building
                         to ensure comparability between the yardsticks used to measure performance from one to another
                         part of the country and to ensure political neutrality.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 3: Capacity Building and Project Management
                         As with previous phases, this component would finance all the necessary functions to ensure
                         effective, efficient, and timely implementation and management of all project activities at the
                         national level. This includes financing of: (a) capacity building; (b) the Sustainable Livelihoods
                         Program Office (SLPO) at the national level; and (c) general project support. The project
                         management will include a robust monitoring and evaluation system to ensure compliance with all
                         fiduciary and safeguard policies of the Bank and GoM and a dynamic training program for all the
                         project staff to maximize their potential.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will operate across the country in every soum and therefore across all ecological regions
                         (desert-steppe, steppe, mountain-steppe). The investment support would be at soum level and below.
                         The majority of soums are rural and the predominant resource base is grassland supporting semi-
                         nomadic herding. Small urban centers (provincial capitals) would also be eligible for investment
                         support under the PBGs. Discussion is on-going with regard to the participation of Ulaanbaatar in
                         the project. The capital city has nearly half of the country’s population and is the only major urban
                         area. Most likely, Ulaanbaatar would receive some technical assistance for capacity building but no
                         investment under the project (ie urban districts would be excluded from the PBGs).
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         This is the third phase of the Sustainable Livelihoods Program. In the previous phases the
                         implementing agency demonstrated its adequate capacity to deal with safeguard policies and issues
                         during implementation. The third phase would also be under the same implementation agency – the
                         Sustainable Livelihoods Support Office under the Ministry of Finance. The major difference in
                         design under the proposed third phase is that the World Bank funds would be co-mingled with
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Government public budget in the Local Development Funds and therefore the safeguards policies
                         should apply to whole LDF, which is the responsibility of the local government to implement. It is
                         therefore of importance that there is capacity at the local level to address safeguard issues. The
                         project would provide support for this, and would only release Bank funds to those soums which
                         have been assessed and found to be compliance with environmental policy.

                         Capacity demonstrated under SLP2: The main challenge for SLP2 has been to adapt the
                         environmental screening process to new legal requirements. The environmental law of 2009 gave
                         responsibility for environmental screening and impact assessment to licensed officers of the Ministry
                         of Nature, Environment and Tourism, posted at aimag level and limited the roles of soum
                         environmental inspectors to environmental audit of completed investments. Because the licensed EIA
                         officer is only 1 per aimag and far from the soums, it created a bottleneck, especially for screening of
                         large numbers of small PRM subprojects involving fencing of hay fields and improvement of
                         livestock water sources. The bottleneck was addressed by preparing a checklist for screening of CIF
                         and PRM subprojects for use by soum environmental inspectors, who would compile environmental
                         screening forms and send them to the aimag EIA officer for signature or further investigation.
                         Another process introduced by a recent amendment to the environmental law makes it legal to
                         conduct a “ strategic environmental assessment? for a category of similar investments under a
                         program approach, instead of requiring each single subproject to go through the screening and sign-
                         off process. This could greatly facilitate the approval of large numbers of small PRM subprojects in
                           support of implementing pastureland management plans. It would be important for SLPO to seek
                           official government consent that the abovementioned streamlined environmental screening process
                           developed for SLP2 would be carried over into IBL implementation under SLP3.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Under SLP2, nearly all social investments under the Community Initiative Fund involved small
                           improvements of existing facilities and only the public baths and other subprojects those involving
                           the construction of new facilities or adding new buildings to existing facilities were required to go
                           through environmental screening as well to comply with social safeguards on land acquisition. Under
                           SLP3, the ten-fold increase in funds available for soum budgets is likely to increase the number of
                           new facilities built. In addition, under SLP2, SLPO was required to implement social safeguards for
                           Tsaatan reindeer herders in the far north of Khovsgul aimag and to track beneficiaries of investments
                           in Bayan Olgii aimag to ensure that the Kazakh minority received an equitable share of benefits. The
                           main difference from SLP2 is that SLP3 supports the government’s program and adopts government
                           standards and procedures. Government has the necessary environmental standards and procedures
                           but it does not have social safeguards.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Songling Yao (EASCS)
                           Feng Ji (EASCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             Under the Local Development Funds, local
                           BP 4.01                                             governments will be able to finance investment
                                                                               priorities identified in consultation with local
                                                                               communities. These investments are likely to be
                                                                               similar in nature to those supported under the
                                                                               first and second phases on the Program under
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               project funds (under SLP2 the project supported
                                                                               the Community Initiatives Fund which was used
                                                                               to finance small scale works and goods to
                                                                               increase local access to social services, and the
                                                                               Pastoral Risk Management Fund, which
                                                                               supported investments identified in soum level
                                                                               pastoral management plans). Typical
                                                                               investments therefore included school and
                                                                               school dormitory renovation and refurbishment,
                                                                               health care center renovation and equipment,
                                                                               improved cultural centers and recreational
                                                                               facilities, and for PRM, improved storage
                                                                               facilities for animal feed and fodder, renovation
                                                                               of wells for livestock and the protection of crop
                                                                               land and fencing of natural springs also for
                                                                               protection. The estimated size of support under
                                                                               the LDF will be in the order of USD250k per
                                                                               year, so the size of individual sub-project will
                                                                               remain to be small.
                                                                 Based on the experience from SLPI, SLP II, the
                                                                 SLP III project would have a broadly positive
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 environmental impact. But it may also bring
                                                                 adverse impacts, including (i) there is a risk that
                                                                 herders will seek to increase their numbers of
                                                                 livestock which would have implications for
                                                                 land degradation; (ii) the project will finance the
                                                                 rehabilitation of existing wells. Though
                                                                 probably negligible, there may be adverse
                                                                 impacts of wells on groundwater recharge due
                                                                 to the extraction of groundwater from the wells.

                                                                 All investments under the project would be
                                                                 subject to the environmental guidelines under
                                                                 the Ministry of Nature and Environment. As
                                                                 part of the annual assessment of soum
                                                                 performance, performance in applying
                                                                 environmental guidelines and EMF will be
                                                                 closely monitored, and if they are not reached,
                                                                 soums would not qualify for the performance
                                                                 based grants under the project. The
                                                                 environmental assessment would need to assess
                                                                 the adequacy of environmental screening and
                                                                 assessment regulations for small scale works
                                                                 and the capacity for enforcement.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes   Mongolia’s pasture lands are natural habitats in
                                                                 the sense that they conform to the definition in
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 OP4.04 on Natural Habitats. The SLPIII could
                                                                 have adverse impacts on these natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   There are more than 30 ethnic groups in
                                                                 Mongolia. All groups are either the descendants
                                                                 of Mongolian nomadic tribes, or are groups of
                                                                 Turkic origin who have become Mongolised
                                                                 over time. The Khalkh make up the majority
                                                                 and comprise over 90% of the population.
                                                                 Except for the Kazakh minority group residing
                                                                 in western Mongolia, all ethnic groups speak
                                                                 Mongolian dialects which are comprehensible to
                                                                 speakers of Khalkha and to each other. The
                                                                 Kazakhs also are the only ethnic group that
                                                                                                                                 relies primarily upon a distinct spoken language.

                                                                                                                                 The majority of Mongolia’s ethnic minority
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 groups share similar customs, traditions and
                                                                                                                                 systems of production as the Khalkh. With the
                                                                                                                                 exception of the predominantly Muslim and
                                                                                                                                 linguistically differentiated Kazakhs in western
                                                                                                                                 Mongolia, and traditionally nomadic reindeer-
                                                                                                                                 herding Tsaatan peoples in the north,
                                                                                                                                 Mongolia’s ethnic groups are not considered to
                                                                                                                                 be economically, socially or legally
                                                                                                                                 marginalized or otherwise disadvantaged in a
                                                                                                                                 manner which would restrict their ability to
                                                                                                                                 participate in the project.

                                                                                                                                 The project will be nationwide in scope and
                                                                                                                                 therefore cover those areas populated by all
                                                                                                                                 ethnic groups including Kazakh and Tsaatan.
                                                                                                                                 An IPP should be prepared to ensure these
                                                                                                                                 groups are not excluded from the project / Local
                                                                                                                                 Development Funds.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    TBD                           The project would support the process of
                                 4.12                                                                                            pastoral management planning and supporting
                                                                                                                                 local communities by introducing approaches to
                                                                                                                                 improve pastoral management and conservation
                                                                                                                                 of grassland resources. As part of the package,
                                                                                                                                 participating soums and herder groups may be
                                                                                                                                 offered secure tenure over pastureland in return
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 for maintaining livestock stocking densities at a
                                                                                                                                 certain level (in line with assessed carrying
                                                                                                                                 capacity). While this is potentially positive
                                                                                                                                 approach to pasture management, it may
                                                                                                                                 exclude herders from pastureland which is
                                                                                                                                 currently open access. If this support goes
                                                                                                                                 ahead, the involuntary resettlement policy
                                                                                                                                 would be triggered.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 11-Feb-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:


                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             All safeguard studies to be launched in November 2012 and completed, with the necessary
                             disclosure, prior to Appraisal, scheduled for February 18, 2013.
                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Task Team Leader:     Name: Andrew D. Goodland

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                             Date: 23-Mar-2013
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Mark R. Lundell (SM)                            Date: 25-Mar-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
