                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA4212
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Aug-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-Aug-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Peru                               Project ID:    P117318
                            Project Name:      Cusco Regional Development (P117318)
                            Task Team          Zoe Elena Trohanis
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          22-Jul-2013                        Estimated   22-Oct-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     LCSDU                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Sub-national government administration (20%), Solid waste management (30%),
                                              Flood protection (20%), General industry and trade secto r (30%)
                            Theme(s):         Natural disaster management (25%), City-wide Infrastructure and Service
                                              Delivery (30%), Cultural Heritage (35%), Pollution managemen t and
                                              environmental health (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      52.10           Total Bank Financing:                 25.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                       Financing Gap:                          0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                  27.10
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                     25.00
                              Total                                                                                     52.10
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           To improve the quality of tourism and solid waste management services and increase the resilience
                           of the tourism sector to the impacts of natural disasters in the provinces of Calca, Urubamba, and
                           Cusco.

                                                                       Page 1 of 16
                          3. Project Description
                         The project consists of four components:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Development and Consolidation of Tourism Services (US$23.1 million, of which US
                         $9.9 million is Bank-financed). The objective of this component is to improve the quality and
                         coverage of tourism services in the Sacred Valley and surrounding areas. The component will
                         achieve this through, inter alia, (i) consolidating “classic” tourist attractions by expanding and
                         improving infrastructure, providing improved access to sites, internal walkways and signage; (ii) the
                         commercialization and positioning of tourism products and services in the domestic and international
                         markets; and (iii) the development of a pilot Fondo Concursable, providing technical assistance and
                         knowledge to position small and microenterprises in the market.

                         Component 2: Integrated Solid Waste Management (US$22.7 million, of which US$9.8 million is
                         Bank-financed). The objective of this component is to improve local capacity for cleaning public
                         spaces and to efficiently collect, transport and dispose of solid waste in the provinces of Cusco, Calca
                         and Urubamba. The component will achieve this through, inter alia, (i) investments in provincial
                         municipal solid waste services to improve solid waste disposal and composting; (ii) investments in
                         District-level solid waste services to improve collection, recycling, and cleaning of streets and public
                         spaces; (iii) technical assistance and capacity building for improved solid waste services; and (iv)
                         communication on the implementation of project works and promoting adequate waste management
                         practices to communities.

                         Component 3: Disaster Risk Management and Disaster Preparedness (US$2.6 million, of which SUS
                         $1.1 million is Bank-financed). The objective of this component is to increase the resilience of the
                         local population, tourists, and infrastructure in touristic areas with high vulnerability to natural
                         disasters. The component will achieve this through, inter alia, (i) designing and implementing early
                         warning systems for the flooding of the Vilcanota and Patacancha Rivers in the Sacred Valley and
                         Ollantaytambo; (ii) designing and implementing an integrated approach to the reduction of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         geological and climactic risks in the micro basin of K’itamayu in Pisac; (iii) designing and
                         implementing an integrated approach to mitigate external geodynamic risks in the Ccochoq river
                         basin in Calca; and (iv) development of an updated Disaster Risk Management Plan for the Sacred
                         Valley, including plans for the evacuation of tourists.

                         Component 4: Institutional Strengthening, Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (US$9.6
                         million, of which US$4.1 million is Bank-financed.) This component will support the capacity
                         building of the principal institutions involved in the operation of tourism activities in the Sacred
                         Valley, and COPESCO, including its Project Coordination Unit (PCU). Activities will include, inter
                         alia, (i) the collection of baseline data for later evaluations and follow up analyses; and (ii) enhanced
                         capacity for project management, project audits, and monitoring and evaluation of project results.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project is located in the Cusco Region in Peru, specifically in the provinces of Calca, Urubamba,
                         and Cusco. The population within the sphere of the proposed project is approximately 563,202
                         people, distributed throughout the provinces of Cusco (population 427,580), Calca (population
                         72,583) and Urubamba (population 63,039). Due to its historic and cultural heritage, the Cusco
                         Region is one of the most visited tourist destinations in South America and is the principal tourist
                         destination in Peru, accommodating 88 percent of the country’s international visitors. None of the


                                                                       Page 2 of 16
                         three landfills proposed under Component 2 will be implemented in the vicinity of any known
                         archaeological site. However, some of the activities for Components 1 and 3 may take place directly
                         within the limits or in the surrounding areas of archaeological sites such as Ollantaytambo (which
Public Disclosure Copy




                         was declared National Cultural Patrimony in 2002).
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Jose Vicente Zevallos (LCSSO)
                         Daniel Mira-Salama (LCSEN)
                         Robert H. Montgomery (LCSEN)
                         German Nicolas Freire (LCSSO)

                         6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The project is classified as Category A under
                         BP 4.01                                            OP/BP 4.01 based upon the one proposed
                                                                            moderate sized landfill in Cusco (part of
                                                                            Component 2) even though this landfill is
                                                                            expected to improve the environmental
                                                                            sustainability of solid waste management in the
                                                                            region. The works associated with Components 1
                                                                            and 3 involve relatively standard, smaller-scale
                                                                            infrastructure works with potential environmental
                                                                            and social impacts that have been assessed as
                                                                            short-term, not significant, and can readily be
                                                                            prevented or mitigated with standard measures.
                                                                            There are no significant negative indirect or long-
                                                                            term impacts anticipated related to the project.

                                                                            The objective of Component 1 is to improve the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            quality and coverage of tourism services in the
                                                                            Sacred Valley and surrounding areas. The
                                                                            component will include various subprojects,
                                                                            including: consolidating “classic”, already
                                                                            existing and operating tourist attractions by
                                                                            expanding and improving infrastructure providing
                                                                            access to sites, internal walkways and signs.
                                                                            Subcomponent 1.2 will develop small and micro-
                                                                            enterprises through a pilot Competitive Fund for
                                                                            Tourism (Fondo Concursable), facilitating access
                                                                            and use of new technologies and knowledge to
                                                                            position themselves in the market (the design of
                                                                            this subproject is pending and will be finalized
                                                                            during the implementation of the Project). An
                                                                            Environmental and Social Management
                                                                            Framework (ESMF) has been developed for these
                                                                            component activities and works. The main
                                                                            potential environment impacts are likely due to
                                                                            construction works associated with rehabilitation



                                                                    Page 3 of 16
                                 of existing roads to existing tourism sites, which
                                 are not anticipated to cause significant
                                 environmental impacts. Other potential impacts
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 relate to works that will be done within or near
                                 existing archaeological sites. However, there are
                                 strong Peruvian regulatory procedures and
                                 oversight related to any such works, such as the
                                 presence of an archaeologist/architect during
                                 works and continuous monitoring and reporting
                                 to the Ministry of Culture. The ESMF also has
                                 relevant requirements. The ESMF has been
                                 prepared, publically disclosed (both locally and in
                                 the Infoshop) and consulted locally.

                                 Component 2 will provide the Cusco Region with
                                 an improved solid waste management system,
                                 through the improvement of collection routes,
                                 urban containers, collection trucks, and ultimately
                                 the construction of three landfills (in the
                                 Provinces of Cusco, Calca, and Urubamba). This
                                 is expected to have important environmental
                                 benefits in the greater Sacred Valley through a
                                 reduction in public health risks and
                                 environmental damage caused by inappropriate
                                 handling of solid waste, reduction/elimination of
                                 damage caused by existing informal dumpsites,
                                 and the improvement in waste collection,
                                 transportation and proper final disposal. An
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
                                 (ESIA) has been developed for each landfill.
                                 Each ESIA addresses environmental and social
                                 impacts, risks, and benefits, and includes an
                                 Environmental and Social Management Plan
                                 (ESMP). The first draft ESIA for the Cusco
                                 landfill was disclosed to the public in December
                                 2012 and has since been updated and redisclosed
                                 in July 2013. The draft ESIAs for Calca and
                                 Urubamba have been completed, consulted and
                                 publicly disclosed, both locally and in Infoshop in
                                 July 2013. Environmental and social aspects were
                                 considered as part of the landfill site selection
                                 process, including critical or sensitive natural
                                 habitats, forests, proximity to populated areas or
                                 to environmental designated protected areas.
                                 Various potential negative environmental impacts
                                 and risks will be prevented or mitigated by the
                                 use of strong technical landfill design and



                         Page 4 of 16
                                 operation standards and procedures. Potential
                                 construction environmental impacts are
                                 considered to be relatively low and easily
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 mitigated with standard mitigation measures.
                                 Potential adverse impacts during operation
                                 include odors to neighboring communities, visual
                                 impacts, truck traffic and increased noise due to
                                 waste transportation, contamination of waters
                                 caused by leachate, slope erosion due to cuts in
                                 the terrain, and security risks such as gas
                                 accumulation in the new landfills. In terms of
                                 existing waste disposal sites, these will be either
                                 closed (e.g., Cusco and Calca) or the waste will
                                 be relocated to the new facilities (e.g., several
                                 small waste sites in the Valley). The closure will
                                 only happen once the new landfills are
                                 operational. Some potential but relatively minor
                                 environmental impacts exist during the closure
                                 works, such as the release of waste and worker
                                 exposure. There has been a steady and ongoing
                                 process to keep stakeholders informed and to
                                 receive feedback. Consultations with focus
                                 groups about the scope of the project,
                                 components and expected impacts have been
                                 taking place since early 2011 and are understood
                                 as a continuous process. Consultation on the draft
                                 ESIAs (and its ESMP) for each landfill were held
                                 in July 2013.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Component 3 aims at reducing risk of natural
                                 disasters (floods, landslides, etc.) in the valley,
                                 both from a management perspective (e.g., with
                                 early warning systems, capacity building and
                                 others) and by performing works (e.g., stream
                                 bank stabilization, stabilization of lagoons located
                                 upstream of populated sites, etc.). An ESMF has
                                 been developed for these component activities
                                 and works, and has been consolidated with the
                                 ESMF for Component 1. The main potential
                                 environment impacts are likely due to
                                 construction works that may occur in stream/river
                                 banks, which are relatively minor in size and
                                 nature, and are not anticipated to cause significant
                                 environmental impacts. The draft ESMF has been
                                 prepared, consulted and disclosed, both locally
                                 and in the Infoshop.




                         Page 5 of 16
                                 Component 1 objective is to provide quality
                                 tourism services and increase the positive
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 economic and social impacts of these services in
                                 the Sacred Valley and surrounding areas. The
                                 component will include various sub-projects (that
                                 are pending to be fully determined and designed):
                                 consolidating “classic”, already existing and
                                 operating tourist attractions by expanding and
                                 improving infrastructure providing access to sites,
                                 internal walkways and signs; and developing
                                 small and micro-enterprises through a pilot Fondo
                                 Concursable, facilitating access and use of new
                                 technologies and knowledge to position
                                 themselves in the market. An Environmental and
                                 Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been
                                 developed for these potential component
                                 activities and works. The main potential
                                 environment impacts are likely due to
                                 construction works associated with rehabilitation
                                 of existing roads to existing tourism sites, which
                                 if performed, are not anticipated to cause
                                 significant environmental impacts. Other
                                 potential impacts relate to works will be done
                                 within or near existing archaeological sites.
                                 However, there are strong Peruvian regulatory
                                 procedures and oversight related to any such
                                 works, such as the presence of an archaeologist/
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 architect during works and continuous monitoring
                                 and reporting to the authority (the Ministry of
                                 Culture). The ESMF also has relevant
                                 requirements. The draft ESMF has been prepared
                                 and is pending public disclosure and consultation.

                                 Component 2 will provide the Cusco Region with
                                 an improved solid waste management system,
                                 through the improvement in collection routes,
                                 urban containers, collection trucks, and ultimately
                                 the construction of 3 landfills (Cusco, Calca,
                                 Urubamba). This is expected to have important
                                 environmental benefits in the greater Sacred
                                 valley, through a reduction in public health risks
                                 and environmental damage caused by
                                 inappropriate handling of solid waste, reduction/
                                 elimination of damages caused by existing
                                 informal dumpsites, and improvement in waste
                                 collection, transportation and proper final



                         Page 6 of 16
                                 disposal. An Environmental and Social Impact
                                 Assessment (ESIA) has been developed for each
                                 landfill. Each ESIA addresses environmental and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 social impacts, risks, and benefits, and includes
                                 an Environmental and Social Management Plan
                                 (ESMP). The Draft ESIA for the Cusco landfill
                                 was disclosed to the public on December 2012.
                                 The draft ESIAs for Calca and Urubamba have
                                 been completed but are presently undergoing an a
                                 final update to reflect some final design details.
                                 Environmental and social aspects were
                                 considered as part of the landfill site selection
                                 process, including no site location in critical or
                                 sensitive natural habitats, forests, proximity to
                                 populated areas or to environmental designated
                                 protected areas. Various potential negative
                                 environmental impacts and risks will be
                                 prevented or mitigated by the use of strong
                                 technical landfill design and operation standards
                                 and procedures. Potential construction
                                 environmental impacts are considered to be
                                 relatively minimal, and easily mitigated with
                                 standard mitigation measures. Potential adverse
                                 impacts during operation include odors to
                                 neighboring communities, visual impacts, truck
                                 traffic and increased noise due to waste
                                 transportation, contamination of waters caused by
                                 leachate, slope erosion due to cuts in the terrain,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 and security risks such as gas accumulation in the
                                 new landfills. In terms of existing waste disposal
                                 sites, these will be either closed (e.g., Cusco and
                                 Calca) or the waste will be relocated to the new
                                 facilities (e.g., several small waste sites in the
                                 Valley). The closure will only happen once the
                                 new landfills are operational. Some potential but
                                 relatively minor environmental impacts exist
                                 during the closure works such as release of waste
                                 and worker exposure. There has been a steady
                                 process to keep stakeholders informed and to
                                 receive feedback. Consultations with focus
                                 groups about the scope of the project,
                                 components and expected impacts have been
                                 taking place since early 2011 and are understood
                                 as a continuous process. Consultation on the draft
                                 ESIAs (and its ESMP) for each landfill is
                                 currently being scheduled by the implementing
                                 agency in consultation with stakeholders.



                         Page 7 of 16
                                                                     Component 3 aims at reducing risk of natural
                                                                     disasters (floods, landslides, etc.) in the valley,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     both from a management perspective (e.g., with
                                                                     early warning systems, capacity building and
                                                                     others) and by performing some works (e.g.,
                                                                     stream bank stabilization, stabilization of lagoons
                                                                     located upstream of populated sites etc.) that are
                                                                     to be determined. An Environmental and Social
                                                                     Management Framework (ESMF) has been
                                                                     developed for these potential component
                                                                     activities and works, and has been consolidated
                                                                     with the ESMF for component 1. The main
                                                                     potential environment impacts are likely due to
                                                                     construction works that may occur in stream/river
                                                                     banks, which are relatively minor in size and
                                                                     nature, and are not anticipated to cause significant
                                                                     environmental impacts. The draft ESMF for
                                                                     Components 1 and 3 has been consulted and was
                                                                     disclosed on August 1, 2013 in country and sent
                                                                     to the Infoshop on August 6, 2013. The Cusco,
                                                                     Urubamba and Calca EIAs were disclosed in
                                                                     country on July 31, 2013 and sent to Infoshop on
                                                                     August 6, 2013.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes            The project will not involve the significant
                                                                     conversion of natural habitats or critical natural
                                                                     habitats. However, subprojects under
                                                                     Components 1 are not fully defined, thus the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     policy is triggered and necessary environmental
                                                                     assessment management requirements are
                                                                     included in the ESMF for Components 1 and 3.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No             This policy should not be triggered since the
                                                                     project will not affect forests, forest-dependent
                                                                     communities nor will it involve changes in the
                                                                     management of forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       No             The project does not involve the purchase or use
                                                                     of significant quantities of pesticides. However,
                                                                     the project may involve the relatively minor use
                                                                     of pesticides during the operation of the landfills
                                                                     to control vectors (rodents, insects). This issue
                                                                     will be managed under OP 4.01 by having the
                                                                     relevant ESMPs include applicable good practices
                                                                     and procedures for pesticide use and storage, and
                                                                     prohibit use of pesticides excluded under OP
                                                                     4.09.




                                                             Page 8 of 16
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes             The project does not anticipate any significant
                         BP 4.11                                         negative impacts on physical cultural resources.
                                                                         None of the three landfills proposed under
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         Component 2 will be implemented in the vicinity
                                                                         of any known archaeological site. However,
                                                                         several of the activities for Components 1 and 3
                                                                         might take place directly within or near the limits
                                                                         of archaeological sites such as Ollantaytambo,
                                                                         which was declared National Cultural Patrimony
                                                                         in 2002. While not directly adversely affecting
                                                                         World Heritage Sites, the project will take place
                                                                         in a highly sensitive social and cultural heritage
                                                                         context and thus the policy is triggered. The
                                                                         ESIAs for Component 2 landfills have not
                                                                         identified the likelihood of encountering physical
                                                                         cultural resources. Any environmental analysis
                                                                         associated with Components 1 and 3 subprojects
                                                                         will specifically include consideration of physical
                                                                         cultural resources. All project ESMPs and related
                                                                         construction contracts will include procedures
                                                                         and requirements related to chance find
                                                                         management. In addition, every activity carried
                                                                         out within an archaeological site, by Peruvian
                                                                         law, will require the constant presence of an
                                                                         archaeologist/architect designed by the Ministry
                                                                         of Culture.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes             A Social Assessment has been carried out to
                                                                         evaluate the potential effects of the three project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         components on Indigenous Peoples. It was
                                                                         published locally on August 5, 2013 and sent to
                                                                         the Infoshop on August 6, 2013.

                                                                         Two of the landfills (Calca and Urubamba) will
                                                                         affect communities of Indigenous Peoples. The
                                                                         Calca landfill will require the acquisition of
                                                                         community land and the Urubamba landfill will
                                                                         be built adjacent to community land. Draft
                                                                         Indigenous Peoples Plans have been prepared for
                                                                         these subprojects and are in the process of being
                                                                         consulted with affected communities. The
                                                                         consultation process is being carried out via
                                                                         discussions with groups of affected community
                                                                         members using a target that at least 40% of
                                                                         participants are women.

                                                                         No physical displacement will occur as a result of
                                                                         the construction of the Calca and Urubamba



                                                                 Page 9 of 16
                                  landfills.

                                  The land required for the Calca landfill belongs to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                  the community of Vista Alegre Yanahuaylla with
                                  46 indigenous families. The area needed for the
                                  landfill (4 hectares) represent 0.48% of the land
                                  that belongs to the community (837.18 ha). There
                                  are no dwellings located near the project area.
                                  The closest dwelling is located approximately at
                                  800 meters from the landfill site. The EIAS did
                                  not anticipate significant adverse impacts on this
                                  community. Impacts identified in the EIAS
                                  include visual impacts, temporary impacts during
                                  construction (dust, noise, etc.), increased traffic
                                  during construction and operation, and
                                  contamination of land and water (in the event that
                                  the landfill is not managed properly).

                                  The community of Parcco (60 families) is
                                  adjacent to the Calca site. The EIAS did not
                                  anticipate significant adverse impacts on this
                                  community.

                                  The Urubamba landfill will be built in an area
                                  adjacent to the community of Paca Huaynaccolca
                                  (40 families). There are no dwellings located
                                  near the project area. The EIA did not anticipate
                                  significant adverse impacts on this community.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                  Impacts identified in the EIAS include visual
                                  impacts, temporary impacts during construction
                                  (dust, noise, etc.), increased traffic during
                                  construction and operation, and contamination of
                                  land and water (in the event that the landfill is not
                                  managed properly).

                                  The Indigenous Peoples Plans identify various
                                  civil works and activities that will benefit the
                                  communities mentioned above. These benefits
                                  were requested by the affected communities.

                                  The interventions planned in the Sacred Valley as
                                  part of Component 1 and Component 3 may
                                  affect communities of Indigenous Peoples. An
                                  Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework has
                                  been prepared to address potential adverse
                                  impacts on these communities and to maximize
                                  project benefits for them. The IPPF has been



                         Page 10 of 16
                                                                         shared with indigenous groups for comment and
                                                                         was published locally on July 27, 2013 locally
                                                                         and sent to the Infoshop on August 6, 2013.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes             One of the three landfills (Urubamba) will be
                         4.12                                            built on municipal land. The other two (Cusco
                                                                         and Calca) will require land acquisition. The land
                                                                         for the Cusco landfill will be acquired from an
                                                                         individual and the land for the Calca landfill will
                                                                         be acquired from an indigenous community.
                                                                         Abbreviated Resettlement Plans have been
                                                                         prepared for the landfills of Cusco and Calca.
                                                                         They were disclosed in country for Cusco on July
                                                                         31, 2013 and for Calca on August 5, 2013. Both
                                                                         were sent to Infoshop on August 6, 2013.

                                                                         The interventions planned in the Sacred Valley as
                                                                         part of Component 1 and Component 3 may
                                                                         require land acquisition. A Resettlement Policy
                                                                         Framework has been prepared to guide the
                                                                         preparation of resettlement plans during project
                                                                         implementation. The RPF was disclosed in
                                                                         country on August 5, 2013 and sent to Infoshop
                                                                         on August 6, 2013.

                                                                         The solid waste component will cause economic
                                                                         displacement among informal waste collectors. A
                                                                         Social Inclusion Plan has been prepared to
                                                                         address this impact, which was disclosed locally
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         on July 31, 2013 and in Infoshop on Aug. 6,
                                                                         2013.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        Yes             While the project does not support the
                                                                         construction or rehabilitation of dams, as part of
                                                                         Component 3, there may be disaster risk
                                                                         management works in two stream/river basins
                                                                         that have existing relatively small reservoirs
                                                                         located in their headwaters. The EMF for
                                                                         Component 3 includes specific measures to assess
                                                                         any relevant existing reservoir and to take
                                                                         appropriate actions, as deemed warranted,
                                                                         consistent with OP 4.37.
                         Projects on International        No              This policy should not be triggered as the
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                            project will not finance activities involving the
                                                                         use or potential pollution of international
                                                                         waterways.




                                                                Page 11 of 16
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                    This policy should not be triggered as the
                            7.60                                                  project will not finance activities in disputed
                                                                                  areas as defined in the policy.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               N/A
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                               The potential positive long-term impacts include: improving the quality and coverage of tourism
                              services and thus increasing the economic and social positive impacts in the Sacred Valley and
                              surrounding areas; improving local capacity to efficiently collect, transport and dispose of solid
                              waste, thus reducing environmental health impacts and promoting sustainable development; the
                              appropriate closing and clean-up of existing informal dumpsites, thus removing potential focus of
                              infections and environmental degradation; and helping protect the local population, tourists, and
                              infrastructure in touristic areas with high vulnerability to natural disasters. There are no significant
                              negative indirect or long-term impacts anticipated related to the project.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                               An alternative analysis was performed related to the waste management component, specifically
                              in terms of assessing different waste management technologies to apply to waste disposal in this
                              region. Alternative waste disposal options included several local landfills, a regional landfill, and
                              other combinations, including transfer stations. An alternative site selection analysis was
                              performed for each of the landfills and included various technical, environmental and social
Public Disclosure Copy




                              factors. The alternative analysis included stakeholder input.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                               Related to Component 1 and 3, an ESMF has been developed. The ESMF includes an Indigenous
                              Peoples Planning Framework and a Resettlement Policy Framework.

                              Related to Component 2, an ESIA has been carried out for each of the three landfills, and each
                              includes an Environmental and Social Management Plan. The ESIA for the Calca and Urubamba
                              landfills also include an Indigenous Peoples Plan, while the ESIA for the Cusco and Calca
                              landfills include an Abbreviated Resettlement Plan.

                              The relevant construction contracts for works in Components 1 and 3 require compliance with the
                              ESMF, including environmental and social mitigation and monitoring measures (e.g., ESMP)
                              developed under the ESMF for each subproject and any Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) or
                              Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) prepared during project implementation. The construction
                              contracts will also comply with applicable Peruvian regulatory requirements including those
                              related to cultural heritage. The project Operational Manual will include relevant environmental
                              and social aspects, including compliance with project specific safeguard instruments (ESMF,
                              ESIAs/ESMPs, social management plans (IPP and RAP), inclusion of environmental and social
                              conditions in project contracts, use of independent supervisors for project construction contracts,

                                                                         Page 12 of 16
                           and supervision and reporting responsibilities of COPESCO.

                           COPESCO has a solid experience with project implementation, has previous experience working
Public Disclosure Copy




                           with World Bank financing, and has been leading the preparation of the Project, including the
                           associated environmental and social safeguards documents, consultations and processes.
                           COPESCO has gathered sufficient institutional capacity to cope with safeguard issues, and has
                           established an experienced project coordination unit with both environmental and social experts
                           knowledgeable of Peru’s and Bank’s requirements; COPESCO has also agreed to strengthen its
                           environmental and social team to ensure adequate capacity during project implementation.

                           The Component 2 landfill for Cusco may be contracted as design-build-operate, and will have an
                           independent supervision contract which will include environmental and social aspects. The
                           execution of works in Components 1 and 3 will be contracted to construction companies and
                           supervision of the construction contractor activities will be contracted to independent supervision
                           consultants, whom, in addition to technical supervision, will be required to provide environmental
                           and social supervision.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The preparation of the proposed project has been a long process, dating back to early 2011.
                           During this time, the Cusco Regional Government, through COPESCO, has led a number of public
                           participation/consultation activities aimed at explaining the project’s scope, objective, main
                           anticipated impacts and mitigation measures. Conversations and workshops have taken place
                           directly through COPESCO or through the consulting firms in charge of preparing designs, and
                           environmental and social studies. Technical working groups were also created, which have been
                           informed of updates on project preparation and have provided their feedback accordingly.
                           Currently, the communities in Calca and Urubamba support the project and have reached
                           agreements with COPESCO. Most of the communities in Cusco also support the project and have
                           done so in writing; however some members of a community in the District of Poroy have
Public Disclosure Copy




                           expressed concerns related to potential leachates that could pollute their waters, but have also
                           reached initial agreements with the Cusco Regional Government in support of the project.

                            As part of the process of project preparation, the development of the ESIAs for the three landfills
                           (Component 2) was done seeking early input from stakeholders to help define potential issues and
                           alternatives. The draft ESMF for Components 1 and 3, as well as the ESIAs for the Cusco, Calca
                           and Urubamba landfills, have all been disclosed and consulted. The three ESIAs were consulted
                           with various local communities (e.g., Huancabamba (Cusco), Yanahuaylla (Calca), Paca
                           Huaynacolqa (Urubamba)), during June and July 2013. Additionally, during July 2013,
                           consultations were held with municipality personnel, representative governmental and civil society
                           institutions, and other rural communities. The principal comments from the consultations included:
                           not to repeat the history of the current management of waste in landfills (i.e., relatively poor
                           management), concerns about the potential risks of water pollution and health risks for persons
                           living near the new landfills, operation/effectiveness of landfill geomembranes as a barrier to
                           protect/prevent contamination, employment opportunities in the construction and operational
                           phases of the project, suggestions for expanding descriptive information about fauna, flora, social
                           aspects, and application of other benefits to surrounding communities.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other


                                                                    Page 13 of 16
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        30-Dec-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     03-Jan-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive        07-Aug-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Peru                                                               20-Dec-2012
                           Comments: ESIA for Cusco Lanfill
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        29-Jul-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     06-Aug-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Peru                                                               31-Jul-2013
                           Comments: Cusco RAP
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        26-Jul-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     06-Aug-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Peru                                                               27-Jul-2013
                           Comments: IPPF
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         The IPPs are under preparation and will be disclosed locally and in the Infoshop upon completion of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         consultations with affected communities, prior to the completion of appraisal.
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources



                                                                   Page 14 of 16
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                          Bank?
                          Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?
                          Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                          the project legal documents?

                                                                    Page 15 of 16
                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Zoe Elena Trohanis
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)    Date: 12-Aug-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Wambui G. Gichuri (SM)   Date: 13-Aug-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                               Page 16 of 16
