                                                                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                            APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA307
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Nov-2011

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        West Bank and Gaza                      Project ID:                       P123322
                              Project Name:                   Water Supply and Sanitation Improvements for West Bethlehem Villages (
                              Task Team Leader:               Richard W. Pollard
                              Estimated Appraisal Date:                                               Estimated Board Date:             15-Aug-2011
                              Managing Unit:                  MNSSD                                   Lending Instrument:               Technical Assistance Loan
                              Sector:                         Sanitation (70%), Water supply (30%)
                              Theme:                          Rural services and infrastructure (100%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                       Amount
                                   Borrower                                                                                                                    0.00
                                   State and Peace Building Fund                                                                                               3.65
                                   Total                                                                                                                       3.65
                              Environmental Category:         B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              The project development objective is to improve, through a pilot project, the delivery of water and the planning of wastewater services in targeted
                              rural communities that are marginalized due to mobility restrictions in West Bethlehem region. The project is expected to achieve the following
                              results:

                              1. A completed feasibility study for wastewater management and reuse in the project area acceptable to the project beneficiaries, the Palestinian
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Water Authority, and the World Bank;
                              2. A costed project concept for investment in wastewater management and reuse infrastructure;
                              3. Improved reliability of piped water supply for the four villages of Battir, Nahhalin, Husan and Wadi Fukin resulting in 24 Hr. supply throughout the
                              year;
                              4. Improved capacity of the Water and Wastewater Department within the JSCPD to plan, manage, operate, and maintain water and wastewater
                              services, as measured by the preparation of a business plan, a tariff structure that aims at full recovery of O&M costs, and a tariff collection rate of
                              at least 80%.

                              3. Project Description

                              The proposed project would provide financing to: (i) determine, through a comprehensive feasibility and design study the optimal solution for
                              sustainably managing the wastewater and wastewater reuse in five Palestinian communities in the western rural area of Bethlehem District in the
                              West Bank; (ii) finance the replacement of the severely deteriorated pipe network for water supplies in the five communities and the construction of
                              a reservoir to improve the water supplies for two of these communities (Battir and Nahhalin); and (iii) develop the capacity of local institutions
                              (principally the Joint Services Council for Planning and Development for West Bethlehem) within the project area to plan and manage improved
                              water supply and sanitation infrastructure, including safe reuse of treated wastewater for agricultural purposes.

                              The project will be implemented in two phases:

                              Phase 1: Feasibility study, design and assessment

                              Component 1: Feasibility study for the wastewater networks. Estimated cost: US$300,000. Activities will include consulting services to prepare a
                              feasibility study to evaluate and recommend appropriate wastewater management alternatives and to prepare conceptual engineering designs for
                              wastewater management infrastructure and effluent reuse covering the communities of Husan, Nahhalin, Battir, Al-Walaja, and Wadi Fukin.

                              Component 2: Detailed Design of the Water Supply System. Estimated cost: US$250,000. Consulting services will be financed to prepare a
                              detailed design of the infrastructure for the water supply system, preparation of an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and an
                              Environmental Management plan (EMP), and assessment of the needs for building the capacity of the JSCPD.

                              Component 3: Project Management. Estimated cost (US$150,000). The Palestinian Water Authority (PWA) through its project management Unit
                              (PMU) will manage and implement the project, and liaise with Israeli authorities to secure all permits that may be required for project activities. This
                              sub-component will cover PMU incremental costs and the cost of two site engineers to work for the JSCPD in supervising the work at site and will
                              be employed by the JSCPD after the project is completed. The PWA will hire an auditing firm to prepare the financial audited reports, as well as a

                                                                                                                                                                          Page 1 of 4
                               monitoring and evaluation consultant who will prepare two evaluation reports at the mid-term and the completion of the project.

                               Phase 2: Construction of Civil Works

                               Phase two will be carried out contingent on the completion of Phase One design activities to the satisfaction of the JSCPD, the PWA and the World
                               Bank, and securing of all permits and clearances required from Israeli and Palestinian agencies to execute the civil works. This includes
                               preparation, clearance, and disclosure of EA/EMP and any other relevant documents to safeguards as deemed necessary.
Public Disclosure Copy




                               Component 4. Rehabilitation and improvement of the drinking water supply networks. Estimated cost: $2,750,000. Activities will include
                               replacement of the water supply networks in the villages of Husan, Nahhalin, Battir, and Wadi Fukin, construction of a small 200 M2 warehouse for
                               pipe fittings and other materials, and construction of water supply reservoirs to serve the communities of Battir and Nahhalin.

                               Component 5. Capacity Building. Estimated cost is (US$200,000). This component will build the capacity of the newly established water and
                               wastewater unit (WWU) in the JSCPD to carry out the operation and maintenance of the WSS system after it has been completed. Based on the
                               results of the assessment to be done under component 3, activities will include, but not limited to, providing training for the JSCPD staff to be able
                               to operate and maintain the new facilities in an efficient manner. This will also include supplying the JSCPD with maintenance equipment and
                               tools, and software (GIS and accounting and billing systems). The PMU in the PWA will be assisted in operating a GIS system and training under
                               this component too, to allow for knowledge transfer to other JSCPDs.

                               4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                               The project is located in the Wadi Fukin area, West of Bethlehem, West Bank & Gaza, and works are expected to be undertaken in the villages of
                               Battir, Husan, Nahhalin, Wadi Fukin.

                               5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                               Tracy Hart (MNSEN)
                               Nina Bhatt (MNSSO)

                               6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                    Yes        No      Explanation
                               Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                 ✖                 The project includes a component of civil works and rehabilitation of
                                                                                                     infrastructure and therefore it is classified as environmental category B and an
                                                                                                     environmental assessment/EMP is required. The EA/EMP will be prepared
                                                                                                     and reviewed before it is disclosed in Arabic and English both in-country and
                                                                                                     at the Bank#s InfoShop before starting the implementation of the construction/
                                                                                                     civil works.
                               Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                    ✖
                               Forests OP/BP 4.36                                             ✖
                               Pest Management OP 4.09                                        ✖
                               Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                         ✖      The project location includes rich cultural heritage sites. The environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                     assessment will examine closely if any of the cultural physical resources will
                                                                                                     be impacted by the civil works component of the project and appropriate
                                                                                                     actions and/or mitigation measures will be included in the environmental
                                                                                                     management plan.
                               Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                  ✖
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                            ✖      The construction of the water reservoirs will require land acquisition. The
                                                                                                     environmental assessment will examine the land requirement and prepare the
                                                                                                     proper resettlement plan if necessary.
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                      ✖
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                      ✖
                               7.50
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                          ✖

                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                  Potential involuntary resettlement impacts or land acquisition requirements are expected to be minimal. Any potential social safeguards impacts
                                  would be related to phase two of the project which will involve civil works to rehabilitate and improve the drinking water supply networks and
                                  includes replacement of the water supply networks in the villages of Husan, Nahhalin, Battir and Wadi Fukin, and construction of water supply
                                  reservoirs to serve the communities of Battir and Nahhalin. At this stage of preparation it is expected that land will need to be acquired for the
                                  building of reservoirs, and that the feasibility study may recommend waste water management solutions that will require land acquisition. A site
                                  for the proposed water reservoir for Battir village has already been secured, but land will be acquired for the Nahlin village reservoir site.

                                  An environmental assessment and environmental management plan (EA/EMP) will be prepared by the borrower, reviewed by the Bank, and
                                  disclosed both in Arabic and English in-country and at the Bank#s InfoShop for the proposed civil works prior to signing the Grant Agreement.
                                  Civil works in the second component of the project will commence only after the preparation, clearance, and disclosure of the environmental
                                  assessment and the environmental management plan. Additionally, appropriate consultations will be undertaken with relevant stakeholders and
                                                                                                                                                                          Page 2 of 4
                           a summary will be reflected in the EA.

                           The preliminary information about the project location and villages indicates that the area is classified of special cultural heritage and unique
                           natural habitat. Therefore, the environmental assessment will examine closely if the project#s physical activities will trigger any of the Bank
                           safeguards policies, namely Natural Habitats (OP 4.04), Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12), and Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11). An
                           environmental management plan (EMP) will be prepared to mitigate any negative impacts during the construction phase of civil works and the
                           operational phase of the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           It is expected that the rehabilitation works of the water supply networks and the construction of the water reservoirs will improve the overall
                           access to water supply in the targeted communities, reduce the water losses in the aging networks, and improving the quality of water supply by
                           replacing the old water pipes by new water pipes. The drinking water quality and how it is impacted by project activities, will be monitored by the
                           borrower.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                           N/A
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                           N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                            and implement the measures described.
                           PWA has limited experience with World Bank safeguards procedures. It is therefore expected that the World Bank team will need to provide
                           some support and follow up on preparation and implementation of potential social safeguards instruments.

                           In an effort to mainstream sound environmental and social management practices in the Palestinian Water Sector, the Palestinian Water
                           Authority, through the Bank-financed Water Sector Capacity Building Project, will employ a consultant prior to the proposed SPF financed
                           project described in this ISDS to perform a comprehensive needs assessment and prepare a detailed TA and capacity building action plan.
                           Based on this needs assessment, the consultant and the client (PWA) will agree on a revision of the initial work program proposed by the
                           consultant to carry out the defined action plan. The consultant#s Terms of Reference include - as part of the initial six month needs assessment
                           - a detailed review of the capacity of the PWA to implement the relevant Palestinian laws and regulation regarding environmental and social
                           impact assessment, involuntary resettlement plans and management of water projects. Based on this review and needs assessment, a capacity
                           building program will be devised and implemented by the consultant. In addition to water sector specific areas, the consultant will be required to
                           provide additional expertise if needed as required by the TORs, including but not limited to social and environmental management of water
                           projects.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                            on potentially affected people.
                           Consultations with different stakeholders including PWA, JSCDP, targeted village councils, and beneficiaries will be conducted as part of the
                           environmental assessment. The training needs for proper implementation and monitoring of the EMP will be identified and addressed as part of
                           component 2 of the project and the cost of necessary training to build the capacity of the PWA and JSCDP is included as part of component 5
                           of the project.

                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                                            No
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                               19-Jan-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                                           31-Jan-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                            29-Feb-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                           Directors
                         Technical Assistance Project
                         For a TA project which will finance the preparation of a specific safeguards instrument, please indicate type of document disclosed, if any.

                         N/A
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                         disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                           Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                                Yes [        ]     No [    ]   NA [   ]

                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                           Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?                                Yes [        ]     No [    ]   NA [   ]

                           Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language                        Yes [        ]     No [    ]   NA [   ]
                           that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?


                                                                                                                                                                             Page 3 of 4
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for   Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?              Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard    Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same        Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Signed and submitted by:                                                Name                                                 Date
                            Task Team Leader:                    Richard W. Pollard                                                       22-Nov-2011
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:     Hocine Chalal (RSA)                                                      30-Nov-2011
                            Comments:
                            Sector Manager:                      Francis Ato Brown (SM)                                                   08-Dec-2011
                            Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                                                 Page 4 of 4
