                                                                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                             CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC157
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Feb-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        Mexico                                    Project ID:                        P121116
                              Project Name:                   Sustainable Production Systems and Biodiversity (P121116)
                              Task Team Leader:               Svetlana Ognianova Edmead
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 06-Feb-2012                                     Estimated Board Date:              22-May-2012
                              Managing Unit:                  LCSAR                                     Lending Instrument:                Specific Investment Loan
                              Focal Area:                     Biodiversity
                              Sector:                         General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%)
                              Theme:                          Other environment and natural resources management (100%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                           Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                            19.20
                                   Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                                                             11.69
                                   Total                                                                                                                         30.89
                              Environmental Category:         B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              B. Global Environmental Objective(s)

                              The Global Environmental Objective is to conserve and protect nationally and globally significant biodiversity in Mexico through improving and
                              mainstreaming sustainable management practices in the productive landscape in priority ecological corridors.

                              C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                              The project’s total costs of US $30.89 million consist of a GEF grant of US $11.69 million and US $19.2 million in co-financing from the GoM
                              (including current programs) to be implemented over a five year period.

                              The project’s three major activities are complementary and correspond to the first three project components. Project activities would be carried out
                              in the productive landscape of priority biological corridors in the states of Chiapas, Campeche, Tabasco, Oaxaca, Quintana Roo and Yucatan.
                              Target beneficiaries are producer groups and producer associations, about 30% or more of which are indigenous people.

                              Project Components
                              The project has three major activities: (i) mainstreaming sustainable production and biodiversity into production systems in biological corridors, (ii)
                              expanding market opportunities for green goods and services from the project area, including labeling and branding initiatives, and (iii) institutional
                              strengthening and developing standards for green production, including regional exchange program to promote consistency among Mesoamerican
                              Biological Corridor (MBC) countries.

                              Component 1. Sustainable Production and Biodiversity Conservation Mainstreaming.
                              The aim of the component is to mainstream green practices into production systems in order to conserve biodiversity of global and national
                              importance. The component would seek to have about 10% of the target area landscape incorporate green practices and/or protected through
                              planning instruments by project closure.

                              Component 1 would assist approximately 120 producer groups already employing green practices in their production systems to expand, diversify
                              and improve such activities, and with approximately 1,800 conventional producers to adopt green practices into their production systems. GEF
                              financing would be used to provide about 10%-30% of competitive green production grants to producer groups, with the remainder of the financing
                              provided by existing state programs available through SAGARPA, CONAFOR, CDI and other agencies and beneficiaries. Seed money for
                              technical assistance will be available to help producers and producer groups develop high quality proposals needed to access grant resources.
                              The main production systems for which grants would be available include 1) forestry (timer and non-timber forest products), 2) silvo-pastoral cattle-
                              ranching systems, 3) coffee production, 4) cocoa production, 5) honey production, 6) wildlife and 7) ecotourism. Factors such as global and
                              national conservation value, biodiversity, connectivity, threat levels, costs, suitability of goods produced and services delivered, and logistics, inter
                              alia will be considered in the selection of specific proposals for interventions. Detailed eligibility criteria will be finalized during project preparation
                              and agreed upon at appraisal.

                              The project would also work with national institutions to catalyze the use of existing land-use planning instruments to promote biodiversity
                              conservation in the target corridors. A range of such instruments already exist in Mexico; the main ones being the Community Land-use Zoning
                              Plans (CONAFOR), Ecological Zoning Plans (SEMARNAT), Wildlife Management Area Plans (SEMARNAT), and Sustainable Municipal Rural
                         Development Plans (SAGARPA). Because these zoning instruments have legal status, areas zoned through their use for purposes such as
                         sustainable production or conservation are respected locally and enforced by law.

                         Training would be provided to producers and producer groups through Technical Service Providers (TSPs), who would be required to be trained
                         and registered with the project. Several TSP systems already exist in Mexico for forestry and various agricultural activities, though some thematic
                         areas are still not covered. The project would work with the existing TSP systems to ensure they include technicians with the requisite profile for
                         training producers in green production practices. In cases where TSP systems are lacking, the project would design, develop and initiate the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         implementation of the systems so that producers would have access to needed technology to implement green practices. By project closure, about
                         30 TSP systems would be fully functioning to support green production systems.


                         Component 2: Production Systems and Market Opportunities.
                         The overall ai m of component two is to improve and expand market opportunities for green goods and services (from the project area) at local,
                         national and international levels to enhance the economic sustainability of the production systems. It would seek to achieve this by helping
                         producers and producer groups to organize and equip about 20 producer associations to enable them to produce goods and services that comply
                         with verifiable green standards. By forming alliances, producers and producer groups will be able to attain economies of scale needed to enter and
                         successfully compete in markets. The project would co-finance studies, technical assistance, legal and administrative fees to help organize the
                         associations and equipment required to make them operational. Organized alliances would be eligible for training in themes such as marketing,
                         advertising, contract negotiation, access to credit/financial support, feasibility studies, business planning, etc.

                         This component will also develop “green labeling or market branding? initiatives and help to identify and develop market niches for green products.
                         By project closure, about 4 cooperative marketing arrangements for green goods and services would be fully operational and at least 5 production
                         systems would be expected to be in compliance with green standards, marketing their products, and have indicative green labeling.

                         A public-access market information system would be developed to help “green? producers and producer groups and second-tier producer
                         associations identify potential market opportunities and information needed to develop them. Public awareness campaigns would be financed in
                         order to raise consumer awareness of the importance of “green? products and to underscore their value.

                         Component 3. Institutional Strengthening and Standards for Sustainable Production Systems.
                         The objective of this component is to build institutional capacities to support and encourage the use of green products and sustainable production
                         systems. Although productive activities are carried out by the private sector, most “green? producers in the project area lack the skills, tools and
                         experience needed to promote their products effectively. With this in mind, public-private outreach and promotion programs would be developed in
                         concert with producers, producer groups, second-tier associations and government agencies to promote commercial standards and further
                         consumer awareness of green products and sustainable production systems, encourage sales and expand market opportunities. Second-tier
                         associations and government agencies will also need to build their capacities to apply participatory and culturally appropriate approaches in
                         working with producers groups in general and indigenous peoples associations in particular.

                         In order to distinguish and promote “green? products in markets, the component would develop “green standards? and “market brands? for at least
                         5 goods and services/sustainable production systems in cooperation with technical experts, producers and public institutions. Standards or brands
                         would have to meet strict environmental, socioeconomic, health and cultural criteria. In addition, to ensure compliance with standards and inspire
                         consumer confidence, third-party verification mechanisms for the green standards would be developed and implemented.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Because most producers lack the necessary capital to transition from conventional to green practices, financial instruments would be developed to
                         support such efforts. GEF incremental funding would be used for the design of the instruments, while local funds would cover the actual financing.
                         Presently under consideration are proposals for adjustments to existing government finance programs in order to support sustainable production
                         systems, guarantees to underwrite loans to producers (the vast majority of whom cannot comply with conventional lending norms) and others.

                         Because corridors extend across national boundaries, a regional program for training and technology transfer between Mexico and neighboring
                         country institutions linked to the priority project corridors would be established and implemented. This will help to provide a corridor-consistent
                         approach to management needed for biodiversity conservation, and the development of international marketing initiatives for green products,
                         guarantees to underwrite loans to producers (the vast majority of which cannot comply with conventional lending norm) and others.

                         Component 4: Project management and monitoring.
                         Component 4 provides the technical and fiduciary support elements to ensure efficient execution of the project through administration, monitoring
                         and evaluation, planning and coordination.

                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         Project activities would be carried out in the productive landscape of priority biological corridors in the states of Chiapas, Campeche, Tabasco,
                         Oaxaca, Quintana Roo and Yucatan.

                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

                         CONABIO has many years of implementation experience with projects funded by multilateral agencies and bilateral donors. They are a lead
                         organization in Mexico regarding the establishment of ecosystem conservation priorities and biological monitoring of species. Much of this
                         experience has involved working with indigenous peoples and rural producers who live in or make use of the priority project locations.

                         Given that some sustainable management activities fall under the aegis of other agencies within the GoM, as well as technical capacity in some
                         areas (forestry, fisheries, among others), CONABIO will engage SEMARNAT, CONAFOR, CDI and other agencies to provide this assistance and
                         to review and authorize sustainable management plans as pertinent. As an inter-ministerial agency, CONABIO is well positions for the exchange of
                         national expertise and coordination between entities.

                         F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

                         Jason Jacques Paiement (LCSSO)
                           Ricardo Hernandez Murillo (LCSEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

                            Safeguard Policies Triggered          Yes   No   TBD                               Explanation
                            Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01   ✖                Mainly positive impacts are expected given the reduced pressure on
                                                                                   natural ecosystems achieved through the use of sustainable
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                   production activities. No land use change activities will be
                                                                                   supported and no primary forests will be degraded. Productive
                                                                                   activities are expected to be small-scale, with short-term, and
                                                                                   reversible impacts potentially arising from small industry, low-impact/
                                                                                   organic agriculture, and non-timber harvesting activities among
                                                                                   other sustainable activities that will be supported under the project
                                                                                   demand-driven funding mechanism, while sustainable land
                                                                                   management instruments and practices will reduce the impacts of
                                                                                   current production and extraction activities. An environmental
                                                                                   assessment, which is underway, will review existing land practices,
                                                                                   pressures and incentives for deforestation in an around corridors
                                                                                   and protected areas.
                                                                                   The project is preparing a rapid strategic environmental assessment
                                                                                   (SEA), which is limited to the analytical work to assess
                                                                                   environmental management capacities throughout and document
                                                                                   baseline environmental conditions in the corridors, as well as major
                                                                                   threats and drivers of deforestation. The land-use planning
                                                                                   instruments, which are part of the technical assistance package, will
                                                                                   contribute to the management, conservation and sustainability of
                                                                                   biological corridors. The rapid SEA will incorporate findings of
                                                                                   previous studies, field work and focus group consultations to
                                                                                   typologies of sub-projects to be included under components 1 and 2
                                                                                   and consider their potential impacts both at a site level and
                                                                                   aggregate landscape level in the context of the 7 sustainable
                                                                                   production systems selected in this project (as described in
                                                                                   Component 1).
                                                                                   Additional consultation is planned, both during preparation, where
                                                                                   the Environmental Management Framework will be discussed in
                                                                                   experts and stakeholder focus groups, and during implementation,
                                                                                   through the state multi-sector consultative committees which have
                                                                                   operated for over 5 years in the 4 initial corridor states (Chiapas,
                                                                                   Campeche, Yucatan, Quintana Roo) and have already been formed
                                                                                   in the 2 new states (Oaxaca, Tabasco) incorporated to this new
                                                                                   operation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                   A framework for screening of sub-projects based on sustainability
                                                                                   criteria and management plans for individual activities will follow
                                                                                   international and national best practices, applicable environmental
                                                                                   laws, and include monitoring, supervision, and capacity-building
                                                                                   measures for community participants and other stakeholders. The
                                                                                   projects will be reviewed by SEMARNAT and other agencies in
                                                                                   coordination with CONABIO through a participatory mechanism to
                                                                                   be established during preparation in order to coordinate the various
                                                                                   institutions involved in this landscape-level project. There is a
                                                                                   strong track record in regard to this mechanism with several projects
                                                                                   over the last decade having completed successfully with strong
                                                                                   community support and a growing technical assistance base in the
                                                                                   states to provide ongoing advice to organizations carrying-out
                                                                                   projects.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04           ✖                CONABIO is the primary agency for establishing conservation
                                                                                   priorities in Mexico and the project responds directly to these
                                                                                   national and international priorities for ecosystem conservation
                                                                                   within the productive landscape. The variables used by CONABIO to
                                                                                   determine Priority Regions include: Critical types of vegetation, Plant
                                                                                   richness: families and gender, Protected plants, trees and cacti
                                                                                   under Mexican Norm 059, Resident birds, Reptiles, Amphibians,
                                                                                   Mammals, and Richness in species of vertebrates.
                                                                                   The project focuses on areas currently under production within
                                                                                   ejidos and communities. Through improved production and
                                                                                   harvesting techniques that seek to maintain biodiversity, it is
                                                                                   expected that the protected areas system will benefit from the
                                                                                   corridors established for long-term integrity of ecosystems.
                                                                                   The recently completed CONABIO Gap Analysis and the Natural
                                                                                   Protected Areas (NPAs) in the SINAP will serve as a reference to
                                                                                   confirm that proposed activities are consistent with conservation
                                                                                   plans and NPAs Management Programs. Based on the scenarios
                                                                                                                                 established and potential types of projects, targets will be
                                                                                                                                 established by ecosystem for monitoring and evaluation of the
                                                                                                                                 project.
                                                                                                                                 Monitoring will include natural and induced perturbations, by
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 analyzing the expected vs. observed distribution of selected species;
                                                                                                                                 habitat fragmentation through rural evaluation, zoning and land use
                                                                                                                                 community plans; loss of continuity/connectivity through success
                                                                                                                                 rate observed in distribution/colonization in remote places; and
                                                                                                                                 finally, biodiversity loss, through the actual distribution of selected
                                                                                                                                 species that may be observed and counted, directly or through
                                                                                                                                 photo traps and footprints. The monitoring will also consider the area
                                                                                                                                 under improved management using the GEF tracking-tools
                                                                                                                                 established for this as well as other parameters relevant to
                                                                                                                                 establishing project-level and aggregate impacts.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                  ✖                                   Communities will be supported in their organization and through
                                                                                                                                 technical assistance to develop sustainable management plans.
                                                                                                                                 Forest policy is supported by the legal requirement of the Forest
                                                                                                                                 Management Plan approval, which SEMARNAT will not issue for
                                                                                                                                 forest operations in NPAs core areas and for buffer zones only if
                                                                                                                                 they are contemplated in the relevant NPA management plan.
                                                                                                                                 Additionally, CONABIO promotes best management practices
                                                                                                                                 through the technical manuals developed under the previous Mexico
                                                                                                                                 Mesoamerican Biological Corridor project (based on the Mexico
                                                                                                                                 Community Forestry Project guidelines).
                                                                                                                                 All forestry plans will be approved by SEMARNAT while non-timber
                                                                                                                                 activities will be authorized through SEMARNAT’s Wildlife
                                                                                                                                 Directorate. As provided for under the policy, management will be
                                                                                                                                 geared towards achieving internationally accepted certification
                                                                                                                                 standards, although not all sub-projects will be certified given the
                                                                                                                                 need for long-term capacity-building and the high transaction cost
                                                                                                                                 that certification may imply for small producers. The Bank-supported
                                                                                                                                 projects in Mexico have contributed to the development of these
                                                                                                                                 regulations and capacity both in the government and civil society,
                                                                                                                                 landowners and technical service providers since the creation of the
                                                                                                                                 Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) and the launching of the
                                                                                                                                 Community Forestry project in the mid 90s. The main indicator of the
                                                                                                                                 project’s impact will be the access of the sustainable production
                                                                                                                                 fostered to achieve the standards required by the markets for
                                                                                                                                 certified products.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 SEMARNAT and CONAFOR regional and state offices will ensure
                                                                                                                                 that all sub-projects are developed and implemented by producers
                                                                                                                                 and producer groups incorporating both the legal requisites and the
                                                                                                                                 best available management practices. Through the state multi-
                                                                                                                                 stakeholder project committees, academic institutions and forestry/
                                                                                                                                 agricultural research agencies will be incorporated to assist in
                                                                                                                                 reviewing practices and developing practical lessons-learned for this
                                                                                                                                 project and broader landscape dissemination (given that promoting
                                                                                                                                 sustainable production practices is an objective of the project).
                         Pest Management OP 4.09                                             ✖                                   The project will be working in the agricultural landscape promoting
                                                                                                                                 best-practices and biodiversity-friendly production to minimize
                                                                                                                                 impacts on biodiversity. Since target markets are ones that provide a
                                                                                                                                 premium for “green? goods and services, sustainable production
                                                                                                                                 systems (including organic production) will only be supported. No
                                                                                                                                 pesticides are expected to be procured; however given that many
                                                                                                                                 communities carry-out varied agricultural activities outside the scope
                                                                                                                                 of the project, capacity building components will be included and, if
                                                                                                                                 warranted, integrated pest management plans will be developed, to
                                                                                                                                 ensure adequate pest management practices are pursued
                                                                                                                                 consistent with the policy.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                              ✖                                   No large-scale or linear infrastructure is expected under the project,
                                                                                                                                 however considering that many projects will be carried-out in areas
                                                                                                                                 that may have sites of cultural significance and historical resources,
                                                                                                                                 all technical studies for the sub-projects will consider any physical
                                                                                                                                 cultural resources in the managed landscapes that are a focus of the
                                                                                                                                 activities.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                       ✖                                   The indigenous peoples who live in the productive landscapes of
                                                                                                                                 priority biological corridors in the states of Chiapas, Campeche,
                                                                                                                                 Tabasco, Oaxaca, Quintana Roo and Yucatan, are among the
                                                                                                                                 beneficiaries of the proposed project. A Social Assessment will be



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                            Safeguard Policies Triggered                                      Yes           No           TBD                                             Explanation
                                                                                                                                    conducted and an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework will be
                                                                                                                                    prepared to facilitate consultations with potential project
                                                                                                                                    beneficiaries. While most of the proposed project activities are
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                    beneficial to indigenous peoples, these activities need to be
                                                                                                                                    designed in a culturally appropriate way in order that the benefits are
                                                                                                                                    further enhanced which would be carried out through location
                                                                                                                                    specific Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPPs) when communities decide
                                                                                                                                    to participate during implementation. The Social Assessment will
                                                                                                                                    also assess the risks that expanding market opportunities for green
                                                                                                                                    goods and services could pose to traditional economic activities.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                                                            ✖        The Social Assessment will evaluate whether or not any of the
                                                                                                                                    proposed project activities could have adverse impacts on the
                                                                                                                                    livelihoods of affected people as a result of the need for land
                                                                                                                                    acquisition or restrictions of access to natural resources in legally
                                                                                                                                    designated parks or protected areas. In the event that they could,
                                                                                                                                    then a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and/or Process
                                                                                                                                    Framework (PF) will be prepared, consulted and disclosed prior to
                                                                                                                                    Appraisal. If necessary, the RPF / PF will clarify the resettlement
                                                                                                                                    principles, eligibility criteria, compensation and income restoration
                                                                                                                                    measures, etc. to be reflected in the preparation of site-specific
                                                                                                                                    Resettlement Plans (RPs) to be applied during project
                                                                                                                                    implementation.

                                                                                                                                    The Social Assessment will also develop specific tools to evaluate
                                                                                                                                    the extent of participation and transparency in local natural resource
                                                                                                                                    management and use decision-making processes in order to ensure
                                                                                                                                    that any potentially adverse effects on vulnerable groups are
                                                                                                                                    adequately identified and mitigated.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                                        ✖                      Safety on Dams does not apply since the project does not include
                                                                                                                                    dam construction nor any influence of the performance of the project
                                                                                                                                    on existing dams.
                            Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                                        ✖                      Projects on International Waterways does not apply since the project
                            7.50                                                                                                    does not include any investments in International Waterways or
                                                                                                                                    activities that may affect the relations between the World Bank and
                                                                                                                                    its borrowers, and between riparian states.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                                            ✖                      Projects in Disputed Areas does not apply since the project does not
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                    include any investments or activities in any territory under dispute.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                           A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Mar-2012
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
                              should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.

                         IV. APPROVALS
                            Signed and submitted by:
                            Task Team Leader:                                Name: Svetlana Edmeades                                                                               Date: 27-Jan-2012
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                 Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                                                                           Date: 01-Feb-2012
                            Comments:
                            Sector Manager:                                  Name: Laurent Msellati (SM)                                                                           Date: 03-Feb-2012
                            Comments:




                            1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                             form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
