                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSC2049

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-May-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 30-May-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Mozambique                     Project ID:     P131965
                            Project Name:     Mozambique Conservation Areas for Biodiversity and Development Project
                                              (P131965)
                            Task Team         Claudia Sobrevila
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       28-Oct-2013                      Estimated       25-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                  Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: AFTN3                             Lending         Specific Investment Loan
                                                                             Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%), Central government
                                              administration (40%), Other industry (15%), Sub-national government
                                              administration (5%)
                            Theme(s):         Biodiversity (30%), Rural non-farm income generation (30%), Environmental
                                              policies and institutions (25%), Other environment and nat ural resources
Public Disclosure Copy




                                              management (10%), Climate change (5%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     75.19                   Total Bank Financing:      70.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                              Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                       Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                       0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                             70.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                        5.19
                              Total                                                                   75.19
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                         C. Project Description
                         Past experiences show that growth of nature-based tourism in Southern Africa has been highly
                         dependent on the quality of conservation areas as tourism destination (pristine beaches, unique coral
Public Disclosure Copy




                         reefs, spectacular landscape, adventure and wildlife) leading to a conclusion that there is a strong link
                         between biodiversity management and tourism. Access to and traffic within these destinations as
                         well as availability of communication infrastructure, electricity, experienced tour operators and
                         readily available credits is also important to attract private investments, and to lower investment and
                         operating costs to investors. Tourism investors also require clear rules of engagement, e.g.
                         transparently secured concession contracts. Past experiences also show that, community incentives
                         for conservation are more likely to emerge when a project addresses existing livelihoods systems and
                         conservation compliance at the same time and when such support is of significant scale to impact at
                         the household level.
                         Given these experiences, and other more practical lessons from the implementation of recent
                         projects, the GOM has adopted a set of strategic orientation for the proposed project. These are: (1)
                         focus more on national issues than on transfrontier issues; (2) emphasize marine or coastal
                         conservation areas which can rapidly generate revenues from tourism, and therefore, contribute faster
                         than terrestrial areas to financial sustainability; (3) consider various tourism options including sport
                         hunting; (4) explore new funding mechanisms that can support conservation areas after project end
                         (Endowment and Sinking Fund); (5) scale-up attention to communities living around and within
                         conservation areas with the view to improve livelihoods and participation in tourism ventures; (6)
                         support complementary institutions such as ANAC, BioFund, MITUR, MICOA and INGC that link
                         conservation and tourism development; (7) include a strong human resources and awareness building
                         component (which was absent in the TFCA II); and (8) ensure experience sharing and feedback from
                         M&E into implementation and sector policies.
                         The project will be implemented through five components:
                         •        Component 1: Institutional and Human Resources Capacity Building
                         •        Component 2: Strengthening Commercial Utilization of Conservation Areas
                         •        Component 3: Conservation Areas Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •        Component 4: Strengthening Economic Opportunities for Local Communities in Buffer
                         Zones
                         •        Component 5: Project management and monitoring

                         (i)      Institutional and Human Resources Capacity Building. The objective of this component is to
                         strengthen the main institutions in charge with the management of conservation areas by increasing
                         their effective administrative and financial management systems and human resources development.
                         This component would support staffing, equipment, training and skill development as well as the
                         development of administrative and management systems and regulations required within DNAC,
                         ANAC and several other public institutions to improve the management of conservation areas and
                         nature-based tourism development. The component would also strengthen the operation of BioFund
                         to secure medium and long terms funds for conservation areas management from Government and
                         from various funding sources. It is critical at this point in time, to prepare a pool of qualified people
                         in the various trades of conservation and tourism.

                         (ii)    Strengthening Commercial Utilization of Conservation Areas. This component would
                         support ANAC and other public and private institutions in charge for tourism development in
                         Mozambique to strengthen nature-based tourism licensing and registration and to promote nature-
                         based tourism investment and facilitation in conservation areas. The component would develop an
                         effective commercial branch within ANAC that would market and monitor consumptive and non-
                         consumptive tourism concessions and other tourism products within Conservation Areas. This
                         component would encourage tourism concessions through tenders and direct negotiations and would
                         provide guidance on environmental, social and economic sustainability of tourism businesses. It will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         also ensure that the new tourism businesses provide local benefits to communities in and around
                         conservation areas.
                          (iii)    Conservation Areas Management. The objective of this component is to improve the
                         infrastructure, equipment, protection, management, research and monitoring of several conservation
                         areas in Mozambique. The conservation areas to be financed have been identified through a
                         participatory process with key conservation stakeholders in the country using selection criteria.
                         These areas will be confirmed at appraisal and include: (1) Maputo Special Reserve and Ponta do
                         Ouro Marine Reserve; (2) Banhine and Zinave National Parks; (3) Chimanimani Reserve; (4)
                         Limpop o National Park; (5) Pomene National Reserve and Bazaruto Archipelago National Park; (6)
                         Malhazine National Reserve; and potentially (7) Primeiras e Segundas Islands (if gazetted as
                         conservation area before project start) and Gile Reserve
                         (iv)      Strengthening Economic Opportunities for Local Communities in Buffer Zones. The
                         objective of this component is to support income opportunities (such as, tourism, agriculture natural
                         resources & wildlife-based activities) for local communities around the conservation areas selected
                         under the project. The component would likely focus its activities on the buffer areas and coutadas
                         that are adjacent to the following conservation areas: (1) Maputo Special Reserve/Ponta do Ouro
                         Marine Reserve; (2) Banhine/Zinave National Parks; (3) Chimanimani Reserve; (4) Limpopo
                         National Park, (5) Pomene National Reserve/Bazaruto Archipelago National Park; (6) Gile Reserve;
                         and, possibly, (7) Tchuma Tchatu community conservation areas.
                         (v)       Project Management. The component would support a team of experts in MITUR, whose
                         task would be to ensure that the project planning, implementation, procurement, financial
                         management and monitoring are carried out with diligence and integrity.
                         An indicative budget for the project by funding sources for each components/sub-components is
                         presented below. GOM’s contribution is currently estimated at about $2 million per year. The level
                         of funding and allocation by component will be finalized during preparation.
                         IFC will focus on scoping for tourism investment opportunities and then assure transaction
Public Disclosure Copy




                         facilitation to identify investors. Associated financing is already mobilized by USAID, KfW, UNDP
                         (GEF4) and several NGOs for other conservation clusters such as Gorongoza National Park,
                         Maromeu Reserve and Lake Niassa Reserve. Ongoing projects from various donors are already
                         supporting the overarching TFCA program.

                         Incremental Reasoning
                         The US$5.19 million of GEF funds are incremental to the overall TFCA program. These incremental
                         GEF funds will be used to develop sustainable financing mechanisms for conservation of
                         biodiversity of global significance including providing seed capital in an endowment fund. In
                         addition, they will also support the strengthening of conservation areas management effectiveness of
                         selected sites with globally significant biodiversity including some of the iconic wildlife in the
                         country. Furthermore, the incremental GEF funds will support community-based natural resources
                         management including community reserves, community game ranches, and integrated wood fuel
                         production within the forest and/or the broader land scape that would restore and/or enhance carbon
                         stocks in forest and non-forest lands.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project areas have been pre-determined and will be confirmed at appraisal and include: (1)
                         Maputo Special Reserve and Ponta do Ouro Marine Reserve; (2) Banhine and Zinave National Parks;
                           (3) Chimanimani Reserve; (4) Limpopo National Park; (5) Pomene National Reserve and Bazaruto
                           Archipelago National Park; (6) Malhazine National Reserve; and potentially (7) Primeiras e
                           Segundas Islands (if gazetted as conservation area before project start) and Gile Reserve.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The TFCAU Unit has been implementing TFCA II for six years following the Environment and
                           Social Management Framework (ESMF), a Process Framework (PF) and a Resettlement Policy
                           Framework (RPF) prepared for that phase. Under the current project, all construction contracts have
                           prepared ESIAs and Environmental and Social management plans, per the requirement of the
                           Ministry of Environment Affair (MICOA) and the ESMF. Some Sub-projects, for example tourism
                           lodges and camps involve constructions activities and required an ESIA. Once these are prepared,
                           MICOA approves them before the construction is done. The Bank has been supervising (post
                           review) the quality of this work and has found it satisfactory. A new ESMF will be prepared for this
                           phase before appraisal. Regarding the social safeguards, the PF and RPF is overseen by DINAC.
                           DINAC has used the technical assistance of INGC to supervise the execution of the RAP in the
                           Limpopo area that has been rated moderately satisfactory by the Bank, due to delays in some of the
                           steps. A new PF and RPF will be prepared for this phase before appraisal. The same organizational
                           arrangement will remain to implement both the social and environmental safeguards.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTCS)
                           Stephen Ling (AFTN3)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             Largely due to construction of buildings,
                           BP 4.01                                             airstrips and roads in the conservation areas. An
                                                                               ESMP will be prepared, consulted upon, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               disclosed before appraisal.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         Yes             The ESMF will include measures for addressing
                                                                               potential impacts on natural habitats.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  Yes             Some of the conservation areas and their buffer
                                                                               areas are located in forest ecosystems. Some of
                                                                               the livelihood activities might developed sub-
                                                                               projects to improved forest management in the
                                                                               buffer areas of the project's conservation areas.
                                                                               The ESMF will include guidance on this; forest
                                                                               management plans may be prepared during
                                                                               project implementation.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09             Yes             The livelihood activities supported under the
                                                                               Community Enterprise Fund could support
                                                                               agricultural sub-projects that may use minimal
                                                                               amounts of agro-chemicals. The ESMF will
                                                                               include a section on Integrated Pest
                                                                               Management.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   TBD                           The project may affect or involve Physical
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         Cultural Resources. This will be confirmed
                                                                                                                                 before appraisal.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
                                                                                                                                 area.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           The project will fund a limited number of cases
                                 4.12                                                                                            and will limit access to wild resources from
                                                                                                                                 communities which in the past, albeit illegally,
                                                                                                                                 were harvesting them. The project may also
                                                                                                                                 involve some involuntary resettlement. A
                                                                                                                                 Resettlement Policy Framework and a Process
                                                                                                                                 Framework will be prepared, consulted upon,
                                                                                                                                 and disclosed before appraisal.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project does not involve the construction of
                                                                                                                                 dams, nor does it depend on dams.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             N/A
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             N/A
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 05-May-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The following safeguard document will be prepared: (1) an Environment and Social Management
                                      Framework which will also include a draft Environment and Social Management Plan; ESIAs/
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      ESMPs will be prepared during project implementation; (2) a Resettlement Policy Framework;
                                      and (3) a Process Framework. In four conservation areas, detailed Resettlement Action Plans
                                      (RAPs) will be designed during project preparation and implemented immediately after
                                      effectiveness.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Claudia Sobrevila

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                                          Date: 06-May-2013
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Magdolna Lovei (SM)                                                                                                  Date: 30-May-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
