                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA1615
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Apr-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 01-May-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Cape Verde                        Project ID:    P126516
                            Project Name:      Cape Verde - Transport Sector Reform Project (P126516)
                            Task Team          Pierre Graftieaux
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          05-Feb-2013                       Estimated   25-Jun-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTTR                             Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (80%), Central government
                                              administration (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (50%), Rural services and
                                              infrastructure (50%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      31.00           Total Bank Financing:                  19.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                       Financing Gap:                          0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   12.00
                              IDA reallocated as a credit                                                                19.00
                              Total                                                                                      31.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           39.     The objective of the project is to improve efficiency and management of the Recipient's
                           national road assets and lay the groundwork for transport sector SOE reform.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                       Page 1 of 9
                         The proposed project consists of four components as described below: (See Annex 2 for a detailed
                         project description).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1 – Road Asset Preservation – US$22 million, out of which IDA finances US$10
                         million.

                         Carrying out, under the terms of performance-based maintenance contracts (PBMC), of: (a)
                         rehabilitation works; and (b) routine maintenance of selected roads including emergency works and
                         reinforcement, on the islands of Santo Antão, Maio, Fogo and São Nicolau.

                         Monitoring and evaluation of PBMC performance.

                         Carrying out of small-scale rehabilitation works on the national road network as emergency repairs
                         as required, that are not covered under PBMC.

                         Component 2 - Institutional Strengthening and Project Management– US$2 million.

                         This component consists of: (a) development and operationalization of a road and bridge
                         management system through the yearly collection and analysis of data relating to the condition of
                         bridges and roads; (b) strengthening the institutional capacity of entities under the aegis of the
                         MIEM , including the IE and FAMR through the carrying out of capacity-building activities; (c)
                         development of complementary funding mechanisms to widen the resource base of FAMR; (d)
                         support to enforce legislation on axle load control including through the provision of weighbridges;
                         (e) development of improved construction, rehabilitation and maintenance standards for road
                         drainage networks based on best practices; and (f) support for the PCU including through the
                         provision of Training, Operating Costs and audits.

                         Component 3 – Road Safety – US$1 million.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Support the Recipient in the execution of the 2011-2020 National Road Safety Plan, including
                         through: (a) development and implementation of a road safety action plan; (b) development and
                         implementation of an accident database and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system; (c)
                         development of a national road safety observatory; (d) drafting of the Recipient’s highway code; (e)
                         support to enforce road safety control through the provision of radars for speed limit enforcements
                         and alcohol breath analyzers; (f) enhancement of DGTR and IE institutional capacity in the area of
                         road safety including road engineering standards to improve road safety; and (g) carrying out of
                         awareness raising campaigns on road safety.

                         Component 4 –Inter-island Transport Strategy – US$4 million.

                         Support to improve the quality of inter-island sea and air transport services; the management of ports
                         and airports; and the efficiency of transport SOEs, including through: (a) strengthening the SOE
                         ownership and oversight functions of the SOE Unit including through the carrying out of
                         institutional capacity-building activities and preparation of performance agreements between the
                         MOFP and each of TACV, ENAPOR and ASA, monitoring of SOE performance, review of audit
                         reports, and monitoring of fiscal risks; (b) laying the groundwork for the concession of sea transport
                         services, delegation of port/airport activities to the private sector, improvement of the financial
                         situation of transport SOEs , including but not limited to TACV, including through the carrying out


                                                                      Page 2 of 9
                         of studies and provision of technical assistance; and (c) support to the Recipient’s Maritime
                         Technical University in the form of advisory for redefining its curriculum and provision of teaching
                         material specific to the maritime sector.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Unallocated: US$2 million
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is located in Cape Verde, especially in the islands of Santo Antão, São Nicolau, Maio,
                         and Fogo.

                         The criteria used to select the beneficiary islands were as follows: (a) focus on hilly islands where
                         maintenance is more costly and more complex, except for one “flat island? [Maio] as a pilot to be
                         able to draw lessons about our second generation PBCs for both hilly and flat islands, (b) target
                         pockets of poverty: according to the 2012 Poverty Mapping, Santo Antão and Fogo are the two
                         poorest islands in Cape Verde with a poverty incidence of 41 and 40 percent respectively. Maio is the
                         poorest of the flat islands, and the works in São Nicolau are indispensable to prevent the isolation of
                         40 percent of the population of the island living in the eastern part in the municipalities of Carriçal
                         and Juncalinho (c) include sections whose condition jeopardizes access to some remote communities,
                         and (d) internal rate of return of the proposed works.

                         The road network in Cape Verde is vulnerable and expensive to maintain because of the geography
                         (steep slopes), geology (unstable and crumbly terrain conducive to landslides, subsidence and rock
                         falls), and climate (heavy rains, potentially explained by climate change and likely to become more
                         and more common). In addition, most of these roads were designed decades ago for much lower
                         traffic volumes than those of today, and the drainage systems have been sized for rainfalls dwarfed
                         by the downpours being experienced over the last few years. Many would need to be re-engineered if
                         not reconstructed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed project of road rehabilitation is designed to have beneficial impacts on the population
                         in terms of improving people and goods movements as island roads are often damaged and cut off
                         due to torrential rains. However, these works also might have adverse environmental and social
                         impacts such as losses of acacias vegetation which are reducing erosion along the right-of-way, and
                         the risk of accident for the construction workers due to the sometimes dangerous location of some
                         road sections (at the edge of cliffs for example).
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Demba Balde (AFTCS)
                         Isabelle Celine Kane (AFTN3)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              This policy is triggered due to the potential
                          BP 4.01                                             adverse environmental and social impacts such as
                                                                              losses of acacias vegetation, and risks of accident
                                                                              for the workers during engineering works. An
                                                                              Environmental and Social Management
                                                                              Framework (ESMF) has been prepared in relation
                                                                              to the US$1 million allocation for urgent works



                                                                      Page 3 of 9
                                                                         required after heavy rainfalls. Four
                                                                         Environmental and Social Management Plans
                                                                         (ESMP) have been prepared, respectively for
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         Santo Antão, São Nicolau, Maio, and Fogo
                                                                         islands where performance-based contracts for
                                                                         rehabilitation and maintenance will be financed
                                                                         under the project.
                                                                         These safeguards documents will make possible
                                                                         the identification, assessment and mitigation of
                                                                         potential negative environmental and social
                                                                         impacts related to these activities. It will also
                                                                         address the potential environmental and social
                                                                         risks that would arise in repairing roads and
                                                                         bridges after floods. These documents have been
                                                                         consulted upon locally (in all four islands),
                                                                         approved at the national level on March 8, 2013,
                                                                         and published locally on April 9, 2013 and at the
                                                                         Infoshop on April 3, 2013.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No              4.04 on Natural Habitats will not be triggered
                                                                         because the rehabilitation works in this project
                                                                         only concern existing roads, with no widening or
                                                                         upgrading. The sections to be rehabilitated are not
                                                                         located in natural reserves or parks. It is not
                                                                         expected either that the works to be undertaken
                                                                         will require the development of new quarries.
                                                                         Generally, the works envisaged do not have
                                                                         impacts on natural habitats or ecological
                                                                         functions of the areas. There is no land clearing
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         or degradation of ecosystems.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No              NO

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No              NO

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes            This policy is triggered mainly in relation to
                         BP 4.11                                         emergency works whose location is not yet
                                                                         identified, as it depends on where and if damages
                                                                         due to extreme weather events will occur during
                                                                         project implementation. The ESMF prepared for
                                                                         the project addresses this policy and specifies that
                                                                         road works contracts should include chance finds
                                                                         procedures that outlines what will happen if
                                                                         previously unknown heritage resources,
                                                                         particularly archaeological resources, are
                                                                         encountered during project construction or
                                                                         operation.




                                                                 Page 4 of 9
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No                 NO
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     Yes                No resettlement has been identified in relation to
                            4.12                                                the rehabilitation works so far. However, some
                                                                                portions of crop plots might be affected because
                                                                                of emergency repairs after extreme climate
                                                                                events. Therefore, a Resettlement Policy
                                                                                Framework (RPF) has been prepared. The RPF
                                                                                was validated at the national level on March 8,
                                                                                2013 with the participation of various Ministries
                                                                                (Infrastructure, Environment, Finance, Tourism,
                                                                                Agriculture, Territorial Planning), civil society
                                                                                representatives (NGOs Platform, Association for
                                                                                the Defense of the Environment and
                                                                                Development), and municipalities. A version
                                                                                revised as per the comments received during this
                                                                                validation workshop was submitted on March 12,
                                                                                2013 to the Bank for clearance. The RPF was
                                                                                cleared, and published locally and at the Infoshop
                                                                                on April 11, 2013.
                                                                                An ARAP or a RAP will be prepared when
                                                                                required based on the guidelines defined in the
                                                                                RPF.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No                 NO

                            Projects on International        No                   NO
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                   NO
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The proposed project is categorized B because of the potential adverse environmental and social
                              impacts such as losses of acacias vegetation, risk of accident for the workers during engineering
                              works. Three safeguard policies are triggered: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); Physical
                              Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) and Involuntary Resettlement (OB/BP 4.12).

                             The OP 4.11 will be triggered in relation to emergency works whose location is not yet identified.
                             The ESMF clarifies that road works contracts must include chance find procedures that outline
                             what will happen if previously unknown heritage resources, particularly archaeological resources,
                             are encountered during project construction or operation

                             No resettlement has been identified in relation to the 4 performance-based rehabilitation and
                             maintenance contracts. However, some portions of crop plots might be affected because of


                                                                        Page 5 of 9
                           emergency repairs needed as a result of extreme climate events that may occur during project
                           implementation. As a result, a RPF has been prepared.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                           in the project area:
                             No potential indirect or long term or cumulative impacts are foreseen during project
                           implementation.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             Non applicable
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             The following instruments have been prepared: (a) the Environmental and Social Management
                           Framework (ESMF), (b) a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and (c) four Environmental and
                           Social Management Plan (ESMP) respectively for Santo Antão, São Nicolau, Maio, and Fogo
                           islands where performance-based contracts for rehabilitation and maintenance will be financed
                           under Component one.

                          To avoid or reduce potential negative impacts, including on physical cultural resources, the ESMF
                          and the RPF provide screening procedures for environmental, social and resettlement activities to
                          be undertaken as part of the Cape Verde Transport Project, taking into account the World Bank
                          safeguard policy requirements and the national environmental legislation. Acceptable
                          Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) have been prepared to specify mitigation
                          measures for various potential adverse impacts during the rehabilitation and maintenance of roads
                          in the four targeted islands.

                          The PCU of the Ministry of Infrastructure and Maritime Economy which is implementing the
                          ongoing Road Sector Support Project, the Instituto de Estradas - Road Agency, the participating
Public Disclosure Copy




                          enterprises and supervising consultants will be given well defined roles in the different instruments
                          to ensure that environmental and social safeguards guidelines including occupational, health and
                          safety guidelines are well monitored and implemented. The PCU will also ensure that all bidding
                          documents and contracts have the environmental and social management clauses to commit the
                          enterprises and supervising consultants to adhere to sustainable environment, social, health,
                          chance finds and safety guidelines during civil works.

                          All the relevant bodies have been adequately informed about the Project. Concerns of the
                          communities and inputs from consultations are reflected in the ESMF and RPF. The objective is to
                          raise awareness regarding project activities and impacts, and foster ownership. The ESMF, RPF
                          and ESMPs have been consulted upon, validated at the national level on March 9, 2013. The
                          ESMF (resp. RPF and ESMPs) were cleared by the World Bank on March 19, 2013 (resp March
                          29 and April 3, 2013). The ESMF and EMPS were disclosed in-country on April 9, 2013 and in
                          the Infoshop on April 3, 2013. The RPF was disclosed in country and in the InfoShop on April 11,
                          2013.

                          The Project Coordination Unit (PCU) was established in 2005 within the Ministry of Infrastructure
                          and Maritime Economy to implement an IDA-financed project (Road Sector Support Project-
                          RSSP). The PCU has satisfactorily carried out its safeguards responsibilities during the
                          implementation of this project. This project will be closing on June 30, 2013. The existing


                                                                     Page 6 of 9
                           institutional and implementation arrangements will be replicated to capitalize on the
                           implementation capacity built within the PCU, especially vis-à-vis safeguards.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             All the relevant key stakeholders have been adequately consulted and informed about the project
                           and public consultations organized during the preparation of safeguards documents. The Project
                           Coordination Unit (PCU) of the Ministry of Infrastructure and Maritime Economy which is
                           implementing the ongoing Road Sector Support Project have ensured that safeguards documents
                           (ESMF, RPF and EMP) prepared within this project have been disclosed on the IE website (http://
                           www.ie.cv/index.php/site-administrator/documentos-tecnicos) and/or venue of main involved
                           structures like the local collectivities, the Environment Ministry, the Instituto de Estradas - Road
                           Agency and in the Ministry of Infrastructure and Maritime Economy.
                           The RPF was commented and validated at the national level on March 8, 2013 with the
                           participation of various Ministries (Infrastructure, Environment, Finance, Tourism, Agriculture,
                           Territorial Planning), civil society representatives (NGOs Platform, Association for the Defense of
                           the Environment and Development), and municipalities. A version revised as per the comments
                           received during this validation workshop was submitted on March 12, 2013 to the Bank for
                           clearance. The RPF was cleared and then published locally and at the Infoshop on April 11, 2013.
                           The ESMF and the four ESMPs have been reviewed by the Bank project team, and commented
                           and validated at the national level on March 8, 2013 at the above-mentioned workshop. Versions
                           revised as per the comments received during this validation workshop were submitted on March
                           12, 2013 to the Bank for clearance. These documents were published locally on April 9, 2013 and
                           at the Infoshop on April 3, 2013.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        13-Mar-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     03-Apr-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        15-Mar-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     11-Apr-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:




                                                                     Page 7 of 9
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                             Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             property?
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Pierre Graftieaux
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Cary Anne Cadman (RSA)                            Date: 30-Apr-2013
                            Advisor:


                                                                        Page 8 of 9
                         Sector Manager:   Name: Supee Teravaninthorn (SM)   Date: 01-May-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                           Page 9 of 9
