                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA4447
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Jun-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-Jun-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Jordan                             Project ID:    P145865
                            Project Name:      Mitigate the Impact of Syrian Displacement on Jordan (P145865)
                            Task Team          Haneen Ismail Sayed
                            Leader:
                            Estimated                                             Estimated   02-Jul-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     MNSSP                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Health (50%), Other social services (50%)
                            Theme(s):         Debt management and fiscal sustainability (50%), Social risk mitigation (50%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        150.00                Total Bank Financing:       150.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                               Financing Gap:                0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                      0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                       150.00
                              Total                                                                                       150.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)


                            3. Project Description
                           In order to help Jordan address the situation resulting from the impact of the large and growing influx
                           of displaced peoples from Syria, the World Bank is preparing an emergency Investment Project
                           Financing (IPF) operation under OP 10.00 (paragraph 11). The project aims to help mitigate the

                                                                        Page 1 of 5
                         immediate and substantial impact of the Syrian conflict on Jordan’s economy and social sectors, by
                         financing expenditures that will be/have been incurred to (i) accommodate the refugees in the
                         Jordanian public system; and (ii) support Jordanian households’ basic needs. The operation would
Public Disclosure Copy




                         finance recurrent expenditures in the health sector, as well as commodities that the poor and middle
                         class rely on. The proposed operation will be fast-disbursing over a period of one year with up to
                         40% of the funds eligible to be disbursed rapidly after loan effective.

                         Specifically, The project objective is to help the Government of Jordan maintain access to essential
                         health services and basic household needs for the Jordanian population affected by the large and
                         increasing influx of Syrian refugees. It consists of the following three components:

                         Component 1: Maintaining Access to Essential Healthcare Services (US$70 million)

                         This component aims to sustain the provision of essential healthcare services to the Jordanian
                         population which is at risk due to the stress on resources resulting from the large influx of Syrian
                         refugees. This will be achieved by financing needed vaccines and drugs, and the treatment of
                         uninsured Jordanians that are being crowded out from public hospitals as a result of the increasing
                         use of public services by Syrian refugees.

                         •        Provision of vaccines and essential drugs to ensure their adequate and continuous supply at
                         all public healthcare facilities ($50 million). In particular, the sub-component will finance vaccines
                         and drugs procured by the Joint Procurement Department (JPD) from the Rational Drug List (see
                         Annex 3) in a manner that satisfies the considerations of economy and efficiency. The project will
                         finance a total of $50 million of drugs and vaccines, including costs of drugs and vaccines procured
                         in 2012, 2013, retroactively, and expected to be procured in 2013 and 2014.

                         •         Financing of healthcare services for uninsured Jordanians in non-MOH health facilities ($20
                         million). This sub-component aims to mitigate the financial impact of referring uninsured Jordanian
                         patients to non-MOH hospitals and health facilities as a result of the increased demand for public
Public Disclosure Copy




                         facilities by Syrian refugees. As Jordanian law entitles all citizens to free public health services,
                         referrals from crowded public facilities to the non-MOH hospitals and health facilities have been
                         undertaken by the MOH to ensure access to healthcare services for Jordanians, thus incurring higher
                         costs. In particular, the project will finance the costs of healthcare for approximately 2500 uninsured
                         Jordanian patients who MOH will need to refer to non-MOH hospitals and health facilities. This will
                         help alleviate the burden of the Syrian crisis on affected communities, improve the fiscal ability of
                         the MOH to reimburse the non-MOH hospitals and health facilities for its services, and assist the
                         MOH maintain its commitment for timely access to health care to its citizens

                         Component 2: Supporting Household Basic Needs (US$79.9 million)

                         Financing universal subsidies for household basic needs. The objective of this component is to help
                         the GOJ ensure the uninterrupted supply of basic household commodities for poor and lower middle
                         class households. The two subsidized products financed under this component are bread (wheat) and
                         LPG cylinders

                         •       Bread ($55 million): The project will finance bread subsidies worth $55 million which is the
                         estimated cost arising from the Syrian conflict and the associated increase in bread demand.

                         •       LPG Cylinders ($25 million): For the LPG cylinders, which are mostly used by households

                                                                       Page 2 of 5
                         for cooking and space heating, the project will finance $25 million worth of subsidies which is the
                         estimated cost arising from the Syrian conflict and the associated increase in LPG demand.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The selection of health services and basic household needs was based on the following criteria,
                         considerations and constraints: (a) financing existing programs and those ready for implementation,
                         (b) protecting poor and vulnerable lower middle class households from the impact of the crisis and
                         rapid results, (c) material impact and (c) donor complementarity.

                         The project will be implemented over 12 months given the urgent needs. It includes provision for
                         retroactive financing of up to US$60 million (40 percent of loan amount) for expenditures incurred
                         12 months prior to loan signing. While indicative allocations were agreed upon during project
                         appraisal for the Components 1 and 2, the project is designed to accommodate changes in needs
                         during implementation. Disbursements will be made either based on a positive list (agreed upon
                         during appraisal to be the Rational Drug List) or transaction based.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Jordan

                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Banu Setlur (MNSEE)
                         Nina Bhatt (MNSUS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       No                 Nature of project activities will not result in the
                          BP 4.01                                             triggering of environmental safeguard policies.
                                                                              Project will finance the procurement of drugs
                                                                              under the nati
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              onal drug list to fill the expected gaps in supply.
                                                                              Healthcare facilities will c
                                                                              ontinue functioning in the present manner in
                                                                              relation to management of medical w
                                                                              astes. Project will not involve any construction
                                                                              related civil works. OP 4.01 an
                                                                              d other environmental safeguard policies will not
                                                                              be triggered and there is no n
                                                                              eed to prepare an environmental safeguards-
                                                                              related instrument.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No

                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09            No

                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No
                          BP 4.11




                                                                      Page 3 of 5
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No                The project finances vaccines, drugs, and
                            4.12                                               medical treatment, bread and LPG containers.
                                                                               None of these goods or services could possibly
                                                                               involve civil works, land
                                                                               acquisition, or restriction of access to natural
                                                                               resources in parks and protecte
                                                                               d areas. Therefore OP 4.12 will not be triggered
                                                                               and there is no need to prepare
                                                                               a resettlement instrument.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
Public Disclosure Copy




                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.

                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.


                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                            This is a category C project
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level


                                                                       Page 4 of 5
                            OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
                                                                                             Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Haneen Ismail Sayed
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Yasser Aabdel-Aleem Awny El-                Date: 04-Jun-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                           Gammal (SM)




                                                                      Page 5 of 5
