                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                   Report No.: ISDSC1360

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Oct-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Georgia                           Project ID:       P130413
                            Project Name:       East West Highway Improvement Project 4 (P130413)
                            Task Team           Jean-Francois Marteau
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           28-Jan-2013                       Estimated         09-May-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      ECSTR                             Lending           Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector:             Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (95%), Public administration-
                                                Transportation (5%)
                            Theme:              Infrastructure services for private sector development (50%), Trade facilitation
                                                and market access (25%), Regional integration (25%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                               Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                              15.40
Public Disclosure Copy




                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                           30.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                     40.00
                              Financing Gap                                                                    0.00
                              Total                                                                           85.40
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed Project supports the achievement of the overall objective of improving the East West
                           Highway Corridor. It is therefore proposed to maintain similar PDOs as the ones used in the current
                           East West Highway projects supporting the improvements to the E60 highway. The proposed PDOs
                           are therefore: (i) to contribute to the gradual reduction of road transport costs and to improve access,
                           ease of transit and road safety along the central part of Georgia's East-West Road Corridor west of
                           Agara; and (ii) to strengthen the capacity of the Roads Department (RD) and relevant government
                           entities to plan and manage the road network and improve road traffic safety.
                         C. Project Description
                         The proposed Fourth East-West Highway Project (EWHIP-4) is designed to finance the upgrading of
                         the East-West Highway from the end of the Agara bypass to Khashuri. It will complement planned
Public Disclosure Copy




                         improvements under the ongoing Third East West Highway Project (TEWHIP) by contributing
                         towards the completion of the East West Highway; simultaneously, it will improve access to the
                         towns of Borjomi and Khashuri. The government has plans to eventually complete the East-West
                         Highway series of Projects through an additional road improvement project which would link
                         Khashuri to the Rikoti Tunnel. The proposed EWHIP-4 has four components as follows:

                         Component A: Improvement and Asset Management of the East-West Highway (Estimated Cost:
                         USD 71 million).

                         (a)     Upgrading of existing 2-lane E60 East-West Highway from Agara bypass to the village of
                         Gomi, including a bypass of this village, to a 4-lane dual carriageway road. The length of the section
                         is approximately 14 km. The construction period is estimated at about 24 months;

                         (b)     Maintenance of the E60 4-lane dual carriageway between Natakhtari and Ruisi. This section
                         is approximately 80 km long plus access ramps. The type of maintenance contract will be decided
                         during project preparation;

                         (c)    Civil works to improve (i) road safety on roads adjacent to or accessing the East-West
                         Highway between Agara and Khashuri, particularly through urban areas; and (ii) access and
                         secondary roads linked to the East-West Highway along this section; and

                         (d)     Construction supervision and quality assurance services.

                         Component B: Institutional strengthening (Estimated Cost: USD 2.5 million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component will build on past and on-going institutional strengthening activities. It is expected
                         to include technical assistance and capacity strengthening activities to further support the RD in
                         improving its operational effectiveness. One possible area may be to review the general capacity
                         building activities of the RD to move away from the present ad hoc approach to a more long term
                         one based on well defined manpower planning and training programs. This review could include: (i)
                         training needs assessment of RD staff; (ii) preparation of staff development plan; and (iii)
                         implementation of prioritized training needs for core RD staff.

                         This component will also propose targeted areas of intervention to reinforce RD’s road management
                         capacity including strengthening its road asset management capabilities. The size of the highway
                         constructed at international motorway standards exceeds one hundred km, and is bound to increase,
                         while the condition of national roads has improved significantly through increased application of
                         more modern road management practices by RD over the last 5-6 years. The project proposes
                         funding of a maintenance contract for portions of the existing motorway sections and will determine
                         during project preparation the most appropriate type of a multi-year contract. From an institutional
                         standpoint, the project proposes to deepen the existing activities under the previous projects on road
                         management (e.g. purchase of a road management system, preparation of Performance Based
                         Contracts in the Kakheti region) by road management oriented studies and training and possibly
                         setting the basis of a modern organization of maintenance for the highways (international corridors)
                         and national roads. Training to the construction and consulting industry, complementing training
                         designed under the secondary and local roads series of projects would also be consistent with the
                         establishment of such a revised organization.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The current Road Safety Strategy and Action Plans were developed under the First East West
                         Highway Project to cover 2010-2013, which means they would end by the start of the proposed
                         Project. Subsequent projects have included targetted support to road safety activities. The proposed
                         project will include road safety interventions in relation to the sections to be constructed (for
                         example road safety interventions for the parts of the E60 that will be replaced by the new highway).
                         In addition, it will support the updating of the overall policy and investigate how to further
                         institutionalize sound road safety practices. In these regard, the Bank team is in discussion with
                         MRDI, the lead agency for road safety, to undertake the following activities under the proposed
                         Project:

                         (a)    An evaluation of the implementation of the Road Safety Action Plan to determine
                         achievements and shortfalls and an assessment of progress in the implementation of the current
                         National Road Safety Strategy;

                         (b)     An update of the Road Safety Strategy (subject to the findings of the assessment of
                         implementation of the current National Road Safety Strategy) and a new Action Plan for 2014-2017
                         including the revision of target indicators.

                         Component C: Preparation of supporting studies and future projects for the development of the East-
                         West Highway (Estimated Cost: USD 4.2 million)

                         Several activities proposed under the civil works component may require additional studies and the
                         RD also needs to prepare technical documents for future investment on its road network. This
                         component provides for the conduct of such studies which could include:

                         (a)     Study to define the scope of the maintenance interventions along some upgraded sections of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the E60 4-lane carriageway e.g. Nakhtari to Ruisi;

                         (b)    Identification and design of road safety improvement actions along the existing road between
                         Agara and Rikoti;

                         (b)     Feasibility and preliminary engineering design of a new tunnel in Rikoti including
                         investigation of options for its financing and operation; and

                         (c)    Other studies including detailed design of the new tunnel, preparation of bid documents and
                         independent review of all technical and safety provisions.

                         Component D: Project management support (Estimated Cost: USD 1.5 million)

                         Support to project management may include:
                         (a)     Implementation support to RD for (i) contract management for the main civil works and
                         consulting contracts under the project; and
                         (b)     Financial audits and project monitoring and evaluation services to be provided by the
                         Transport Research and Rehabilitation Center (TRRC).

                         It is expected that the project financing would be undertaken by the Bank (eighty percent of the cost)
                           and the Government (twenty percent) and that a ten percent provision would be kept for
                           contingencies.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the           safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                           analysis (if known)
                           The project will be implemented in two distinct environments. First, it will support construction of
                           two additional lanes on the East-West Highway between about 110-km point and 115-km point along
                           the existing alignment and, after that point, support construction of a new section of the highway of
                           approximately 9-km long bypassing the Gomi settlement and heading North-East of Khashuri along
                           a new alignment. The highway corridor, including the proposed bypass, does not cut through pristine
                           ecosystems or natural habitats. Sensitive receptors along the proposed new alignment of the bypass,
                           to be carefully considered in environmental management planning, are the Mtkvari (Kura) river and a
                           small fresh water pond. Out of the several considered alternatives, the preferred alignment of the
                           Gomi bypass requires the least amount of land acquisition and entails the least resettlement-related
                           costs.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The proposed Project will be implemented by the Roads Department, an agency that has been
                           implementing several World Bank funded projects since 2004. An environmental review of past
                           road projects in Georgia found that supervision of the environmental performance of works
                           contractors had been a relative weakness of the client, mostly due to lack of human resources and in-
                           house capacity of the RD and insufficient incorporation of EMP provisions in contract. In order to
                           ensure due application of the identified environmental mitigation measures at the construction stage,
                           the works contract will include the costs for environmental management in the bills of quantity, and
                           an environmental specialist was hired as part of the recently started Third East West Highway Project
                           Additional Financing. Environmental compliance of the portfolio has improved and issues are now
                           limited and are remedied diligently once identified.

                           The safeguards supervision capacity of the RD is enhanced by supplementing RD staff team with
Public Disclosure Copy




                           individual social and environmental consultants (funded under existing loans) and by including
                           environmental monitoring functions in the responsibilities of a construction supervision company to
                           be hired for the construction oversight. The social safeguard capacity has been strengthened
                           following the recent hiring of the two resettlement consultants whose work has already demonstrated
                           positive results. Notably, negotiations with affected people and compensation payments for the 5 km
                           long Aradeti section under the TEWHIP AP has been effected in line with the provisions stipulated
                           in the RAP and RPF. Compliance report on the process has been prepared and submitted to the Bank
                           for approval as part of the reporting requirement prior to the commencement of works. The findings
                           of the July social safeguards review mission show that there are no outstanding resettlement issues
                           under current Bank financed projects.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Darejan Kapanadze (ECSEN)
                           Vera Dugandzic (ECSSO)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             The project will finance the upgrading of a large
                           BP 4.01                                             scale transport infrastructure part of which will
                                                                 be along a new alignment. It may therefore have
                                                                 significant and irreversible impacts. It is
                                                                 classified as environmental Category A.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 Environmental risks are moderate, because
                                                                 neither the existing highway corridor nor the
                                                                 selected new alignment for the Gomi bypass cut
                                                                 through pristine ecosystems or natural habitats.
                                                                 The bypass alignment lies in proximity to the
                                                                 river bank and a freshwater pond. Potential
                                                                 impacts on these and other possible sensitive
                                                                 receptors will be closely studied, analyzed,
                                                                 assessed, and their mitigation measures
                                                                 developed through the environmental impact
                                                                 assessment and management planning
                                                                 processes, which are being initiated at present.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   Project implementation is not expected to
                         BP 4.11                                 negatively affect any known physical cultural
                                                                 resources. However, the portion of the highway
                                                                 to be constructed along a new alignment carries
                                                                 the potential of encountering chance finds in the
                                                                 course of earth works, which have happened in
                                                                 several past projects in neighboring locations.
                                                                 The policy is triggered to have adequate
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 arrangements in place for handling such
                                                                 situations.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   Project implementation requires land acquisition
                         4.12                                    the impact of which will be determined subject
                                                                 to the final selection of the preferred alignment.
                                                                 Based on the multi-criteria analysis prepared
                                                                 and the field visits conducted, the potential
                                                                 social impact that construction works may entail
                                                                 in terms of land acquisition and resettlement
                                                                 appears to be acceptably low to moderate. Once
                                                                 the final design is completed and selection of
                                                                 the alignment is finalized, the preparation of the
                                                                 RAP will be initiated. Its completion is expected
                                                                 by December 2012. The multi-criteria analysis
                                                                 of the various alignments along the 14 km of the
                                                                 section will include all relevant social,
                                                                 environmental and economic information and
                                                                                                                                 will compare resettlement issues of the
                                                                                                                                 alternatives, number of hectares of agricultural
                                                                                                                                 land to be acquired and number of houses to be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 demolished (if any). In addition, land
                                                                                                                                 acquisition costs and compensations will be
                                                                                                                                 estimated for each alternative. Resettlement
                                                                                                                                 Policy Framework that was developed in 2009
                                                                                                                                 for the parent FEWHIP was updated in January
                                                                                                                                 2012 to be consistent with the RAP developed
                                                                                                                                 for the TEWHIP Additional Financing. The
                                                                                                                                 additional small scale works proposed under the
                                                                                                                                 project are not expected to require land
                                                                                                                                 acquisition.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Dec-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Terms of reference and methodology of the EIA of the proposed EWHIP-4 will be discussed with
                                      the project stakeholders at an early stage of the EIA process (October 2012). The draft EIA report,
                                      including EMP, will be disclosed in-country in the local language and in English, and will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      posted in the InfoShop (tentative date December 2012 for the draft. The second round of
                                      stakeholder consultations will be held to discuss draft EIA report and to finalize it through
                                      incorporation of the received feedback.
                                      The RAP is prepared by the consulting firm which is in charge of the design of the main civil
                                      works, and will be subject to consultation after disclosure in the infoshop and in country in
                                      December 2012.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Jean-Francois Marteau

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 09-Oct-2012
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Moustafa Baher El-Hefnawy (SM)                                                                                       Date: 10-Oct-2012




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
