                                              INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC3083

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Jun-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-Aug-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Cote d'Ivoire                   Project ID:     P131778
                            Project Name:       Cote d'Ivoire - POPs Pesticides Mgt Project (P131778)
                            Task Team           Douglas J. Graham
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           17-Jun-2014                     Estimated       20-Oct-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      AFTN1                           Lending         Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            GEF Focal Area:     Persistent Organic Pollutants

                            Sector(s):        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Pollution management and environmental health (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:          5.00                Total Bank Financing:           0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                               Financing Gap:                  0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           0.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                            5.00
                              Total                                                                        5.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project’s Project Development Objective (PDO) is the same as the Global Environmental
                           Objective as required for a GEF project. The PDO is to reduce adverse health and environmental
                           impacts in Côte d’Ivoire of POPs pesticides by reducing or eliminating their ongoing use and
                           managing existing stockpiles. The PDO will be achieved by strengthening capacity and the
                           regulatory framework for the management of pesticides, reducing farmers' dependence on the most
                           problematic pesticides, safeguarding contaminated sites, and managing stockpiles consistent with the
                         country’s obligation under the Stockholm Convention. Although the project primarily focuses on
                         POPs pesticides, many activities will have a wider applicability for other classes of pesticides.
                         C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Stockholm Convention is a global treaty with the general objective to protect the environment
                         and human health against the threat of POPs. The Stockholm Convention divides POPs into 3
                         categories: chemicals that must be eliminated, including 14 pesticides and PCBs; chemicals whose
                         use and production need to be reduced (DDT); and unintentionally produced chemicals such as
                         dioxins and furans. The GEF Operational Program on POPs serves as the financing mechanism of the
                         Stockholm Convention and thus this project focuses on POPs targeted under that Convention.

                         The project components and its overall design are based on the recognition that the current level of
                         information on the magnitude, characteristics and geographic distribution of the obsolete pesticides
                         stockpiles is grossly insufficient (as only 5% of the country was inventoried during the NIP exercise),
                         for identifying contaminated sites, and for safeguarding and implementing pesticides disposal. The
                         design therefore entails review and improvement of policy and regulatory frameworks, detailed
                         pesticides inventories, evaluation and selection of management or disposal techniques, and
                         preparation of comprehensive environmental and social safeguard instruments.

                         The proposed project consists of four components:

                         •        Component 1: Capacity Building and Strengthening the Regulatory Framework (GEF US$
                         0.6 million; Counterpart funds US$ 0.2 million): This component aims to strengthen the
                         Government’s capacity to manage, monitor, and control POPs and pesticides. Activities under this
                         component will include a comprehensive review of current hazardous waste management
                         regulations, and the development of needed legislative and regulatory instruments that will address
                         POPs in general, POPs pesticides in particular, and pesticides overall. In addition, technical
                         guidelines on safety procedures for POPs pesticides handling, transport, storage and disposal will be
                         developed, and used for training key stakeholders. Other guidelines to be developed could include
Public Disclosure Copy




                         those on pesticide site investigation, risk assessment and hazardous waste import/export procedures.
                         Further, regional laboratories for testing and quality control of pesticides will be identified and
                         upgraded.

                         •        Component 2: Management of POPs pesticides (GEF US$ 3 million; Counterpart funds US$
                         4.0 million): This component will support sound management of POPs pesticides stockpiles and will
                         consist of: (i) a comprehensive inventory of POPs pesticides. The outcome of this inventory will
                         provide a clear picture on the quantity, extent, and locations of POPs pesticides stockpiles and
                         contaminated sites across the country, especially as the NIP inventory only covered less than 5% of
                         the country; (ii) establishment of a Pesticide Stock Management System (PSMS) database, similar to
                         what was developed under African Stockpiles Program, on registered and banned pesticides; import,
                         distribution, and use to serve as a basis for sound management of pesticides; and (iii) implementation
                         of needed measures to manage obsolete pesticide stocks and associated wastes as well as
                         contaminated sites. It could also support disposal of obsolete pesticides depending on the cost and
                         availability of funds.

                         •       Component 3: Promotion of alternatives to chemical pesticides (GEF US$ 0.75 million;
                         counterpart fund US$ 5.05 million): In order to prevent the buildup of new stockpiles, this
                         component will involve identification of alternatives to use of banned POP pesticides as well as more
                         generally to conventional chemical pesticides, including the adoption of Integrated Pest Management
                           (IPM) techniques and would comprise of: (i) field testing demonstrations of identified alternatives
                           for control of key pests on crops in key geographical areas; (ii) development of curricula to improve
                           farmer field schools and build capacity of selected farmers on alternatives to conventional pes
Public Disclosure Copy




                           ticides; and (iii) communication strategy evolved and implemented to inform farmers and population
                           in general on the misuse of pesticides containers, impact of pesticides on human health and the
                           environment, and alternatives to conventional pesticides and PO Ps.

                           •       Component 4: Project Management (GEF US 0. 65 million; Counterpart funds US 0.75
                           million): This component is designed to provide effective and efficient management support for the
                           implementation of the project; and will be essentially for day-to-day project management activities,
                           including project management and coordination; monitoring and evaluation; and financial
                           management and procurement.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project is of a national scope and will take place throughout the country. Existing pesticides
                           stockpiles will only be identified during implementation but they are believed to occur widely. They
                           will be managed at a much reduced number of longer-term storage sites, but the location of the latter
                           remain to be determined.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The project management unit will be at the Ministry of Environment (MINESUDD) in Abidjan but
                           parts of the project will be executed by the Ministry of Agriculture. The Recipient's capacity is at
                           best moderate. An existing project on the management of parks is being well managed as concerns
                           safeguards and is managed by an entity under MINESUDD, allowing for transfer of experience and
                           lessons learned. World Bank agricultural projects are also ongoing in the country and have involved
                           developing safeguards expertise in areas related to this project. It is likely however that the PMU will
                           need considerable training and support to become sufficiently proficient in managing key safeguard
                           issues.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Douglas J. Graham (AFTN2)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              Management of pesticide stockpiles (transport
                           BP 4.01                                               and storage) involve environmental risks,
                                                                                 although these are far less than the
                                                                                 environmental impacts currently resulting from
                                                                                 unmanaged stockpiles. Overall the project will
                                                                                 significantly reduce environmental risks. An
                                                                                 ESMF will be prepared prior to Appriasal and
                                                                                 EMPs will be prepared during project
                                                                                 implementation, as needed.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          TBD              No project investment are expected to involve
                                                                                 impacts on natural habitats. However, this will
                                                                                 be confirmed before appraisal.
                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No                            No project investment will involve impacts on
                                                                                                                                 forests or will have any relationship to forest
                                                                                                                                 management.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           Yes                           The third component of the project aims to
                                                                                                                                 promote a range of strategies and investments to
                                                                                                                                 reduce usage of chemical pesticides (and
                                                                                                                                 particularly POPs pesticides) by supporting
                                                                                                                                 alternative strategies, such as IPM. The project
                                                                                                                                 will not procure pesticides nor support the use
                                                                                                                                 of any hazardous chemicals. A PMP will be
                                                                                                                                 prepared during project implementation.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No                            No project investment will involve impacts on
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         physical cultural resources.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
                                                                                                                                 area.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            It is possible that small amounts of land might
                                 4.12                                                                                            be needed for some storage facilities but the
                                                                                                                                 project will include a condition that site
                                                                                                                                 selection must not require land acquisition
                                                                                                                                 leading to involuntary resettlement and/or
                                                                                                                                 restrictions of access to resources or livelihoods.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            N/A.

                                 Projects on International        No                                                             N/A.
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             N/A.
                                 7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-May-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      As this is a Category B operation in a Fragile and Conflict-Affected State (FCS), an
                                      Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment Framework (ESSAF) will be included in the
                                      PAD to provide guidance on the implementation of safeguards during project implementation. An
                                      Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared during project
                                      implementation (or by Appraisal if possible), followed by Environmental Management Plans
                                      (EMPs) or Pest Management Plans (PMPs), once project activities and sites are finalized.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Douglas J. Graham

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name:                                                                                                                      Date:
                                 Coordinator:


                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Sector Manager:   Name: Benoit Bosquet (SM)   Date: 15-Aug-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy
