                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA2966
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Sep-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 23-Sep-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Brazil                            Project ID:    P130682
                            Project Name:      BR Espirito Santo Integrated Sustainable Water Management Project (P130682)
                            Task Team          Lizmara Kirchner
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          09-Sep-2013                       Estimated   12-Dec-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     LCSWS                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Sanitation (50%), Forestry (25%), Public administration- Water, sanitation and
                                              flood protection (25%)
                            Theme(s):         Water resource management (35%), Environmental policies and institutions
                                              (30%), Climate change (20%), Natural disaster management (1 5%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     338.00           Total Bank Financing:                225.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                113.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                   225.00
                              Total                                                                                   338.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective (PDO) is to promote sustainable water resources management in
                           the State of Espírito Santo.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                      Page 1 of 10
                         The proposed project will finance four components described below:

                         Component 1: Integrated Water Management and Disaster Risk Management (US$66.02 million, of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         which US$45.92 million IBRD). This component supports activities aimed at (i) improving water
                         resource management, particularly in the areas of planning and monitoring to allow for the
                         integration of policies concerning water resources, water infrastructure and the environment; (ii)
                         improving metropolitan coordination and planning mechanisms for the management of urban water;
                         and (iii) developing adequate planning and monitoring instruments for risk reduction as well as
                         preparedness and response to adverse natural events. Main activities to be financed include: (a) the
                         development of a State Water Resources Management Plan, (b) the development of river basin
                         management plans for three already identified river basins (Sao Mateus, Itaunas and Itapemirim), as
                         well as support to the development or revision of plans for other river basins to be identified, (c)
                         strengthening the State’s hydrological and water quality monitoring network and institutional
                         capacity, (d) strengthening coastline management, (e) mapping of groundwater resources, (f)
                         development of an integrated urban water management plan and an urban drainage master plan for
                         the Greater Vitoria Metropolitan Region (GVMR), which includes support towards the structuring of
                         a metropolitan institutional framework for the management of urban water, as well as the designs and
                         works identified as priority in the drainage master plan, (g) institutional strengthening for disaster
                         risk management, (h) identification and monitoring of disaster risks, and (i) strengthening the State’s
                         Civil Defense System and the State Monitoring and Alert Center.

                         Component 2: Efficient Water Supply Services and Increased Access to Sanitation (US$221.23
                         million of which US$135.25 million IBRD). This component supports investments that aim at
                         increasing the efficiency of water supply services and increasing the coverage of sewage collection
                         and treatment services in the State of Espirito Santo (SES). This component will finance, inter alia,
                         the following activities: (a) development of an Operational Efficiency Strategic Plan for CESAN, (b)
                         sewerage investments that will ensure adequate wastewater collection and treatment in the urban
                         areas of the municipalities of Vila Velha and Cariacica in the GVMR, as well as nine municipalities
Public Disclosure Copy




                         located in the interior of the State in the Caparao Region and the Santa Maria da Vitoria and Jucu
                         river basins, (c) a socio-environmental plan for wastewater collection system connections to
                         households, and (d) strengthen the capacity of the Espirito Santo Regulatory Agency for Water,
                         Sanitation and Road Infrastructure.

                         Component 3: Watershed Management and Restoration of Forest Cover (US$23.63 million of which
                         US$16.71 million IBRD). The quality of surface and coastal waters in the GVMR is strongly
                         affected by conditions in upper watersheds. Untreated effluents are a significant source of
                         contamination, as are some agricultural practices. Poorly sited and designed roads and inappropriate
                         land uses are important sources of sediment. This component will focus on improving the quality of
                         surface and coastal waters through a program of coordinated interventions in selected watersheds.
                         These interventions ultimately will result in a better quality of drinking water in the GVMR, as a
                         large portion of the areas proposed for intervention are the source of water supply to the GVMR. It
                         will do so, inter alia, by supporting the following SES programs: (a) Reflorestar – to induce land use
                         change in the target watersheds using Payments for Environmental Services (PES); and (b)
                         Mangarai River Pilot – which seeks to reduce sediment load originating in the M angarai River sub-
                         watershed through a holistic approach that combines reforestation and improved land management
                         (through the Reflorestar program) with a range of other interventions, such as improvement to roads
                         and sanitation in the watershed.




                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                         Component 4: Project Management and Supervision (US$26.56 million of which U S$26.56 million
                         IBRD). Activities under this component relate to the institutional support and capacity development
                         for project management and implementation, including training, staffing and project development
Public Disclosure Copy




                         activities associated with project execution, including monitoring and evaluation. In line with
                         successful experience from previous operations in the State, this component also finances the support
                         brought to the project implementation units by a consulting firm, who will be responsible for
                         providing specific technical, administrative and financial management support to the Project,
                         including the supervision of sewerage works to be implemented in the GVMR.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Investments in watershed management and conservation will be located in the Santa Maria da Vitoria
                         and Jucu watersheds, as well as in the Caparao region. These areas will host reforestation
                         investments in selected river basins and a pilot demonstration unit aiming at building a sustainable
                         watershed-based water treatment model including the development of payment for environmental
                         services mechanisms.

                         The Project will improve the quality of water bodies by connecting additional users to existing
                         sewerage systems in specific un-served areas of the Greater Vitoria Metropolitan Region (in the Vila
                         Velha and Cariacica municipalities), as well as in six municipalities located in the interior of the
                         State in the Santa Maria da Vitoria and Jucu watersheds (municipalities of Santa Leopoldina, Santa
                         Maria de Jetiba), and in the Caparao region (municipalities of Irupi, Iuna, Ibatiba and Conceicao do
                         Castelo). The Project will also build new small urban sewerage systems in 3 municipalities in the
                         interior of the State: Marechal Floriano (in the Jucu watershed), Dores do Rio Preto and Divino Sao
                         Lourenco (Caparao Region).

                         The project team has done a pre-screening and site-visits and has verified that none of the proposed
                         works are located in environmentally sensitive areas. In fact, the sewerage works planned are
                         expected to have a positive impact to watersheds that suffer from pollution due to the discharge of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         untreated sewage in the local water bodies.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Gunars H. Platais (LCSEN)
                         Soraya Simao Melgaco (LCSSO)

                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes               The physical interventions foreseen in the
                          BP 4.01                                            project refer to (i) the extension of sewage
                                                                             collection and treatment systems in the Greater
                                                                             Vitoria Metropolitan Region (GVMR) in the
                                                                             municipalities of Vila Velha and Cariacica, and
                                                                             (ii) building and expansion of collection and
                                                                             treatment systems in municipalities in the Santa
                                                                             Maria da Vitoria and Jucu watersheds, as well as
                                                                             in the Caparao region.

                                                                             The majority of the systems is relatively small in
                                                                             nature as the targeted municipalities in the Santa



                                                                     Page 3 of 10
                                 Maria da Vitoria and Jucu watersheds, as well as
                                 in the Caparao region are small towns varying
                                 between 2,000 to 13,000 in population. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 works are not expected to have major negative
                                 environmental impact.

                                 Based on the nature of the works, which are
                                 similar to the previous Category B project
                                 (P087711), this project is classified as Category B
                                 requiring an environmental impact assessment
                                 (EIA) in accordance with the World Bank's
                                 Environmental and Social Safeguards Policies.
                                 To comply with Bank policy, the Project prepared
                                 an EIA and an EMF, including the undertaking of
                                 three public consultations from May 20 to 22,
                                 2013 (one in the GVMR, one in the Caparao
                                 Region and one in the Santa Maria and Jucu river
                                 basins). Draft final versions of the EIA, EMF,
                                 resettlement plan and resettlement framework
                                 were made available to the public 10 days before
                                 the first scheduled public consultation. The EIA
                                 also includes monitoring measures such as an
                                 environmental management plan (EMP) which
                                 covers the following thematic programs: (i)
                                 project-specific environmental and social
                                 management plan that includes mitigation
                                 measures for the specific investments as needed,
                                 definition of implementation responsibilities
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 during the construction and operation phases,
                                 monitoring arrangements, and implementation
                                 schedule with adequate budget; and (ii) sludge
                                 management that includes short- and long-term
                                 solutions for the treatment, disposal and reuse of
                                 sludge generated from the wastewater treatment
                                 plants. Furthermore, included in the provisions of
                                 the EMP is the adoption of an Environmental
                                 Construction Manual during the construction of
                                 the planned works. This manual is included in the
                                 bidding process for all works, and the adoption of
                                 the adequate environmental practices established
                                 in the manual is deemed a contractual obligation
                                 to be fulfilled by the contracted companies.
                                 Furthermore, the EMP also includes good
                                 practices and procedures for treatment of
                                 Quilombola communities in accordance to
                                 national and local legislation.




                         Page 4 of 10
                                                                     Specific environmental assessments for
                                                                     individual investments will be carried out as
                                                                     required by local law. Issues that arise in
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     conjunction with the implementation of works
                                                                     will be addressed through the incorporation of
                                                                     environmental guidelines through the
                                                                     environmental construction manual for
                                                                     contractors that is part of bidding and contractual
                                                                     documents. These guidelines will include rules on
                                                                     the disposal of construction waste in pre-
                                                                     approved landfills, communication with local
                                                                     communities, pedestrian safety, dust and noise
                                                                     abatement measures, etc., and have been
                                                                     reviewed by Bank environmental specialists.

                                                                     Expansion of sewerage services is expected to
                                                                     lead to an increase in sewage collection with
                                                                     health benefits both for local residents along
                                                                     polluted water ways and for users of Espirito
                                                                     Santo’s beaches more generally.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes             Preliminary assessments of the wastewater
                                                                     collection and treatment works as well as other
                                                                     planned interventions indicate that natural
                                                                     habitats will not be adversely affected by the
                                                                     project. Sewerage interventions will not be
                                                                     conducted in protected areas. Certain sections of
                                                                     the systems fall in Areas of Permanent Protection
                                                                     (APP); the impacts on these areas will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     minimized by the adoption of guidelines as
                                                                     specified in the Environmental Construction
                                                                     Manual, which forms part of the EMP. Because
                                                                     they are considered to be of public utility, the
                                                                     interventions are subject to licensing by IEMA.
                                                                     Although specific areas of reforestation have not
                                                                     yet been identified, they may include protected
                                                                     areas and are expected to have a positive impact
                                                                     on natural habitats. As established in the EMP,
                                                                     only native species of the Atlantic forest will be
                                                                     used in the reforestation interventions. Some
                                                                     specific interventions may also take place in
                                                                     APPs and will aim at recuperating and restoring
                                                                     them.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes             The Project will support management of forests,
                                                                     as it will include reforestation of approximately
                                                                     3,850 hectares of forest in selected river basins
                                                                     and a pilot demonstration unit linking the
                                                                     recovery of forests and the quality of water


                                                             Page 5 of 10
                                                                         sources. Interventions are expected to have a
                                                                         positive impact, contributing to 12 percent of the
                                                                         goal set by the State-wide reforestation Program
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         for 2014. As established in the EMP, only native
                                                                         species of the Atlantic forest will be used in the
                                                                         reforestation interventions.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes             Since one of the project components will deal
                                                                         with the generation of opportunities and revenue
                                                                         for rural producers (Component 3), it was noted
                                                                         during the preparation of the EIA that forest
                                                                         cover restoration activities will use low toxicity
                                                                         herbicides and formicides for pest management
                                                                         (mostly ants) during the seedling planting phase
                                                                         of the program. An Integrated Pest Management
                                                                         Plan was prepared and is an integral part of the
                                                                         EMP. The assessment also indicates that the
                                                                         Project is unlikely to require the purchase,
                                                                         application or storage of pesticides and will not
                                                                         lead to an increased use of pesticides. No
                                                                         pesticides for rodent control will be necessary
                                                                         under flood control, drainage activities or
                                                                         reforestation initiatives.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes             Brazil has a well-developed legislative and
                         BP 4.11                                         normative framework for management of
                                                                         physical cultural property. Although no impact on
                                                                         Physical Cultural Resources (PCR) is expected,
                                                                         "chance find procedures" for PCR are included in
                                                                         the EMP to safeguard against potentially
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         impacting physical cultural property during
                                                                         implementation.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No              This safeguard does not apply since indigenous
                                                                         peoples, as defined by the four required
                                                                         characteristics in OP4.10, are not present in the
                                                                         project’s area of influence. According to FUNAI
                                                                         (www.funai.gov.br), the indigenous territories in
                                                                         the State (Tupiniquim, Comboios, Caieiras Velha,
                                                                         Caieras Velha II, Pau Brasil) are outside of the
                                                                         project’s area of influence. No project activities
                                                                         will take place on lands with outstanding land
                                                                         claims or unclear land tenure or titles.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes             As part of the social assessment, the Bank
                         4.12                                            reviewed the main civil works identified for
                                                                         implementation under the project and found that
                                                                         no involuntary resettlement of households will
                                                                         take place. However, land acquisition and
                                                                         easements will be required for wastewater



                                                                 Page 6 of 10
                                                                                treatment and collection works, as well as for
                                                                                potential drainage works. As such, a resettlement
                                                                                plan and a resettlement framework have been
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                prepared, respectively, for the works already
                                                                                identified, and to guide any future resettlement in
                                                                                the case it becomes necessary.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No                The Project will not support the construction of
                                                                                new, or rehabilitation of dams, nor will support
                                                                                other investments which rely on the operation of
                                                                                existing dams.
                            Projects on International        No                   Water bodies affected by the Project are located
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                entirely within Brazilian territory.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                   Areas of project intervention are within
                            7.60                                                Brazilian territory and are not in dispute.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                No potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts have been identified.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                                The impacts considered most relevant are those related to (i) sewerage systems (Component 2),
                              and (ii) the increase of forest cover and recovery of Areas of Permanent Protection (APP)
                              (Component 3). In both cases, activities are expected to generate positive impacts and outweigh
                              the negative impacts associated with the implementation phase of works (impacts are localized,
Public Disclosure Copy




                              small scale, temporary and are controlled and mitigated with the help of the Environmental
                              Management Plan, EMP) and during operation of the systems.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                                There are no relevant project alternatives considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                                The Borrower's overall capacity to plan and implement the proposed investments is demonstrated
                              by its performance over the last 13 years of project implementation under loans CPL-37670,
                              IBRD-72480 and IBRD-76550. Project implementation arrangements will build on the lessons
                              learned from past operations in water and sanitation in the Espirito Santo, which have proven to be
                              robust and effective at managing environmental and social safeguards.

                             CESAN, the state water utility, who will be responsible for the implementation of most of the
                             sewerage works, has solid experience on the implementation of projects that adhere to Bank
                             safeguard requirements. Previous Bank operations have helped strengthen CESAN’s
                             environmental management, and the company has adopted the Environmental Construction
                             Manual (developed for previous Bank operations) as a standard operating procedure in all of its
                             construction contracts. CESAN has also partnered with the State’s Environmental and Agricultural


                                                                        Page 7 of 10
                           Institutes (IEMA and INCAPER) to research and develop adequate uses for the sludge generated
                           from its wastewater treatment plants in agriculture, and is already implementing some pilot
                           projects.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           CESAN also has significant experience with land acquisition and resettlement, as the Company’s
                           investments, particularly in small towns, often require acquisition of small parcels of land for the
                           construction of pumping station and wastewater treatment plants.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Stakeholders include: (i) State entities - State Secretariat of Sanitation, Housing and Urban
                           Development (SEDURB), the State Secretariat of Special Projects and Metropolitan Management
                           (SEPAM), the State Secretariat of the Environment and Water Resources (SEAMA), the State
                           Water Utility (CESAN), the State Secretariat for Agriculture (SEAG), the State Rural Technical
                           Assistance, Research and Extension Institute (INCAPER) as well as the State Agriculture and
                           Forestry Defense Institute (IDAF); (ii) CESAN's customers and staff; (iii) watershed committees;
                           (iv) rural farmers; and (v) civil society.

                           Three public consultations were planned locally once the draft final environmental and social
                           safeguards documents (EIA, EMF, resettlement plan and resettlement framework) were available:
                           one in the Greater Vitoria Metropolitan Region and two in the interior of the State (one in the
                           Santa Maria and Jucu river basins region and one in the Caparao Region). These consultations
                           were documented and comments/inputs received during this process were incorporated, to the
                           extent possible, in the final version of the Environmental Assessment. These consultations were
                           held on May 20 to 22, 2013.

                           Disclosure of safeguards documents was done on SEAMA's, CESAN's and the benefiting
                           municipalities' websites and hard copies of the documents were also made available in their
                           respective offices.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         05-Aug-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      12-Aug-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Brazil                                                              10-May-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         05-Aug-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      12-Aug-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Brazil                                                              10-May-2013
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan


                                                                     Page 8 of 10
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      05-Aug-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   12-Aug-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Brazil                                                           10-May-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
Public Disclosure Copy




                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?


                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                             Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             and constraints been carried out?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the project design include satisfactory measures to          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             overcome these constraints?
                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Lizmara Kirchner
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:         Name: Greg J. Browder (SM)                         Date: 23-Sep-2013




                                                                       Page 10 of 10
