                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA4903
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Jun-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 05-Dec-2012, 29-Jan-2013, 18-Jun-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Azerbaijan                        Project ID:    P122812
                            Project Name:      AGRICULTURAL COMPETITIVENESS IMPROVEMENT PROJECT
                                               (P122812)
                            Task Team          Rufiz Vakhid Chirag-Zade
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       24-Apr-2013                          Estimated   21-Oct-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: ECSAR                                 Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (60%), General agriculture, fishing and
                                              forestry sector (20%), Agricultural extension and resear ch (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural markets (30%), Rural non-farm income generation (30%), Other social
                                              protection and risk management (20%), Rural services and i nfrastructure (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      53.25           Total Bank Financing:                  34.50
                            Total Cofinancing:                       Financing Gap:                          0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   18.75
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                      34.50
                              Total                                                                                      53.25
                            Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to facilitate the access of agricultural producers to markets by
                           strengthening sanitary and phytosantiary services, enhancing selected value chains and providing
                           financial services to agribusiness enterprises.

                                                                       Page 1 of 8
                          3. Project Description
                         The project components and activities are:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component A: Support for Sanitary and Phytosanitary Services.
                         This component aims to strengthen the efficiency and effectiveness of sanitary and phytosanitary
                         services in order to reduce existing obstacles to agricultural and food trade. Activities under
                         Component A will be grouped into three subcomponents: (i) Food Safety Capacity Building; (ii)
                         Upgrading plant health and phytosanitary system (iii) Animal health and veterinary services. The
                         project would support: (i) comprehensive capacity building and training program on food safety
                         through provision of TA, training and equipment; (ii) strengthening pest diagnostic capacity and
                         enhancing pest risk analysis of SPCS through provision of equipment for laboratories, targeted TA
                         and training; (iii) privatization of the State Veterinary Service (SVS) field staff; and (iv) further
                         strengthening the disease surveillance and preparedness functions of the SVS.

                         Component B: Agribusiness value chain development
                         The component aims to increase the competitiveness of selected supply chains by raising
                         productivity and quality of output and by facilitating commercial relationships between stakeholders
                         along each supply chain. The component will help agro enterprises, farmers and others to actively
                         engage in the development of commodity value chains by partially financing demand-driven
                         investment proposals. The component would also support activities for improving seed varieties and
                         quality of seeds entering the market. The activities will be structured into two sub-components: (i)
                         Investment and advisory support for agribusiness value chain development, and (ii) Seed sector
                         development.

                         Component C: Financial Services to Agribusinesses
                         The objective is to enhance access to financial services for agribusinesses operating in Azerbaijan’s
                         agrifood sector, in particular towards enhanced competitiveness of the agribusiness sector,
                         achievement of food product quality and safety standards, new products development, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         establishment of market linkages. Specifically, the component will include the following activities:
                         (i) credit line through commercial banks and leasing institutions; (ii) capacity building of
                         Participating Financial Institutions (PFIs); and (iii) feasibility study on agricultural insurance and
                         capcaity building of the local insurance sector.

                         Component D: Project Management
                         This component will finance the administrative and operational project implementation and
                         management costs (FM, procurement, safeguards compliance, M&E), including overheads of Project
                         Management Unit (PMU) professional staff as well as support staff.

                         The Project is managed by the Project Management Unit (PMU) established within the State Agency
                         for Agricultural Credits (SAAC) under the first phase of Agricultural Development and Credit
                         Program APL (ADCP), which continued under ADCP 2. The SAAC is the Ministry of Agriculture’s
                         agency for overseeing international agricultural development projects. The PMU functions include
                         among others, implementation of project activities, financial management, procurement, project
                         monitoring and evaluation.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project coverage is country-wide. The activities under Component A and B would cover, inter


                                                                       Page 2 of 8
                         alia, the network of plant, seed quality and veterinary laboratories, including teaching laboratory in
                         Ganja Agricultural University. The demand-driven activities to be supported under Component B
                         and C will be implemented across the rural areas of Azerbaijan.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Daniel P. Owen (ECSSO)
                         Gulana Enar Hajiyeva (ECSEN)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes                Component A and B will support upgrade of
                         BP 4.01                                               plant and veterinary and seed quality laboratories,
                                                                               which environmental compliance might require
                                                                               strengthening. TA to be delivered under
                                                                               Components B and C may have environmental
                                                                               implications (for example, lead to increased use
                                                                               of pesticides). Component B and C will support
                                                                               diverse agricultural activities to be financed by
                                                                               the project grant program and the credit line , and
                                                                               might cause direct environmental impacts of
                                                                               various type and significance. The project is
                                                                               classified as FI because Component C (provision
                                                                               of agricultural credits through designated banks)
                                                                               is the largest component. The environmental
                                                                               issues to be dealt with, will include collection and
                                                                               disposal of animal waste and waste water,
                                                                               construction related issues (in case of small scale
                                                                               construction of rural facilities), impacts related to
                                                                               agro-processing and minor construction, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               impacts related to environmental management
                                                                               practices in laboratories to be upgraded under the
                                                                               project. These impacts are anticipated to be
                                                                               temporary, reversible and can be avoided,
                                                                               minimized or duly mitigated if managed
                                                                               appropriately. In order to address the potential
                                                                               environmental impacts and identify relevant
                                                                               mitigation measures, an Environmental
                                                                               Management Plan (EMP) has been prepared and
                                                                               duly disclosed. The EMP envisages site-specific
                                                                               EMPs to be prepared by grant and credit
                                                                               applicants for sub-projects, and, thus, describes
                                                                               the procedures and institutional responsibilities
                                                                               and arrangements to be followed for the
                                                                               preparation, review and approval of those specific
                                                                               EMPs.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No




                                                                       Page 3 of 8
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No              No activities which may potentially impact
                                                                         forests will be allowed under the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes             This policy is triggered because, while not
                                                                         financing directly the purchase of pesticides, the
                                                                         project may lead to the increased use of
                                                                         pesticides. This will be mitigated through the
                                                                         capacity building (trainings), extension services,
                                                                         and specific measures provided in the framework
                                                                         document and site-specific EMPs to be prepared
                                                                         in accordance with the project 'umbrella' EMP , to
                                                                         ensure that sustainable agricultural practices are
                                                                         introduced by credit beneficiaries.
                                                                         The Pest Management Plan and
                                                                         Recommendations for the Development of the
                                                                         National IPM Program have been prepared, with
                                                                         a dual purpose to (i) indicate how safe pesticide
                                                                         handling and integrated pest management
                                                                         practices will be promoted under the project, and
                                                                         (ii) suggest strategic approach for promoting
                                                                         integrated pest management in the country. The
                                                                         project related recommendations of the PMP are
                                                                         duly incorporated into the project EMP and the
                                                                         project design.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No             The project activities will not require any
                         4.12                                            resettlement and will not be implemented in the
                                                                         locations which will require change of land use or
                                                                         ownership
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

                         Projects on International         Yes             The project support for development of value
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                            chain would include inter alia investments for the
                                                                         improvement of on-farm infrastructure, such as
                                                                         small irrigation systems. Such activities, if any,
                                                                         are likely to be developed inter alia on the
                                                                         transboundary rivers Samur, Kura and Araz,
                                                                         flowing into the Caspian Sea and considered
                                                                         international waterways for the purposes for the
                                                                         Word Bank Operational Policy on Projects on
                                                                         International Waters (OP 7.50). The proposed
                                                                         project, however, is not expected to have any
                                                                         significant impacts on the quantity or quality of
                                                                         water flowing through these rivers or into the



                                                                 Page 4 of 8
                                                                                 Caspian Sea. It is expected that sub-projects
                                                                                 would not produce a noticeable change for the
                                                                                 abstraction volumes of the systems and would not
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 have an adverse change to the quality or quantity
                                                                                 of river flows as the works would not change the
                                                                                 nature of the original systems. The irrigation
                                                                                 infrastructure improvements will not result in
                                                                                 significant increases in either withdrawals from
                                                                                 or discharges to the international waterways.
                                                                                 Therefore, the project is not expected to have any
                                                                                 adverse effects on the water flows or the rights of
                                                                                 the other riparian states on the international
                                                                                 waterways, thus on November 19, 2012 the RVP
                                                                                 approved the exception to the notification
                                                                                 requirement pursuant to paragraph 7(a) of OP
                                                                                 7.50 for this safeguard policy.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                Veterinary, plant health and seed quality laboratories to be upgraded under Component A and B
                              (renovation of lab facilities and provision of equipment) might not be environmentally compliant
                              with good international practices, e.g. in terms of proper management of laboratory wastes. The
                              upgrade and renovation will ensure the laboratories are provided with necessary infrastructure and
Public Disclosure Copy




                              equipment to improve environmental management practices. Also, training sessions will be
                              delivered to the lab staff under the project to improve lab environmental management capacity and
                              introduce international best practices. Components B and C will provide TA which might
                              indirectly cause the increased use of pesticides and, thus, this potential impact has to be adequately
                              addressed by raising awareness among farmers via various means and inter-media, including
                              extension services currently existing in most of the rayons of Azerbaijan. Investment support
                              (grants) will be provided under Component B for sub-projects focused on improvements in
                              infrastructure and technology, modernization of post-harvest technologies, food safety upgrading
                              and skills development. The largest component of the project is Component C which will provide
                              agricultural credits via authorized agent banks (PFIs). The activities eligible for financing under
                              Components B and C are not pre-determined and will be identified on market-led and demand-
                              driven basis, however, the analysis of the activities applied for during the ADCP 1 and ADCP 2
                              allowed to identify several most typical potential sub-project types, which might be associated
                              with such environmental issues as the need to handle animal and construction wastes and waste
                              water, increased use of pesticides (though not financed by the project), impacts caused by various
                              agro-processing activities (e.g. canning industry, dairy factories, fruit and pickle processing) and
                              by establishing/supporting small-scale agricultural infrastructure (minor rehabilitation of existing
                              small irrigation facilities, storage or cooling facilities, grading and sorting equipment), etc. No
                              large scale and/or irreversible impacts are anticipated to result from the sub-projects’
                              implementation as all the activities potentially having high risks will be screened out. While not


                                                                         Page 5 of 8
                           being highly risky separately, the similar or related sub-projects, if implemented in the same area,
                           may cause cumulative impacts such as water pollution, overgrazing and pasture depletion etc. In
                           order to prevent the risk of adverse cumulative environmental effects, a brief environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                           analysis will be made of the portfolio every year by the PMU environmental specialist, and
                           specific recommendations will be provided to PFIs and the Value Chain Development Secretariat
                           (VCDS) based on the results of the analysis
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             Overall, the long-term impacts of the project activities are expected to be positive as the project
                           will support improved agricultural practices and will build the awareness of environmentally
                           sustainable agriculture among farmers.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             The borrower has updated and revised the ADCP 2 EMP to accommodate environmental aspects
                           of the ACIP. The revised EMP indicates potential impacts associated with TA to be delivered
                           under the project, which may lead to increased use of pesticides, and those of sub-projects which
                           have high probability to be applied for under Components B and C. For the purposes of
                           Components B and C the EMP serves as a framework document identifying most likely activities
                           and associated impacts, proposing mitigation measures, specifying the environmental management
                           procedures for screening, evaluation, approval and implementation of sub-projects to be financed
                           under the grant scheme and credit line, and indicating institutional responsibilities for enforcing
                           environmental compliance. The EMP also considers cumulative impacts of both multiple activities
                           under a single sub-project and of similar sub-projects implemented in the same area. The
                           implementation mechanism ensuring project’s compliance with the EMP involves the PMU hiring
Public Disclosure Copy




                           a full time Environmental Specialist with the responsibilities to supervise the environmental
                           performance of the project and provide training and advice to relevant PIU staff, PFIs, VCDS and
                           potential grant and credit applicants. Borrower's capacity has been built and considerably
                           improved during the two previous ADCPs. The series of training sessions have been delivered to
                           PMU, participating PFIs, credit applicants and other stakeholders. The environmental management
                           capacity of the project will be further improved by continuing this good practice under the ACIP,
                           with special focus on newly authorized PFIs. The Recommendations for the Development of the
                           National IPM Program and Pest Management Plan have been prepared. The IPM
                           Recommendations have been submitted to the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) for further
                           consideration. Recommendations of the PMP have been incorporated into the project design. In
                           particular, the project would support an extensive training program based on needs of research
                           institutes and farmers and support biological control program and pesticide residue management of
                           Plant Protection Institute.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The key stakeholders of the project are the Ministries of Agriculture, Environment, Economic
                           Development, farmers and local entrepreneurs involved in agri-business as well as local executive,
                           agricultural and environmental authorities. The updated EMP has been disclosed and discussed at
                           the public consultation meetings which took place in several locations of the project area during
                           February 2012, with records of the meetings attached to the EMP as an annex. The key


                                                                      Page 6 of 8
                           stakeholders participated in the consultation meetings, and their feedback was duly addressed. The
                           IPM Recommendations and PMP were broadly discussed with the stakeholders in March-April
                           2012. Both EMP and PMP have been placed on MoA web-site for public access.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      19-Nov-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   20-Nov-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Azerbaijan                                                       26-Jan-2012
                           Comments: The dusclosure took place in January-February 2012. The revised final EMP was re-
                                         disclosed in November 2012
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      30-Aug-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   31-Aug-2012
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Azerbaijan                                                       26-Jan-2012
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a              Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways


                                                                     Page 7 of 8
                             Have the other riparians been notified of the project?           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                             Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                             Has the RVP approved such an exception?                          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Task Team Leader: Rufiz Vakhid Chirag-Zade
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                             Date: 18-Jun-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Dina Umali-Deininger (SM)                       Date: 18-Jun-2013




                                                                       Page 8 of 8
