                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC663

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Jul-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Burkina Faso                    Project ID:     P129688
                            Project Name:     Third Phase Community Based Rural Development Project (P129688)
                            Task Team         Emmanuel Y. Nikiema
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         17-Sep-2012                     Estimated       18-Dec-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    AFTA1                           Lending         Adaptable Program Loan
                                                                              Instrument:
                            Sector:           General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%), Other social services
                                              (10%), Water supply (10%), Public administration- Agri culture, fishing and
                                              forestry (20%), Adult literacy/non-formal education (10%)
                            Theme:            Rural services and infrastructure (30%), Municipal governance and institution
                                              building (20%), Participation and civic engagement (19 %), Land administration
                                              and management (16%), Decentralization (15%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                         8.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                               70.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                          7.41
                              Local Communities                                                          8.00
                              Total                                                                     93.41
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The three-phase APL Program’s PDOs is, as stated in 2000, to achieve “Building on the
                           accomplishments of Phase 1 and Phase 2, the PDO of Phase 3 is to put the empowerment of rural
                           communities in leading their own local development process on a sustainable institutional and
                           financial footing?.
                         As stated in the Phase 1 and Phase 2 Appraisal Documents, the broad objective of Phase 3 is to
                         consolidate the accomplishments of the first and second phases and establish a sustainable basis for
                         decentralized rural development. This sustainable basis will be obtained by (i) pursuing and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         completing the work on Institutional development and capacity building; (ii) supporting the
                         implementation of rural land tenure reform and (iii) funding social, economic and environmental
                         investments at the commune level.

                         Triggers from Phase 2 to Phase 3:
                         a)      Trigger: Modalities have been adopted by Government that permit World Bank financing for
                         Rural Communes’ investment activities to be integrated into the Permanent Fund for Territorial
                         Collectivity Development (Fond Permanent pour le Développement des Collectivités Territoriales).
                         Result: at mid-term review of Phase 2, it was considered that it was too premature to rely on this
                         newly created Permanent Fund. This trigger was therefore removed and it was suggested that it
                         would become a performance indicator for Phase 3.
                         b)      Trigger: Monitoring and evaluation of the program’s activities are sufficiently integrated into
                         the Government systems and structures. Result: Phase Two of CBRD is supporting Regional
                         Directorates of Economic Planning (DREPs) and providing them with all data produced or collected.
                         DREPs are then regularly using the data for carrying out their different activities. DREP runs also the
                         permanent Technical Secretariat for regional and provincial coordination.
                         c)      Trigger: Each Rural Commune has a Secrétaire Général (General Secretary) in place. Local
                         elections are foreseen to be held by the end of 2012 in order to renew the mandate of Municipal
                         Councils; if conducted before the close of Phase II, they should be considered “free and fair? by
                         independent election observers. Result: General Secretaries are in place and the election date was set
                         for November 2012
                         C. Project Description
                         1. Description
                         As mentioned above, the broad objective of Phase 3 was to consolidate the accomplishments of the
                         first and second phases and establish a sustainable basis for decentralized rural development. This
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will be achieved by (i) pursuing and completing the work on Institutional development and capacity
                         building initiated in Phase 1 and 2; (ii) supporting the implementation of rural land tenure reform law
                         which was promulgated under Phase 2; (iii) pursuing the funding social, economic and
                         environmental investments at the commune level to reach a sustainable level.

                         The proposed project will have the four following components:
                         (i)    institutional development and capacity building for decentralized Rural development;
                         (ii)   support to the implementation of rural land tenure reform;
                         (iii)  funding of social, economic and environmental investments at the commune level and
                         (iv)   project management and coordination and monitoring and evaluation.
                         Component 1: Strengthening Capacity for Decentralized Rural Development (US$ 16 M)

                         Sub-Component 1A. Capacity Building for Rural Communes and Institutional Development
                         The proposed project will focus on sustainability by continuing to provide support to Rural
                         Communes staff and services in order to enhance/complete their knowledge in the areas of
                         organization, planning, management (economic, financial, technical, procurement), governance and
                         monitoring and evaluation. For new council members that will be elected in Nov. 2012, there will be
                         a greater capacity building effort.

                         Sub-Component 1B. Capacity Building for local stakeholders
                         Rural Communes’ local partners (private contractors, NGOs, decentralized government institutions,
                         etc.) will be taught how Rural Commune institutions function and to interact and deal with them in
                         an efficient way.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •        Sub-Component 1C. Capacity Building for Regional Councils
                         Regional Councils (RC) play an important role in representing the interests of rural communes at the
                         regional level where central government agencies are most represented and have decision powers. It
                         is therefore important to provide capacity building for the Regional Councils to help them learn how
                         to work with government institutions at regional level. In addition, at the end of the proposed project,
                         corresponding to the end of the APL program, it is foreseen that Regional Development Agencies
                         (ARD/RDA), working under the umbrella of the RC will take over the role of the Project Regional
                         Coordination Units. The project will therefore assist the Regional Councils set up and prepare the
                         RDAs for their future role.

                         Component 2: Supporting the Implementation of rural land tenure law (US$3M)
                         Support will be provided to rural villages and communes for the effective implementation on the
                         ground of the rural land tenure law. For that purpose, the land tenure law agency will be assisted for
                         the definition of implementation procedures. This will also imply the installation of the institutions
                         that in charge of implementation at village, commune and regional level, their equipment, the
                         training of their staff, information-communications campaigns and the financing of few demonst
                         ration operations (surveys, production of maps, production of land registry, etc.). The progress of this
                         component will be monitored using an M&E system that will be specially designed for that end.

                         Component 3: funding local development investments at the rural commune level (US$65 M).

                         In order, for the communities, to build a sustainable basis for decentralized rural development which
                         will pave the road for a true socioeconomic takeoff. This component would support local socio
                         economic and environmental investments to complete the construction of basic and vital
                         infrastructure that is indispensible for the social wellbeing of the communities (social investments)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and for their economic development (economic investments) and to work towards stopping and
                         reversing the natural resource degradation process (environmental and NRM investments).

                         The project funds to be allocated to Component 3 in Phase 3 were initially supposed to be channeled
                         through the Permanent Fund. However, this fund is not yet operating efficiently and is hampered by
                         heavy approval and disbursement procedures. During the first year of the proposed project, the
                         modalities for the transfer of the funds allocated analyzed and if and when all conditions of
                         efficiency are met, funds may be channeled through the Permanent Fund.

                         Component 4: Project Coordination, Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$8M)

                         This component’s objective is for the project components and activities to be effectively carried out,
                         coordinated, monitored and regularly evaluated. It will support (i) the coordination and efficient
                         administrative, technical and financial management of the project and (ii) the monitoring and
                         evaluation of the performance, results, and impacts of the project and overall program. The National
                         Coordination Unit (NCU) that was established for Phase One and Two for the overall management
                         and coordination of the Project will ensure the quality of technical and fiduciary aspects
                         (procurement, safeguards, financial management) of all project activities. The NCU will also liaise
                         closely with key government ministries. At regional level, the NCU will be represented by 13
                         Regional Coordinating Units (RCUs). In six regions, the RCUs will also coordinate the
                           implementation of the PACT project. Support will also be provided to the National Forum (Cadre
                           National de Coordination et de Concertation du Développement Rural Décentralisé) to guide overall
                           programmatic support to local development. Coordination mechanisms between projects and donors
Public Disclosure Copy




                           involved in local development and NRM will be reinforced for optimal synergies. The concerned
                           World Bank projects are: CBRD, PACT, PAFASP, PAPSA and WAPP.

                           Project monitoring and evaluation will include: the monitoring and evaluation of the performance,
                           results, and impacts of the project and overall program (i) real-time monitoring of physical and
                           financial execution of the Project; (ii) tracking project progress with respect to the agreed results-
                           oriented indicators; (iii) technical and financial audits of the Project; (iv) monitoring and evaluating
                           the economic, environmental and institutional impact of the Program and the Project at the national
                           level, and (v) drawing lessons from the various national experiments in decentralized and
                           participatory rural development.

                           GEF Funding.

                           GEF funding ($8M) will be fully blended. The amount will be utilized against the activities falling
                           under Biodiversity ($1.5M), Climate Change ($1.5M), Land Degradation ($3M) and Sustainable
                           Forest Management ($2M). Activities to be funded under the GEF can fall under any of the four
                           project components as long as they fall under the above four windows. The largest amount (65%)
                           will be directed towards funding local development investments at the rural commune level
                           (Component 3). Under this latter, component activities must be included in the Communal
                           Development Plans prepared by the rural communes and meet the criteria set under the four GEF
                           windows. The GEF Focal Point has identified few potential activities but the final decision will rest
                           with the communes.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the               safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTCS)
                           Maman-Sani Issa (AFTN2)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes              Under component 3 and GEF funding, the
                           BP 4.01                                                project will support social and economic
                                                                                  development investments as well as natural
                                                                                  resources management activities; Regarding
                                                                                  both their nature and size they are likely to
                                                                                  induce some small-scale and manageable
                                                                                  negative impacts. The existing ESMF will then
                                                                 be updated, consulted upon and disclosed before
                                                                 appraisal.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes   The project will support natural resources
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 management investment such as rolling back
                                                                 land degradation and improving sustainable
                                                                 forest management actions and skills. Though
                                                                 expected outcomes are likely to be positive, the
                                                                 ESMF will emphasis on that and provide some
                                                                 guidance to maximize the benefits
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes   The project will not support forest exploitation
                                                                 but reforestation and sustainable management of
                                                                 forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The project will not support agricultural
                                                                 production activities, and thus pest management
                                                                 activities will not be a part of the project.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    The project is not expected to affect historical
                         BP 4.11                                 sites or suspected/known heritage areas. But, to
                                                                 prevent any inconvenience the chance find
                                                                 procedure will be proposed in the ESMF and
                                                                 included in activities cycle during
                                                                 implementation where there is a need.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No    There are no Indigenous Peoples living in the
                                                                 project area.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   Similarly with the ongoing project, the existing
                         4.12                                    RPF will be updated and will built on lessons
                                                                 learned from its implementation during the
                                                                 previous phase, as well to reflect, if any,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 changes that took place overtime in the
                                                                 institutional arrangements for implementing and
                                                                 monitoring the instrument. Consistent with the
                                                                 requirements for OP 4.12, the updated RPF and
                                                                 eventually a Process framework will be used as
                                                                 a guide to conduct specific Resettlement Action
                                                                 Plans (RAPs) as needed, as they relate to land
                                                                 acquisition and loss of economic activities
                                                                 issues, as well as compensation measures to
                                                                 minimize negative impacts on Project Affected
                                                                 People (PAPs). Those report should be
                                                                 prepared, disclose within the country prior to
                                                                 the appraisal
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No    The project does not involve existing dams nor
                                                                 will finance new small dams or dykes.
                         Projects on International         No    The project is not intended to support irrigation
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                    scheme or surface water uptake and does not
                                                                                                                                 affect or draw water resources from
                                                                                                                                 international waters.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             N/A.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 17-Jul-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      ESMF Environmental and Social Management Framework: 06/09/2012
                                      RPF Resettlement Policy Framework: 06/09/2012
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Emmanuel Y. Nikiema

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                                          Date: 23-Jul-2012
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Martien Van Nieuwkoop (SM)                                                                                           Date: 13-Sep-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
