                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA1347
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Jun-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Jun-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Cote d'Ivoire                     Project ID:    P119308
                            Project Name:     Agriculture Sector Support Project (P119308)
                            Task Team         El Hadj Adama Toure
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         22-May-2013                       Estimated   08-Aug-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    AFTA1                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (25%), Agricultural extension and
                                              research (20%), Crops (20%), Agro-industry, marketing, an d trade (20%),
                                              Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (15%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Export development and
                                              competitiveness (25%), Rural policies and institutions (25%), Other social
                                              protection and risk management (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     150.80           Total Bank Financing:               50.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                       Financing Gap:                      85.05
                              Financing Source                                                                      Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                      15.75
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                             50.00
                              Total                                                                                   65.75
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective (PDO) is to improve smallholder access to technologies and
                           markets, and enhance governance of selected value chains supported under the project.

                                                                      Page 1 of 8
                          3. Project Description
                         Component 1: Promotion of public-private partnership for sustainable cocoa development in the
                         South-West: The Project will support, on a cost-sharing basis, Coffee and Cocoa Council (CCC) to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         kick-off the Coffee/Cocoa Public-Private Partnership Platform (PPPP) and implement the 2QC
                         program which aims to tackle in a coordinated way cocoa productivity issues and improve cocoa
                         farmers livelihood. Under this component, the Project aims at achieving the replanting with
                         improved planting materials of about 20,000 hecatres of the cocoa orchards aged 25 years of more,
                         train about 13,000 cocoa farmers on good agricultural practices . Under this component, the project
                         will support cooperatives' subprojects in the areas of water, education, health, electricity, etc.) and
                         will support rehabilitation or maintenance of about 960km of feeder roads, of which 320 Km under
                         IDA financing.
                         Component 2: Support to the expansion and renewal of village plantations of oil palm and rubber
                         Southeast Cote d’Ivoire: The Project will support the Government and the rubber and palm oil inter-
                         professions (APROMAC and AAIPH) to improve linkages between farmers and agribusiness
                         companies, and strengthen inclusion of smallholders, women, youth and vulnerable groups, in the
                         subsector’s supply chains, while ensuring social and environmental sustainability. Project aims to
                         achieve 33,500 hectares of villages plantations planted or replanted with improved planting material
                         in order to reduce the productivity gap with agribusiness estates, improve delivery of services to
                         farmers and linkages with processing units. As part of Component 2, the project will support the
                         rehabilitation of and maintenance of about 1,800 km of feeder roads, of which about 1,060km under
                         IDA financing.
                         Component 3: Support to the cotton sector and Promotion of Cashew processing in Central and
                         Northern Cote d’Ivoire: will focus on strengthening institutional capacity of the cotton inter-
                         profession (INTERCOTON) to develop funding mechanisms for access to technologies and to more
                         effective agriculture extension services; supporting the Government of Cote d’Ivoire through the
                         cashew regulatory body (ARECA) to re-establish the cashew inter-profession ; initiating a funding
                         mechanism in cashew and cotton producing areas to finance and implement a feeder roads
                         rehabilitation and maintenance program of about 3,100 km of which 1,140 with IDA funding.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Additionally, the project will support the financing of medium-sized industrial units (2000 to 3000
                         tons/year) for cashew processing .
                         Component 4: Project implementation and support to sector coordination: This component aims to
                         ensure proper coordination of project implementing agencies and sound management of project
                         activities, while supporting the Ministry of Agricultural for the overall coordination of the National
                         Agricultural Investment Program (NAIP).
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         For each commodity, the Project will focus its intervention on the most important/representative
                         production region in the country: the southwestern region of Nawa for cocoa; the southeastern
                         regions of Sud Comoe and La Mé for rubber and palm oil, the eastern regions of Hambol and
                         Gontougo for cashew nuts and the northern regions for cotton. The project thus covers most of the
                         country, from humid forest areas to dry savanna areas. In areas that were formerly covered by humid
                         forest, deforestation has been extensive and little native forest remains outside of protected areas.
                         Special measures are put in place in the ESMF under this project to protect the remaining areas from
                         further degradation. Likewise, as far as land acquisition is concerned, special measures are being put
                         in place in the RPF to ensure sustainable management of project intervention areas.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists


                                                                      Page 2 of 8
                         Douglas J. Graham (AFTN2)
                         Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTCS)
                         Africa Eshogba Olojoba (MNSEE)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Paivi Koskinen-Lewis (AFTCS)

                         6. Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes             This policy is triggered because of direct
                         BP 4.01                                         potential environmental and social impacts
                                                                         associated with the investments in rehabilitation
                                                                         and maintenance of rural feeder roads (no new
                                                                         roads are to be constructed), small socio-
                                                                         economic subprojects under Component 1, and
                                                                         support to cashew industrial processing plants.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes             The project activities will be implemented in
                                                                         savanna and forest habitats and although one of
                                                                         the goals of the project is to expand areas under
                                                                         cultivation, no natural habitats or pristine forest
                                                                         will be converted for expansion of any cultures
                                                                         (this is not allowed by law and additional
                                                                         preventative measures will be put in place under
                                                                         the project). Losses of natural habitats are
                                                                         possible for projects such as road rehabilitation or
                                                                         involving minor infrastructure construction and
                                                                         the policy is therefore triggered, but any such
                                                                         losses will be insignificant in scope.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No              The policy is not triggered as the project
                                                                         envisions no investments in management of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         natural forests or plantations. Management of tree
                                                                         crop plantations (oil palm, rubber, cashew) are
                                                                         not covered under the Forests Policy.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes             This policy is triggered because the expansion
                                                                         and intensification of agricultural and livestock
                                                                         activities could lead to increased use of
                                                                         pesticides, fungicides and herbicides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes             Although no known physical cultural resources
                         BP 4.11                                         were identified during project preparation, the
                                                                         ESMF includes a Chance Finds Procedures for
                                                                         proper management of any physical cultural
                                                                         resources discovered during project
                                                                         implementation phase.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No              Per World Bank definition, the policy is not
                                                                         triggered as there are no Indigenous Peoples in
                                                                         the foreseen project area.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes             This policy is triggered because of possible land
                         4.12                                            acquisition that could lead to the possible loss of
                                                                         shelter, goods or involuntary resettlement caused


                                                                 Page 3 of 8
                                                                                by road rehabilitation or the socio-economic
                                                                                subprojects.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No                No construction/rehabilitation or use of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                irrigation waters from a dam is envisioned in this
                                                                                project.
                            Projects on International        No                   The project does not involve in any way any
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                international waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                   No project activity will be implemented in
                            7.60                                                disputed areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The project is classified as a “Category B? under OP/BP 4.01 with a partial assessment as the
                              impacts are likely to be small-scale, site specific, and easily mitigable. For example, anticipated
                              negative environmental and social impacts of the project could result from civil works associated
                              with rural roads rehabilitation (including impacts associated with quarries or borrow pits, if
                              needed) and socio-economic sub-projects, but also from more extensive/intensive crop production,
                              namely potential increases in pesticide use.

                              Historically, expanding areas of cocoa and other tree crops in Côte d’Ivoire have driven significant
                              losses of tropical humid forests. Deforestation has been so extensive that in the project areas few
                              patches of natural forests are extant, and these are mostly in protected areas. Any further
                              conversion of natural habitats is now outlawed; the project has included safeguards measures to
                              ensure that under no circumstances project investments trigger further deforestation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                               More expansive or intensive agricultural productivity in some areas could result in potential
                              indirect impacts such as water pollution from processing facilities or increased use of fertilizers.
                              These will be addressed through the project’s support to more environmentally and socially
                              sustainable production. Increases in agricultural production could result in induced development
                              and movements of people in the future as well as triggering possible future expansions of some
                              cultures footprint. With EU support, the Government carried out strategic environmental
                              assessments in 2012 of both the rubber and palm oil sectors, which considered such impacts.
                              These have informed the environmental and social safeguards studies under this project and major
                              recommendations have been offered for systematic implementation through the project’s support
                              for environmental and social safeguards systems. Furthermore, in accordance with the Bank and
                              IFC Re-engagement Framework in the palm oil sector, a Bank/IFC team prepared a joint Country
                              Situation Assessment (CSA) that provides an updated overview of the palm oil sector and its
                              recent developments in Cote d’Ivoire. Envisaged certification efforts supported under the project
                              will further strengthen the management of overall social and environmental concerns.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                               For the most part there are no alternatives to the proposed investments under the project (rural
                              roads in particular) to attain the objective of increased agricultural production and reduced

                                                                        Page 4 of 8
                           poverty. There are alternatives to the use of chemicals in agricultural production but their
                           development remains very limited; this project (and the accompanying GEF Pesticides
                           Management Project) will begin, in consultation with both Government and beneficiary
Public Disclosure Copy




                           communities, to promote non-chemical approaches to pest control and Integrated Pest
                           Management where feasible.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             Considering that the exact geographic locations of project specific interventions will not be
                           known by appraisal, the Borrower has prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed three
                           environmental and social safeguards instruments, namely an Environmental and Social
                           Management Framework (ESMF), a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), and a Pest
                           Management Plan (PMP), in compliance with the core requirements of the triggered safeguards
                           policies : OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment), OP 4.09 (Pest Management) and OP/BP 4.12
                           (Involuntary Resettlement). The ESMF also includes provisions to address basic requirements of
                           OP/BP 4.04 (Natural Habitats) and OP/BP 4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources). It includes both an
                           environmental and social screening form (ESSF) and a Check-list to be applied by the Borrower
                           for the screening, categorization and preparation of the site specific safeguards instruments for the
                           subproject activities and to ensure expansion of tree crop areas do not occur in natural forest areas.
                           These instruments, when they need to be developed, will be subject to a consultation and approval
                           process as described in the Operational Manual and will be locally disclosed prior to subproject
                           implementation. In addition, the ESMF contains a set of Environmental and Social Clauses (ESC)
                           to be embedded in all contractors’ contracts to ensure systematic compliance with environmental
                           and social safeguards requirements.

                           The project is currently finalizing a study on Social Inclusion which primarily aims at deepening
                           the understanding of various stakeholders organization, interaction and both strengths and
                           weaknesses, as well as the most practical way of ensuring the project is inclusive and considerate
                           of gender, women, youth and vulnerable groups dimensions throughout its lifecycle. The expected
Public Disclosure Copy




                           results will further strengthen the implementation of measures under the project to reduce social
                           vulnerabilities.

                           In addition, an associated World Bank project now under preparation, the GEF-financed Pesticide
                           Management Project, will provide further support to the agricultural sector to minimize negative
                           impacts resulting from use of toxic pesticides as well as enhanced support to integrated pest
                           management (IPM). The two projects will work closely together during implementation.

                           The technical capacity of the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) of the Ministry of Agriculture on
                           environmental and social safeguards remains limited despite the implementation by the line
                           ministry of several Bank-financed projects. A limited understanding of Bank policies exists, which
                           would need additional technical capacity building to help streamline the proper implementation of
                           safeguards recommendations. To that aim, a safeguards team composed of an Environmental
                           Specialist and a Social Development Specialist will be included in the PCU to ensure that core
                           recommendations from the ESMF, RPF and PMP are applied (i.e. systematic use of the
                           Environmental and Social Screening Form, ESSF, along with the Environmental and Social
                           Check-list, ESCL), and that once the subproject footprints have been clearly identified, appropriate
                           additional safeguards instruments will be prepared and implemented by executing agencies that
                           will monitor and report on project safeguards. The two Safeguards Specialists will also ensure
                           training of designated safeguards focal points within the various executing agencies in the


                                                                      Page 5 of 8
                           respected project intervention areas. Technical support will be provided by Bank safeguards
                           specialists throughout the project implementation cycle to further support the project
                           environmental and social safeguards specialists.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Preparation of the three safeguards instruments was done through extensive public consultation
                           and participation, and stakeholders’ concerns were duly taken into consideration and reflected in
                           the final safeguards documents. Full details of the consultations are provided in each document.
                           During the consultations, participants did not raise concerns about project impacts or proposed
                           mitigation issues but raised issues that centered around the following: lack of training/skilled work
                           force; poor condition of rural roads; women’s role in agricultural activities; how to improve yield
                           amounts; high price of fertilizers; and cooperatives in need of capacity strengthening. The project
                           will address the issue of rural roads in particular through the roads rehabilitation and maintenance
                           program across all three technical components to be implemented in each of the Project’s target
                           regions in order to improve and facilitate access to markets for smallholders. Inclusion issues are
                           being addressed for each of the value chains by including specific activities in operational manuals
                           based on the findings of the study on Social Inclusion. This will entail provisions on targeting
                           beneficiaries to ensure women have access to cash crops in addition to food crop production.
                           Strengthening of the producers’ organizations as well as exploring the possibility of supporting the
                           creation of women’s cooperatives has been included in all components as part of capacity building
                           and support for institutional development of the Inter-professions. Questions on improved yields,
                           price of fertilizers are dealt with through the project’s productivity and agricultural good practices
                           program for each value chain which includes the provision to smallholders of improved planting
                           materials kits that contain seedlings, site protection fences and fertilizers, and provision of training
                           and advisory services.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                           19-Mar-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                        25-Mar-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Cote d'Ivoire                                                         19-Mar-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                           08-Apr-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                        16-Apr-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Cote d'Ivoire                                                         16-Apr-2013
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                        Yes

                                                                       Page 6 of 8
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      19-Mar-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   25-Mar-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Cote d'Ivoire                                                    19-Mar-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information


                                                                     Page 7 of 8
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: El Hadj Adama Toure
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                    Date: 24-Jun-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Martien Van Nieuwkoop (SM)                     Date: 26-Jun-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 8 of 8
