                                                                     INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                              APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSA965
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Jul-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                       Africa                                  Project ID:                      P130694
                              Project Name:                  Nile Basin Climate Resilient Growth Project (P130694)
                              Task Team Leader:              Eileen Rose Burke
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 11-Jul-2012                                  Estimated Board Date:            15-Nov-2012
                              Managing Unit:                 AFTN2                                   Lending Instrument:              Technical Assistance Loan
                              Sector:                        General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (80%), Public administration- Water, sanitation and flood
                                                             protection (20%)
                              Theme:                         Water resource management (50%), Environmental policies and institutions (40%), Participation and civic
                                                             engagement (10%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                  Financing Source                                                                                                      Amount
                                  Borrower                                                                                                                   0.00
                                  Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                                                              4.00
                                  Nile Basin Initiative Trust Fund                                                                                         11.00
                                  Total                                                                                                                    15.00
                              Environmental Category:        B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              The development objective for the proposed project is "to facilitate cooperative water resource management and development in the Nile Basin."
                              This would be achieved through the provision of targeted technical assistance to the NBI member countries and broader stakeholders, to facilitate
Public Disclosure Copy




                              cooperative activities, improve integrated water resources planning and management, and identify and prepare feasibility studies of potential
                              regional (or transboundary) investments.

                              By increasing understanding of regional hydro variability and climatic conditions, and through cooperative preparation of development projects of
                              regional significance, the project will contribute to sustainable, climate resilient growth in the region. However, due to the technical assistance
                              nature of this project and, as no works will be undertaken on the ground during the implementation of this project, these benefits will not accrue
                              during the three year project life. As such, it will not be possible to measure these impacts during the life of this project.

                              3. Project Description

                              1.1       Description. The Project intends to provide customized support to facilitate activities in each of the three operational NBI institutions 
                              the Nile Secretariat (Nile-SEC), the Nile Equatorial Lakes Subsidiary Action Program Coordination Unit (NELSAP-CU), and the Eastern Nile
                              Technical Regional Office (ENTRO). The support takes into account the historical evolution, comparative advantage, strategic plans and mandates
                              of each of these organizations.

                              The components and sub-components are described as follows:

                              Component 1: Advancing Nile Basin-Wide Cooperation and Analysis. This Component will support Nile-SEC in its two core functions of facilitating
                              cooperation and water resources management. The activities proposed have been prioritized in line with the NBI Strategic Plan and available
                              resources for the Project, and aim to sustain, enhance, and apply the work and products supported through previous NBI activities in all its
                              centers . Component 1 proposes targeted technical assistance and operational support aimed at strengthening basin cooperation and the
                              provision of tools, knowledge products and analysis to increase a shared understanding of the Nile River system. It has two sub-components as
                              noted below:

                                        Sub-component 1.a: Strengthening the platform for basin-wide cooperation for sustainable water resources management and
                              development. This sub-component aims to facilitate basin-wide cooperative activities. This includes technical assistance and operational support
                              to the Nile-SEC for evidence-based analysis to illustrate the benefits of cooperation, information and events for governance bodies and
                              stakeholders to facilitate riparian awareness-building, dialogue, cooperation, and resource mobilization. Efforts will be made to improve NBI
                              linkages to relevant national and other regional/international-level institutions, including government agencies, academia, Community Social
                              Organizations (CSOs), media, private sector, development partners, and the general public.

                                       Sub-component 1.b: Enhancing capacity and understanding for cooperative management and development of water resources in the
                              Nile Basin. This sub-component aims to improve the knowledge and analytical foundation for developing a shared understanding of the Nile Basin

                                                                                                                                                                        Page 1 of 5
                         issues and cooperative water resources development and management options in the Basin. This includes technical and operational support for
                         the enhanced application of analytical resources such as the newly developed Nile Basin Decision Support System (DSS). Efforts will also be
                         made to strengthen technical Help Desk services and DSS user community facilitation to improve the relevance of NBI activities at National-level
                         and encourage sharing of knowledge and further DSS development. Enhanced public access to information is a key feature of the proposed sub-
                         component, with the publication of a series of technical briefs, and an upgraded web portal that includes a basin-wide real-time hydromet
                         monitoring visualization system that would facilitate integration of earth observation products and incentives for sharing ground-based hydromet
                         data.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2: Promotion of Sustainable Development and Planning in the Nile Equatorial Lakes Region: This Component will support the
                         NELSAP-CU in its efforts to identify and prepare potential and strategic cooperative investment opportunities. This will help undertake preparatory
                         work and resource mobilization to catalyze transformative investments on the ground that can be enabled by, and contribute to, regional
                         cooperation. The NEL region countries have a demonstrated track-record for preparation and implementation of multi-sectoral regional
                         cooperative analysis of transboundary opportunities for investments. This Component will help provide support for further critical future
                         investments of regional significance.

                                   Subcomponent 2-1: Identifying and promoting strategic opportunities to advance cooperative water resource management and
                         development. This sub-component aims to support development of "project profiles" of regionally-significant water resources investments in the
                         NEL region to facilitate resource mobilization, some of which would be for projects that have already been identified through other high-level
                         scoping studies . This component will also include the production and dissemination of technical briefing notes to highlight analysis emerging from
                         earlier studies and analysis, and other updates to these studies to increase awareness of hydrological issues in the NEL region.

                                    Subcomponent 2-2: Preparing transformative investment projects of regional significance. This sub-component aims to undertake
                         preliminary scoping and feasibility level studies related to potential cooperative water-resources development investments in the NEL region. This
                         includes possible investments related to hydropower, power transmission/inter-connection, irrigation and watershed management. While it is
                         possible that the Project may support project preparation up to feasibility-level, for one power transmission line, the location and associated civil
                         works are still to be determined. These technical studies will be accompanied by environmental and social assessments, to the degree
                         appropriate (e.g. strategic environmental and social assessment for a feasibility study; and an environmental and social impact assessment for a
                         feasibility study). These investments will be prepared based on previous selection criteria following work undertaken by NBI/NELSAP and
                         guidance from NEL riparian countries.

                         Component 3: Promotion of Sustainable Development and Planning in the Eastern Nile Region. This Component is intended to support ENTRO in
                         promoting cooperation among Eastern Nile riparian countries in a challenging hydro-political environment. It builds on ENTROs current activities
                         and achievements , and seeks to focus on both knowledge and analysis activities in which ENTRO has recently made significant progress, as well
                         as on investment facilitation , where ENTRO has demonstrated successful interfacing of regional and national-level activities.

                                  Sub-component 3.a: Strengthening the knowledge base and analytical framework for Eastern Nile climate-resilient water resources
                         planning and management. This sub-component aims to improve public domain access to the Eastern Nile knowledge base; analytical and
                         forecasting tools for investment preparation and flood and drought management; enhancing knowledge partnerships with stakeholder networks
                         including government, power utilities, academia, etc.; and promoting regional cooperation activities.

                                  Sub-component 3.b: Promoting sustainable development and growth in the Eastern Nile. This sub-component aims to prepare studies
                         on cooperative investments (initially focused on watershed management activities) as well as promote more holistic approaches to preparing and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         operating possible water investments that better take into consideration environmental and social issues. A key activity proposed under this sub-
                         component would be to respond to countries' requests for technical support in improving dam safety in the Eastern Nile. This would entail
                         development of a regional dam safety framework or set of guidelines, as appropriate, and given the increasingly large potential of hydropower
                         development in coming decades. Networks of environmental and social specialists that have been assisting ENTRO will also be strengthened
                         through intensive training.

                         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         The project is primarily technical assistance and will be implemented by NBI offices in three countries:
                                  Uganda, Entebbe  location of NBI Secretariat
                                  Ethiopia, Addis Ababa  location of ENTRO
                                  Rwanda, Kigali  location of NELSAP-CU

                         The project is designed to complement ongoing NBI operations and assist in the identification of possible future investments through feasibility
                         studies, of potential upstream investments. Under the first phase of the project, therefore, no specific locations or sites nor planned physical
                         investments (such as civil works) are included for financing. Instead preparation studies are envisaged.

                         Anticipating that the above activities would entail reviews of the environmental and social impacts, including in some scoping of possible sites and
                         activities, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared, and targeted to be disclosed in July 2012. . This
                         ESMF for the NBCRG Project has been prepared by all three NBI organizations and contains an environmental and social screening tool. This
                         screening tool has been used by NBI projects in the past, including sub-projects preparation and planning The ESMF responds to the need for
                         identifying and developing appropriate mitigating measures for any potential environmental and social impacts.

                         Moreover, through the NBI Institutional Strengthening Project (ISP - P110616), another report, the Environmental and Social Management
                         Guidelines for Nile Basin Initiative Projects, is being developed. The process for development of these guidelines is ongoing and includes
                         consultations and disclosure. The project will ensure that the guidelines are consistent with Bank safeguards policies. Once adopted by NBI and
                         the participating countries, the Environmental and Social Management Guidelines will apply to all NBI projects. These guidelines will be consistent
                         with the project's ESMF. These two documents, the strategy and the guidelines, will also constitute the environmental and social safeguards
                         framework instruments that would be applicable for this project (specifically covering some guidelines as covered in an ESMF, RPF or Process
                         Framework and other appropriate safeguards instruments that may be needed in the future).

                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists


                                                                                                                                                                   Page 2 of 5
                               Maria Concepcion J. Cruz (AFTCS)
                               Hocine Chalal (AFTN3)

                               6. Safeguard Policies                          Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                               Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01            Yes              The NBCRG Project is primarily a technical assistance project. Because it will also
                                                                                               identify and prepare potential investments following the feasibility studies, an
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared and will
                                                                                               be disclosed in July 2012. Even though there will be no civil works or construction,
                                                                                               the NBI has written an ESMF to address any possible social and environmental
                                                                                               impacts of potential activities.

                                                                                               Through the NBI's Institutional Strengthening Project (P110616), Environmental
                                                                                               and Social Management Guidelines for NBI projects are also being finalized. The
                                                                                               development of these guidelines is ongoing and will include consultations and
                                                                                               disclosure. Once adopted, the Guidelines will be consistent with the ESMF and
                                                                                               will apply to all NBI projects.
                               Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                    Yes              Although this project is primarily technical assistance for identification and
                                                                                               preparation of possible projects, and does not include any investments, OP4.04 is
                                                                                               triggered because it is anticipated that most of the investment opportunities may
                                                                                               possibly overlap with significant natural habitats. The NBI ESMF covers specific
                                                                                               policies and actions needed to ensure compliance with the policy.
                               Forests OP/BP 4.36                             No               Since the project does not involve actual physical interventions in forests, the
                                                                                               policy is not triggered but any potential forest-related issue linked to the project will
                                                                                               be addressed on a due diligence basis in the ESMF mentioned above.
                               Pest Management OP 4.09                        No               Since the project does not involve actual use of pesticides and agro-chemicals, the
                                                                                               policy is not triggered but any potential pest management related issue linked to
                                                                                               the project will be addressed on a due diligence basis.
                               Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11         No               The NBI selection criteria for potential activities ensures the avoidance of sites with
                                                                                               known cultural or historical significance.
                               Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                  No               The areas to be covered by potential investments will not take place in areas of
                                                                                               known Indigenous Peoples territories.
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12            Yes              As part of preparation and feasibility studies, the areas to be affected have not yet
                                                                                               been identified. The ESMF covers guidelines and procedures in case future
                                                                                               activities will involve some relocation or restriction of access to resources. The
                                                                                               ESMF sections on land acquisition, relocation and restrictions of access will apply,
                                                                                               in particular, to possible investment opportunities such as regional transmission
                                                                                               interconnections, multipurpose WRD activities, hydropower projects, watershed
                                                                                               management, and so on that increase the resilience of flood impacted
                                                                                               communities. As noted in the ESMF, once specific sites are selected and future
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               investment opportunities are identified, the appropriate social safeguards
                                                                                               instruments will be prepared, as needed.
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                      No               The project involves no physical works involving the construction of new dams, nor
                                                                                               does the project rely on the outputs of an existing dam. Instead, one of ENTRO's
                                                                                               activities through the project would be to formulate dam safety guidelines for the
                                                                                               basin, where the client can provide advice to countries to strengthen the
                                                                                               institutional, legislative, and regulatory frameworks for dam safety programs. As
                                                                                               such, international good practices will be promoted, through the use of dam safety
                                                                                               experts and training of key staff on the relevant aspects of dam safety.
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP      Yes              While OP 7.50 is triggered by the project, it is expected that the project will be
                               7.50                                                            exempt from the notification requirement, as studies proposed under the project
                                                                                               are upstream in nature and do not involve studies beyond feasibility studies.
                                                                                               However, such studies must include "in the terms of reference for the activities an
                                                                                               examination of any potential riparian issues".
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60          No               Project activities are not expected to take place in contested or disputed areas.


                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any potential l arge scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                  The project is essentially a Technical Assistance project which aims at supporting Nile Basin entities in the preparation of the next generation
                                 of cooperative initiatives between Nile Basin countries. The overall purpose of the project can be viewed as supporting the creation and
                                 dissemination of knowledge, supporting the establishment of strong collaborative networks and identifying and initiating the preparation of
                                 potential transformative investment opportunities. Consequently no major direct impacts are expected from the project.

                                 The sites of possible investment projects have not yet been decided but there are potential environmental and social impacts. These may
                                 pertain specifically to possible investments, based on the feasibility studies for activities related to hydropower and transmission, agriculture
                                 and irrigation and water and watershed management. The ESMF covers guidelines and procedures for addressing any likely impacts and their
                                 mitigation measures. Should the screening results indicate the possibility of any of the planned sub-projects leading to water pollution,
                                                                                                                                                                           Page 3 of 5
                           ecosystem damage, land acquisition or loss of livelihoods, the project will be required to apply other tools such as ESIAs or Resettlement
                           Action Plans (RAPs) as necessitated by project impacts.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                            Beyond the technical assistance nature of the project, it is anticipated that the feasibility studies may identify follow-on preparation of some
                           significant infrastructural projects in the water and energy sectors. Some of the activities identified in these studies might require environmental
                           and social mitigation measures. The ESMF defines the procedures and specific guidelines for determining the environmental and social (and
                           cumulative) impacts and for developing appropriate mitigation measures. Specific safeguards instruments, such as the ESIA, RAP of PF may
Public Disclosure Copy




                           be developed in the future, on an as needed basis.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.


                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                            and implement the measures described.
                             In order to address environmental and social policy issues, the project will ensure that the pre-feasibility, feasibility and other preparation
                           studies (if undertaken by the project) take into account the lessons learned from projects in the context of basin-wide conditions. In particular,
                           the NBI decision to adopt a set of selection criteria, including avoiding areas of global significance, or territories occupied by indigenous
                           communities, or sites with cultural or historical artifacts, indicates sensitivities to Bank safeguards concerns. In addition, the following actions
                           will be undertaken to ensure that environmental and social impacts are taken into account in the preparation of potential activities. These
                           include: (i) enhancement of the Decision Support System (DSS) database to include gender-disaggregated and site-specific information on
                           vulnerable communities and environmentally sensitive areas; (ii) development of terms of reference for the studies that include specified
                           activities for addressing environmental and social vulnerability and mitigation responses that will be applicable even at the community level,
                           including cumulative impacts; (iii) provisions for a separate program to support the NBDF and strengthen the role of civil society groups and
                           support women's entrepreneurship, by providing more effective consultative and participatory processes; and (iv) provisions for capacity
                           building, including hiring of additional environment, social, community liaison and communications specialists in the NBI institutions.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                            on potentially affected people.
                             The project beneficiaries are the riparian countries of the Nile Basin. In particular, the directly affected stakeholders are the riparian
                           communities in and around the Nile Basin that are at-risk for extreme climatic changes (e.g. resulting in drought or flooding). Additionally, the
                           active stakeholders who have participated in meetings and consultations are the civil society groups who are members of the Nile Basin
                           Discourse Forum (NBDF). The NBDF is a network of civil society organizations which form a portion of the basin stakeholders and
                           representatives of the affected people. Throughout consultations with the NBDF a key concern has been finalizing an approach and a set of
                           procedures for mainstreaming of the environment and social issues into project designs. When specific activities have been identified for future
                           investment, the project will ensure that environmental and social impact assessments are carried out collaboratively with a broad spectrum of
                           stakeholders, especially at the community level.

                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                               16-Jun-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                                           26-Jul-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                            26-Jul-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                           Directors
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                               26-Jul-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                                           26-Jul-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                            26-Jul-2012
                         Technical Assistance Project
                         For a TA project which will finance the preparation of a specific safeguards instrument, please indicate type of document disclosed, if any.

                         An Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared and will be disclosed in July 2012.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                         disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         N/A

                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                           Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                                Yes [     ]        No [    ]   NA [   ]

                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats



                                                                                                                                                                             Page 4 of 5
                              If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) natural   Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              habitats, does the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                              If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the             Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              plan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                              Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                                                Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?                     Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language             Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for          Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?                     Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard           Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same               Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Task Team Leader:                     Eileen Rose Burke
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:      Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                              Date: 04-Aug-2012
                            Sector Manager:                       Name Jonathan S. Kamkwalala (SM)                                               Date: 26-Jul-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                                                      Page 5 of 5
