                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                         APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSA1379
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-Sep-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Tajikistan                       Project ID:   P127807
                            Project Name:        Tax Administration (P127807)
                            Task Team            Munawer Sultan Khwaja
                            Leader:
                            Estimated            11-Sep-2012                      Estimated   30-Oct-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:       ECSP4                            Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector:         Central government administration (100%)
                            Theme:          Tax policy and administration (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                               Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                              0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                    18.00
                              Total                                                                          18.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a            No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           The development objective of the TARP is to reform the tax administration to become more efficient
                           and effective in collecting revenue while providing quality service to taxpayers.

                           Specifically, the project aims to: (i) enhance the level of voluntary compliance; (ii) strengthen the
                           effectiveness of the Tax Committee to fight tax evasion and reduce the size of the shadow economy;
                           (iii) strengthen the institutional and human capacity in order to improve the professionalism of tax
                           officials and reduce the avenues for corruption.; and (iv) modernize processes that would reduce
                           administrative cost for the government and compliance burden for taxpayers, thereby improving
                           Tajikistan's business environment and competitiveness.
                            3. Project Description
                           A.      Description


                                                                        Page 1 of 4
                           It is envisaged that the project would consist of four components, the implementation of which
                         would be managed by different units of the Tax Committee.
                              Component 1: Institutional Development. This component will aim to build capacity for strategic
Public Disclosure Copy




                         planning and organizational management; improve the revenue forecasting and tax analysis capacity
                         of the MOF and TC; provide support for restructuring and consolidating the organization to match
                         functional requirement; develop human resource management information system, staff training,
                         distance education and e-learning; and focus on motivation, honesty and integrity of tax officials.
                              Component 2: Process Modernization and Operational Development. This component will aim at
                         streamlining business processes based on self assessment and risk management; strengthening tax
                         functions including registration, return processing, collection, audit, and appeals; enhancing the
                         capacity of the large taxpayers’ office, arrear collection; improving taxpayer service and education;
                         and development of a modern call center).
                              Component 3: Information Technology Infrastructure Development. This component will attempt
                         to upgrade IT infrastructure in the TC to develop an integrated tax management system which will
                         unify business processes and support e-filing, e-payment, web-based taxpayer information; improve
                         telecommunications and connectivity; and develop a data management system (with data mining,
                         data warehousing and data exchange capabilities).
                          Component 4: Project Management. This component would help manage the change that would
                         take place, ensure the timely and efficient implementation of each activity, and interact with all local
                         and international entities involved in project execution.

                         Preliminary cost estimate for the proposed Bank-funded project is $12-15 million. The overall
                         implementation of GoT’s Tax Reform Program is expected to cost about of $25.0 million over 4-5
                         years. Out of this, the GoT is expected to finance around $9 million towards the cost of buildings,
                         refurbishment and other civil works. The Government funding for the civil works is parallel to the
                         project and not a co-financing of the project. The approximate cost for IT development is about $12
                         million and for TA on organizational restructuring and process modernization is about S4 million.
                         ADB also plan to provide additional financing around $2-4 million in 2013-14 after completion of
                         their current TA activities ending in 2012.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed project is rated as Category 'C' for environmental purposes. The project does not
                         envisage any civil construction or land acquisition. None of the envisaged activities will require any
                         special permission on environmental issues. Hence the proposed project will not be subject to
                         Environmental Impact Assessment procedures or any permission relating to environmental
                         protection.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists


                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        No
                          BP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No




                                                                       Page 2 of 4
                            Pest Management OP 4.09            No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential l arge scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:

                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.


                           B. Disclosure Requirements Date
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:

                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
                           ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information



                                                                       Page 3 of 4
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Munawer Sultan Khwaja
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                            Date: 12-Sep-2012
                            Coordinator:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: William Leslie Dorotinsky (SM)                 Date: 12-Sep-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 4 of 4
