                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC2915

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-May-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-May-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Ethiopia                        Project ID:      P133591
                            Project Name:      Ethiopia Water Supply and Sanitation Project II (P133591)
                            Task Team          Tesfaye Bekalu Wondem
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          23-Sep-2013                     Estimated        27-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTU1                           Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Sanitation (30%), Water supply (70%)
                            Theme(s):          Rural services and infrastructure (25%), Urban services and housing for the poor
                                               (25%), Decentralization (24%), City-wide Infrastruc ture and Service Delivery
                                               (13%), Participation and civic engagement (13%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    150.00                    Total Bank Financing:         150.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                               Financing Gap:                  0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                 150.00
                              Total                                                                       150.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives


                           C. Project Description
                           WaSH - II will be implemented through a programmatic approach that will lead to a full Sector Wide
                           Approach (SWAP) with several development partners. Under the WaSH Implementation Framework
                         (WIF) prepared by the government all development partners will pool their resources in a
                         Consolidated WaSH Account (CWA). The DFID financed and World Bank managed trust fund is a
                         step forward towards cooperation and harmonization in the sector. Sufficient momentum and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         experience has been gathered in implementing the trust fund, and the implementation modality used
                         for WASH I has been adopted by other financiers including AfDB. The collaboration with DFID that
                         was started under WaSH - I will continue under WaSH - II, and other donors are also expected to
                         join. The team has made preliminary discussion and reached agreement in principle with MoWE,
                         MoFED, DFID and AfDB to Co-finance the national WaSH program through a basket fund.

                         Key features of the WASH II program include: (i) a common basket or pooled fund; and (ii)
                         strengthening the devolution of service delivery to lower level institutions. In addition based on the
                         experience and lessons learned from WSSP the proposed WaSH-II program among others will adopt:
                         a (i) performance based, stepped approach -so that rural communities and towns only qualify to
                         receive additional assistance as they develop capacity and meet established criteria; (ii) technology
                         and service level choice based on beneficiaries willingness and ability to pay up-front contribution
                         and ongoing running costs; (iii) learning by doing and a cascaded approach to capacity building; (iv)
                         involvement of the private sector to support operations, maintenance and supply of equipment; (v)
                         establishment/ strengthening of O&M back stopping support at the federal, regional and woreda
                         levels based on the O&M policy; and (vi) integration of water supply, sanitation and hygiene
                         services.

                         The Key components of the Program will be:-

                         (i)     Component 1. Rural Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene (R-WaSH): Funding is to be
                         provided (i) to construct community water supply schemes and institutional sanitation facilities (ii) to
                         promote improved hygiene and sanitation practices in beneficiary communities (iii) to strengthen
                         and sustain capacity of beneficiary woredas to effectively plan, implement and manage their R-
                         WaSH (iii) to strengthen and sustain the capacity of beneficiary communities to effectively plan,
                         implement and manage their water supply and sanitation facilities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (ii)       Component 2. Urban Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene (U-WaSH): Funding is to be
                         provided (i) to improve the water production and distribution system, (ii) to support the preparation
                         of urban sanitation strategy and partly its implementation in beneficiary towns, (iii) strengthen and
                         sustain the capacity of participating water boards/committees and operators to effectively manage
                         their water supply and sanitation facilities. Works in larger urban centers with existing water supply
                         and sanitation systems that need to be expanded or improved are to be financed through an on-
                         lending basis, consistent with the Government’s policy on cost recovery for urban water supply and
                         sanitation. The Water Resources Development Fund (WRDF) will be the implementing agency for
                         these Sub components, responsible for appraisal of proposed projects and monitoring and evaluation

                         (iii)       Component 3.Program Management: Funding is to be provided to the MoFED, MoH,
                         MoE and MoWE to build the capacity of regional health, education and water bureau as well as
                         Woreda WaSH offices BoFEDs and WoFED personnel and regionally-based consultants to: support
                         program implementation, refine policies and program implementation arrangements, monitor and
                         evaluate the program, equip water quality testing and training centers, improve information
                         availability and flow.

                         The proposed program, which will be implemented using a Specific Investment Loan (SIL) will have
                         a duration of five years, which is beyond the duration of Universal Access Plan. However a Mid
                           Term Review will allow revising project intervention areas, objectives and result framework based
                           on the progress made in the sector towards the achievement of UAP targets.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The team has considered a Program for Result (P4R). Recent experience shows that GOE considers
                           P4R a useful tool for leveraging an enhanced focus on results, harmonizing support with other
                           development partners, and relying on existing institutional and implementation arrangements - with
                           emphasis on government system strengthening. HoweverP4Rs require well developed fiduciary
                           systems, a credible and functional monitoring mechanism, and robust information and data
                           management. Considering these factors and the fiduciary risks associated with the intended shift to
                           a highly decentralized implementation arrangement, the team has opted for a SIL.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project will support government's national program which covers rural and urban beneficiaries
                           all over Ethiopia. Further, there is an ongoing nation-wide screening to determine if there are
                           indigenous peoples in five regions of the country to provide a preliminary assessment of potential
                           impacts. If applicable, this project will trigger OP4.10 and incorporate required mitigation measures
                           as needed before appraisal.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Though the borrower has good experience in preparing good safeguards instruments and screening
                           sub-projects to identify environmental and social impacts, its institutional capacity for the
                           implementation of mitigation measures is limited. Therefore, the proposed project will support
                           measures that will strengthen the Borrower's capacity to identify and assess potential adverse
                           environmental and social impacts and to implement and monitor appropriate mitigation measures.
                           Specifically, the borrower will designate a qualified and experienced sociologist and an
                           environmental officer to be responsible for social and environmental safeguards matters and they will
                           receive training on World Bank safeguards policies and exposure to ongoing projects where these are
                           being followed during project preparation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Shankar Narayanan (SASDS)
                           Chukwudi H. Okafor (AFTCS)
                           Asferachew Abate Abebe (AFTN3)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              OP 4.01 is triggered by the proposed project due
                           BP 4.01                                              to its planned rehabilitation and construction
                                                                                activities under components 1 & 2. In the event
                                                                                that future investment locations cannot be
                                                                                determined prior to appraisal, the Borrower will
                                                                                revise the existing Environmental and Social
                                                                                Management Framework particularly with
                                                                                regards to current developments. In cases where
                                                                                the investment sites have been identified prior to
                                                                                appraisal, the Borrower will carry out separate
                                                                                Environmental Impact Assessments. The
                                                                                                                                 prepared safeguards instruments will be
                                                                                                                                 consulted upon and disclosed prior to appraisal.
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       TBD                           The project may be implemented in or near
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 natural habitats, though none of them are
                                                                                                                                 expected to be critical habitats. The ESMF will
                                                                                                                                 include measures for assessing impacts and
                                                                                                                                 undertaking mitigation measures, as necessary.
                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No                            The project does not involve or affect forests.

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No                            The project does not involve pest management
                                                                                                                                 measures.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   TBD                           The project may affect physical cultural
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         resources, which will be determined closer to
                                                                                                                                 appraisal.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     TBD                           The project may affect or involve IPs, and there
                                                                                                                                 is an ongoing discussion between the
                                                                                                                                 Government and the Bank on the application of
                                                                                                                                 OP 4.10 in Ethiopia. This issue will be
                                                                                                                                 addressed in light of the outcomes of that
                                                                                                                                 discussion.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           OP 4.12 is triggered by the proposed project due
                                 4.12                                                                                            to its planned rehabilitation and construction
                                                                                                                                 activities under components 1 & 2. In the event
                                                                                                                                 that future investment locations cannot be
                                                                                                                                 determined prior to appraisal, the Borrower will
                                                                                                                                 prepare a Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                                                                                                 (RPF). In cases where the investment sites have
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 been identified prior to appraisal, the Borrower
                                                                                                                                 will prepare a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP).
                                                                                                                                 Both the RPF and RAP will be consulted upon
                                                                                                                                 and disclosed prior to appraisal.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project does not involve dams.

                                 Projects on International                                         Yes                           OP 7.50 is triggered because the proposed
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            project will finance water supplies to several
                                                                                                                                 smaller towns and rural settlements that will
                                                                                                                                 cause abstraction of surface and ground water.
                                                                                                                                 Therefore, Ethiopia's riparians will be notified
                                                                                                                                 as required with this operational policy.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             N/A
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-May-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             ESMF & RPF and other safeguards instruments, as required: Preparation to commence May 2013
                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Task Team Leader:     Name: Tesfaye Bekalu Wondem

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name:                                              Date:
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Rosemary Mukami Kariuki (SM)                 Date: 19-May-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
