                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC3794

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Sep-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-Sep-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                            Project ID:      P133000
                            Project Name:      Huainan Coal Mining Subsidence Area Rehabilitation (P133000)
                            Task Team          Xiaokai Li
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          01-May-2014                      Estimated        26-Nov-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASCS                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (80%), General agriculture,
                                               fishing and forestry sector (20%)
                            Theme(s):          Other environment and natural resources management (65%), Other urban
                                               development (35%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    200.00                     Total Bank Financing:        100.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                                Financing Gap:                 0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                     100.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        100.00
                              Total                                                                        200.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed project objective is to support environmental remediation and utilization of JiuDa
                           subsidence site in Huainan city.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed project is likely to have the following three components:
                         Component 1. Environmental Remediation and Water Management (Indicative base cost: 76.5
                         million USD): This component supports restoration of environmental conditions and landscape of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         JiuDa subsidence area to create a green ecological zone within the city. It will have three
                         subcomponents: (a) environmental remediation through site cleanup of the coal mining wastes and
                         collapsed structures, repair of the damaged site, re-greening (325 ha) and tree planting (330ha), and
                         re-vegetation of several quarries; (b) rehabilitation of local water streams for rainstorm drainage up
                         to 1/20 frequency, and creation of small wetlands for water environment management and recreation;
                         and (c) closure of the Datong dump site with a total foot print of 11 ha and an estimated 2.75 million
                         m3 domestic solid wastes collected over 25 years (1984-2009), to prevent water, soil and air
                         pollution at the site.

                         Component 2. Infrastructure improvement and site utilization (Indicative base cost: 73.50 million
                         USD): The component is intended to improve and construct the necessary roads, and associated
                         water supply and sewage infrastructure within the site and going through it, to restore their
                         functionality and connect the area with other parts of the city. The roads include four secondary
                         roads with a total length of about 12.7km connected to existing roads in the city, and associated small
                         scale water supply (17.4km) and sewerage pipes (19.7km) to provide basic infrastructure services,
                         which are not available in the area at present. This component also supports facilities and activities to
                         utilize the remediated site and local resources available for livelihoods development of the local
                         communities These include: a community skills training center of 4,000m2, seedling nurseries (133
                         ha), economic trees, a flower market, a coal-mining industry museum and recreation business
                         facilities, etc. In addition, the limited resettlement required of infrastructure improvement and
                         environmental remediation will be included under this component.

                         Component 3. Project management and technical assistance (Indicative cost: 12 million USD): The
                         component funds project management, implementation support and technical assistance activities.
                         Project implementation support and management activities include consulting services for project
                         design, construction supervision, environmental management, monitoring and evaluation, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         incremental operating costs. The technical assistance includes capacity building and training
                         activities for project implementation and management, as well as technical and policy studies related
                         to coal mining subsidence management.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is located in Huainan city, in the central north of Anhui Province, China and in the
                         middle reach of Huai River. Huainan city has a population of 2.45 million people with a land area of
                         2,596 km2. The project activities will be in an 11.4km2 area of Datong District of Huainan city,
                         featuring ground subsidence and environmental degradation caused by coal mining activities over
                         many decades. The project aims to remediate the selected subsidence area for environmental
                         improvement and reutilization.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         Huainan city has experience in the projects financed by the World Bank and Asian Development
                         Bank (ADB). The implementing agency- Huainan Agriculture and Water Investment Company
                         (HAWIC) however lacks experiences in implementing Bank supported projects. A Project Leading
                         Group (PLG) chaired by the executive vice-mayor has been established to provide policy guidance
                         and oversight in project preparation and implementation. Members of the PLG include senior
                         officials from all related government departments: Municipal Development and Reform
                           Commission, Municipal Finance Bureau, Agriculture Commission, Water Resource Bureau,
                           Municipal Subsidence Area Rehabilitation Office, Municipal Key Project Construction Bureau,
                           Municipal Urban and Rural Construction Commission, etc., and Huainan Coal Mining Group
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Corporation. Further, a Project Management Office (PMO) headed by the director general of
                           Huainan Finance Bureau has also been established to be responsible for day-to-day management and
                           coordination of project preparation and implementation.

                           The HAWIC will designate staff to coordinate and manage the safeguards assessments and
                           instruments implementation, and receive training on the Bank safeguard policies during project
                           preparation. Initial training was provided during the identification mission to PMO and implementing
                           agency staff, on the Bank safeguard policies. Capacity building for the HAWIC and PMO staff, and
                           tailored training on related Bank policies and different aspects of project management will be carried
                           out during project preparation. The capacity of the HAWIC and PMO will be further strengthened to
                           meet the Bank’s requirements for project safeguards management. Qualified consulting firms with
                           Bank project experiences have been engaged to carry out environmental assessment and resettlement
                           action planning according to the TORs agreed with the Bank team.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Zhefu Liu (EASCS)
                           Feng Ji (EASCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The project is expected to substantially improve
                           BP 4.01                                              local environment by closing up an existing
                                                                                dump site and by supporting environmental
                                                                                remediation in the JiuDa coal-mining
                                                                                subsidence area (approximately 11.4km2). It
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                will also bring about great environmental
                                                                                benefits to local communities. However, there
                                                                                will be risks mainly associated with closure of
                                                                                an existing dump site and site clean-up of
                                                                                limited coal mining wastes, i.e. whether the
                                                                                closure of the dump site and the site clean-up of
                                                                                coal mining wastes can be conducted in an
                                                                                environmentally sound manner. During
                                                                                construction phase, there are general
                                                                                construction-related impacts such as disposal of
                                                                                spoil, sediments and waste generated from
                                                                                demolished buildings, nuisance of dust, noise,
                                                                                wastewater, and disturbance to local
                                                                                communities etc. In the operation phase,
                                                                                adverse impacts mainly include, among others,
                                                                                disposal of leachate and methane gas collected
                                                                                from the dump site. Therefore, the
                                                                                Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01) would be
                                                                                triggered. A full EA would be conducted by an
                         experienced EA consulting firm.

                         Environmental baseline information for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         project will be collected, including the
                         monitoring data for groundwater, surface water,
                         soil in the project area, the leachate from the
                         dump site, etc., and the characteristics of the
                         mining wastes to check whether they are
                         contaminated with toxic and hazardous
                         materials. The EA will assess the impacts of the
                         project on the project area of influence,
                         including residential area adjacent to the project
                         site, ancillary facilities (e.g., disposal sites for
                         mine wastes) and impacts related to future land
                         use of the area after rehabilitation. Evaluation of
                         alternatives for site remediation will be
                         conducted. A Remediation Plan for the project,
                         prepared as a result of project feasibility study,
                         will present the recommended option along with
                         the description of the mitigation measures, the
                         environmental monitoring plan, the
                         implementation schedule, the implementation
                         responsibilities, and the budget for remedial
                         measures as well as the long-term
                         environmental monitoring plan, the institutional
                         responsibilities for implementation, and the
                         budget for these activities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The EA will include, among others, the four
                         secondary roads. The design of the access roads
                         will consider improvement in connectivity of
                         the existing roads to residential areas and future
                         businesses in the project areas. The EA will
                         consider the construction phase impacts: noise
                         and dust emissions, vibration impacts to
                         subsided areas and structures (buildings),
                         extraction and transportation-related impacts of
                         raw materials, transportation and disposal-
                         related impacts of excavated materials, potential
                         disturbances to the local businesses and
                         residences, management of workers’ camps, etc.
                         The EA will also address the environmental
                         impacts during the operational phase (e.g. noise,
                         vehicle emission, road safety).

                         Public consultation is to be conducted in two
                         stages: one for the draft EA TORs, and the other
                                                             for draft EA. The results of the consultations
                                                             will be taken into account in the project
                                                             feasibility study/design and the EA. Based on
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             the EA, an EMP will be developed, including:
                                                             (a)
                                                             Specific mitigation measures for each type of
                                                             project activities, including the Remediation
                                                             Plan. An Environmental Code of Practices
                                                             (ECOPs) for the construction activities will be
                                                             included in the EMP, to address general
                                                             construction related impacts; (b) A monitoring
                                                             plan; (c) An institutional framework for project
                                                             preparation and implementation for each type of
                                                             project activities; (d) An institutional
                                                             strengthening plan covering training, and
                                                             technical assistance; and (e) Adequate budget
                                                             for the EMP implementation.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No    Based on the available information and the site
                                                             visit, the project area, which features with farm
                                                             land, water ponds, cultivated trees, has been
                                                             heavily influenced by human activities. The
                                                             project activities are not likely to affect any
                                                             protected reserves, known as natural habitats, or
                                                             established or proposed critical natural habitats.
                                                             This policy would therefore not be triggered.
                                                             However, the presence/absence of any natural
                                                             habitats at the project site and within the project
                                                             area of influence will be screened as part of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             EA process.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            TBD   The project may finance planting of trees of
                                                             conifer and broadleaf species. It is expected that
                                                             the plantation will generate positive impacts to
                                                             the environment and the local communities.
                                                             However, some negative impacts (e.g. invasive
                                                             species) may occur if the project is not properly
                                                             designed and implemented. The final project
                                                             proposal will provide information to determine
                                                             whether this policy would be triggered or not.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       TBD   The establishment and management of tree
                                                             plantation and nursery may need to use limited
                                                             pesticides or herbicides. If this is the case, the
                                                             environmental friendly method for pest
                                                             management will be promoted. The final project
                                                             proposal will provide information to determine
                                                             whether this policy would be triggered or not.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   TBD                           Based on the available information and the site
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         visit, the project is not likely to cause any
                                                                                                                                 significant adverse impacts on the Physical
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 Cultural Resources (PCRs) in the project
                                                                                                                                 influence area. However, further PCRs survey,
                                                                                                                                 as part of the EA during project preparation,
                                                                                                                                 will be undertaken to confirm whether this
                                                                                                                                 policy is triggered or not.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            Huainan municipality has a population of 2.45
                                                                                                                                 million population including 32,000 ethnic
                                                                                                                                 minorities scattered in the municipality. The
                                                                                                                                 project area is located in Datong District and it
                                                                                                                                 is an area populated purely with Han Chinese.
                                                                                                                                 Han is the majority in China anddoes not fall
                                                                                                                                 into the criteria of IP definition. So the Bank
                                                                                                                                 Indigenous Peoples Policy OP 4.10 would not
                                                                                                                                 be triggered. However, further screening for
                                                                                                                                 ethnic minorities would be undertaken to
                                                                                                                                 confirm the presence/absence of groups that
                                                                                                                                 would qualify as IP under the Bank's policy.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           For project facility construction, a small amount
                                 4.12                                                                                            of collective land may need to be acquired, and
                                                                                                                                 some existing private structures may have to be
                                                                                                                                 relocated by the project. Therefore, the OP 4.12
                                                                                                                                 would be triggered. A resettlement action plan
                                                                                                                                 is to be prepared forthe Bank review prior to
                                                                                                                                 project appraisal.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project will not finance construction or
                                                                                                                                 rehabilitation of any dams as defined under this
                                                                                                                                 policy. Thus, this policy would not be triggered.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The project is not associated with an
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            international waterway
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project is not located in disputed areas.
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Dec-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      In parallel with the project feasibility study, detailed impact and socio-economic survey is being
                                      carried out, based on which the safeguards instruments (EA/EMP, EA Executive Summary, and
                                      RAP, etc.), will be drafted and submitted to the Bank for review by September, 2013.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Xiaokai Li



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Approved By:
                         Regional Safeguards Name:                        Date:
                         Coordinator:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sector Manager:     Name: Mark R. Lundell (SM)   Date: 04-Sep-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
