                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC5246

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Sep-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-Sep-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Uzbekistan                        Project ID:      P133703
                            Project Name:       Horticulture Development Project (P133703)
                            Task Team           Dilshod Khidirov
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           15-Oct-2013                       Estimated        11-Feb-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      ECSAR                             Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Crops (50%), Agricultural extension and research (50%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural markets (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       110.00                Total Bank Financing:             100.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                              Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                              10.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                    100.00
                              Total                                                                          110.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The development objective of the proposed project is to strengthen the horticulture subsector by: i)
                           facilitating investments along the value chain in order to improve productivity on the farm, improve
                           quality and reduce post-harvest loss, and reduce food safety hazards; ii) improving the flow of
                           information about best practices on farm and along the value chain; iii) facilitating the adoption of a
                           supportive policy framework for the subsector.
                           C. Project Description
                         The area to be covered by the project was discussed with the Ministry of Agriculture and Water
                         Resources and it was tentatively agreed to include the following five regions: Tashkent, Jizzak,
                         Samarkand, Kashkadarya, and Namangan. The project is proposed to be implemented over a 6-year
Public Disclosure Copy




                         period, and will include three components as described below.

                         Component 1: Agricultural Support Services - Providing Public Goods

                         As discussed in the Horticulture Policy Note for Uzbekistan Strengthening the Horticulture Value
                         Chain, Uzbekistan’s horticultural sector has grown rapidly, fueled by growing domestic and export
                         demand, and by rates of on-farm profits that are high relative to alternative crops. The rapid
                         expansion has brought with it a new set of market participants on the farm and along the marketing
                         chain, straining the capacity of existing institutions. The general market for agricultural input and
                         output services is less extensive than in similar-sized agricultural sectors elsewhere. This is in part
                         because the governance structures of dehkan and private farms growing horticultural produce are
                         different from those under which private wheat and cotton farms operate. Grain and cotton producers
                         occupy 84 percent of the arable land in Uzbekistan and are given production quotas by the state, and
                         are supplied with pesticides and fertilizer. In contrast dehkan farmers make their own arrangements
                         for purchasing fertilizers, pesticides, machinery, planting materials, etc. and organize the sale of their
                         outputs.

                         As a consequence, agricultural input and output markets are not fully mature in Uzbekistan and the
                         large number of farmers growing horticultural subsector for the first time are unfamiliar with many
                         of the technical aspects of growing the crop and with market-reliant activities. Entrepreneurs entering
                         to provide inputs or down-stream services lack experience as well for many of the same reasons. All
                         of this creates a knowledge gap, which current institutions are unable to close in a timely way.

                         The scale and variety of threats from pests and disease has increased rapidly with the import of
                         planting material and the expansion of cultivated areas. Moreover, it is important for the research
Public Disclosure Copy




                         centers to fully document the genetic material present in the traditional local varieties of fruit and
                         vegetables and to document and preserve the genetic material present in Uzbek forests, since these
                         may be the building blocks for improving future varieties.

                         To respond to the above challenges, the following set of activities is proposed to be included in this
                         component in order to strengthened two research institutes:

                         •        Provide assistance to assure improved planting materials, disease and pest identification and
                         soils tests by supporting labs and training personnel
                         •        Identify and document genetic material available in the wild and material found in local
                         varieties non-commercial varieties
                         •        Develop the capacity to map pests and diseases as outbreaks occur in order to coordinate
                         actions to stem related crop losses
                         •        Promote and support ecologically sustainable pest management, safe pesticide handling/use/
                         disposal, and avoid exceeding maximum pesticide residue levels on/in crops
                         •        Support demonstration farms and media-based mechanisms for disseminating information
                         about mechanical and biological on-farm technologies, including information about varieties,
                         irrigation, greenhouses and post-harvest equipment
                         •        Develop modular training programs for farmers and traders for all areas, including storage,
                         post-harvest handling, packing and marketing, and food hazard controls
                         •       Develop and disseminate basic materials to help farms manage the business-side of farming,
                         including basic information on record keeping, marketing, and business plans.
                         •       Explore and disseminate information about alternative energy technologies, including solar
Public Disclosure Copy




                         energy and energy based on agricultural by-products
                         •       Support study tours for leading farmers

                         The following set of activities would be funded in order to strengthen the public-private institions
                         that facilitate agricultural input and output markets:

                         •        Build the capacity of voluntary associations along the value chain with the goal of drawing
                         up quality standards, codes of conduct, and organizing marketing campaigns, drawing on the
                         successful experiences of other countries
                         •        Improve market information, including price information gathering and reporting, about
                         domestic regional markets and destination markets in Russia and the Ukraine
                         •        Undertake market studies of potentially interesting fruit and vegetable markets for Uzbek
                         producers to help farmers improve profitability;
                         •        Undertake market-channel studies identifying bottlenecks and opportunities for new private
                         sector investments (e.g. collection points for processors, new packaging, new crops, etc.)
                         •        Provide technical support in marketing via publications of articles, video and coordinated
                         events at demonstration plots with information about packing, volume, quality and food safety
                         requirements along various marketing channels.
                         •        Participate in national and international trade shows for fruit and vegetable stakeholders to
                         promote investments and exports, and to improve quality of production, marketing and investment
                         decisions.
                         •        Establish opportunities for stakeholders and policy makers to learn from countries with
                         advanced horticultural subsectors about successful policies


                         As discussed in the Policy Note, food safety hazards often emerge as marketing chains become more
Public Disclosure Copy




                         complex and these pose a public health threat to domestic consumers. In addition, quality and food
                         safety assurances become increasingly important in export destination markets. In recent years,
                         supermarkets, fast-food restaurants and other buyers of horticultural products impose their own
                         private-sector standards on suppliers in order to protect their reputation and core business. To date,
                         Uzbekistan’s horticultural exports, especially exports to Russia, have grown rapidly because of their
                         high quality and early availability. However, the ability of Uzbek exporters to penetrate high end
                         markets may become more limited because of weak food hazard controls, as Russia implements its
                         obligations under the WTO and as supermarkets and restaurants capture a larger share of the produce
                         market.

                         For example, more than 90% of Uzbekistan’s fresh produce has been traditionally sold in Russia and
                         not many of these fruits and vegetables have entered supermarket chains due to inadequate
                         packaging, sorting and grading of produce. In Russia supermarkets are winning in competition with
                         traditional open markets and thus, the size of Russian market for produce from Uzbekistan has
                         decreased twofold in the past five years, while local production continued growing.

                         Furthermore, a study prepared under the Bank-financed Central Asia One Health Project in 2011
                         identified a number of recommendations to strengthen the national food safety structure controls and
                         reduce the risk of food borne diseases. The recommendations and conclusions are divided into three
                         sections: legislative framework, administrative and institutional structures and operational aspects of
                         the food chain. Implementation of these recommendations will be important for improved food
                         safety and public health in Uzbekistan, and for enhanced export potential of horticulture products.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The following set of activities would be financed under this component to protect local consumers
                         should be protected from unsafe products and improve their access to higher quality products. They
                         would also help farmers, processors and traders manage their reputational risks and improve the
                         image of Uzbek produce outside of the country, thereby improving access to the most attractive
                         marketing channels.

                         o       Assist developing good production and handling practices according to GlobalGAP, HACCP
                         and other internationally recognized food safety systems;
                         o       Help Uzstandart translate into Uzbek various international fruit & vegetable quality
                         requirements;
                         o       Develop manuals of quality and packaging requirements for various products in various
                         countries where products from Uzbekistan are or could be sold.
                         o       Work with private-public voluntary associations to gather and disseminate information about
                         private-sector standards in domestic and destination markets

                         Component 2: Facilitating Private Investment - Access to Credit

                         While knowledge gaps contribute to many problems along the horticulture market chain, private
                         sector investments are often required to solve the problems. By way of example, it is estimated that
                         over 30% of vegetable and fruit crops are wasted due to lack of proper storage and the inability to
                         process crops that do not find their way into fresh produce markets. Although there is no data to
                         show the total capacity of the country’s cold storage, field visits suggest that the majority of the
                         horticulture farmers, mainly dehkan farmers, do not have access to the modern post harvest pre-
                         cooling and cold storage facilities. Fresh farm produce cannot maximum its shelf life without pre-
                         cooling after harvest even the transportation with refrigerator is available for export market.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          The agro-business sector in Uzbekistan remains constrained by the lack of capital in general, but
                         investment capital in particular. Whereas the banking sector has in recent years registered significant
                         gains in the availability of short-term lending resources, long term resources remain limited. Demand
                         for agricultural financial services is high and is not currently being sufficiently met. Consequently,
                         banks and leasing companies still need long-term funds in order to respond to investment demands
                         from their clients.

                         The objective of the Access to Credit component is to enhance access to financial services for
                         agribusinesses operating in Uzbekistan’s horticulture sector, in particular towards enhanced
                         competitiveness of the sector, improved quality and food safety standards, and establishment of
                         market linkages. The component would finance such investments as new cultivar, seeds/seedlings,
                         water-saving irrigation facilities (such as drip irrigation), cold storage and other cold chain facilities,
                         and value added handling/processing equipment and facilities. The project will build on the
                         experience gained during RE SP II which has achieved sizeable results with provision of financial
                         services to Uzbekistan’s agricultural enterprises. RESP II also supported capacity building of the
                         participating banks to improve their skills in appraising agriculture-related investment loans.

                         The component would further expand the access to the investment financing through additional
                         lending resources for use by banks and leasing companies for on-lending agribusiness. The project
                         would also support introduction of new financial products to support value chain development in the
                         sector.

                         Line of Credit for Banks and Leasing Companies. This sub-component will finance investment
Public Disclosure Copy




                         activities, principally for enterprises operating in the horticultural sector, through qualifying
                         commercial banks and leasing companies. The current needs of agribusinesses for financing far
                         exceed the long-term funds available to commercial banks, as shown by the high demand for
                         investment funds under RESP II. Particularly, attention will be focused on investments supporting
                         the enhanced competitiveness of the sector, access to new technologies, value addition in the sector,
                         and improved market access through establishment of market linkages. In addition, the project would
                         introduce a range of innovative structured finance products, to support development of market
                         linkages and value chains. These products are expected to take the focus of the financial sector off
                         the traditional forms of collateral, help agribusinesses borrow to deliver under signed contracts, and
                         develop relationships between farmers, agro-processors, wholesalers, retailers, etc.

                         Similar to RESP II, the Credit Line will be extended through qualified commercial banks and leasing
                         companies, the Participating Financial Institutions (PFIs). A PFI will be a commercial bank or a
                         leasing company selected on the basis of a set of PFI Eligibility Criteria, which include compliance
                         with banking laws and prudential norms and regulations, maintenance of a healthy financial status
                         and sound lending policies and procedures. The credit line will be open to all interested commercial
                         banks which qualify through the due diligence process. Leasin g companies are also encouraged to
                         undergo the due diligence procedure, as leasing arrangements may be more attractive than loans in
                         some cases due to lesser collateral requirements. An operational manual for the credit line (similar to
                         the Rural Enterprise Investment Regulations under the RESP II) will set forth the eligibility criteria
                         for PFIs, sub-borrowers and sub-projects to be financed and the procedures for all parties involved in
                         the implementation of the credit line.

                         Capacity building program for Financial Institutions. Given the novelty of the non-traditional
                         financial products to support value chain development, the project will implement a capacity building
                         program for the financial institutions involved in the project. The PFIs will receive training on
Public Disclosure Copy




                         applicability of the new financial products in lending to agriculture, assessing the suitability and
                         effectiveness of these new financial products, and on mitigation of the related risks. The PFIs will
                         receive hands-on training in practical application of the new financial products through long-term
                         (resident) TA, training and a study tour to a country with a developed agricultural finance system and
                         application of value chain finance in agriculture.

                         Component 3: Project Management

                         The component will be focused on strengthening the MAWR’s and RRA’s capacity for Project
                         management, monitoring and evaluation through the provision of goods, consultant services,
                         Training, and financing of Incremental Operating Costs. This component will (i) support operation of
                         the RRA, and finance overall project management, as well as contract administration, procurement,
                         and financial management; and (iii) establish a robust performance based Management Information
                         System (MIS) and arrange for data collection and reporting on key performance output and impact
                         indicators, through baseline surveys, participatory assessments, mid-term review and final evaluation.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The area to be covered by the project was discussed with the Ministry of Agriculture and Water
                           Resources and it was tentatively agreed to include the following five regions: Tashkent, Jizzak,
                           Samarkand, Kashkadarya, and Namangan.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The HDP is proposed to be managed and implemented by the Rural Restructuring Agency (RRA), an
                           institution that is currently implementing the Second Rural Enterprise Support Project, GEF Climate
                           Change and Land Degradation Project, and other donors’ projects. The RRA has already established
                           office premises in the country’s capital, with trained and professional staff that have experience
                           implementing agriculture and rural development projects. Due to the complexity of the
                           implementation of the large number of components under the RESP II, the necessity to directly liaise
                           with regional and district government, and the importance of constant access to project beneficiaries
                           (farmers in project regions), the RRA has also established small offices in the seven project regions.
                           At present the regional offices provide day-to-day management of implementation activities, as well
                           as fulfilling monitoring and reporting functions.

                           The RRA has adequate capacity and sound track record under the RESP II that ensures sufficient
                           experience and capacity to effectively implement the HDP. It will recruit additional specialists
                           (Procurement, Financial Management, Environment, M&E, etc.) and they will be trained in Bank’s
                           procedures. The Bank will continue to provide regular implementation support. As of today,
                           compliance with the Environmental Management Framework under the RESP II&GEF project has
                           been generally satisfactory. The performance of the RRA environmental specialist will be closely
                           monitored with additional support provided if needed.

                           The GoU and RRA have good track record in supporting biological control and other IPM methods
                           in the past, including an IPM Institute with field offices/training centers (although it should be noted
                           that these have been focused on the cotton sector with limited applicability to horticultural crops).
                           Training and advisory services on integrated pest management (IPM) and safe handling and use of
                           agricultural chemicals has been and is currently being provided to farmers and agribusiness
                           personnel under the Rural Training and Advisory Services Component of RESP II. In addition,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           previous Bank-funded projects in the agricultural sector addressed IPM issue through involving of
                           international consultants and organizations that prepared a program on strengthening and expanding
                           the use of IPM techniques, which integrated biological, chemical and cultural practices. They also
                           included the development of equipment for improved production and dispersal of beneficial insects
                           and improved application of chemical pesticides. Additionally, training materials in IPM that were
                           produced by these projects were commonly used over the years among the agricultural producers.

                           While RESP II did not trigger any social safeguards (like the current project), the project unit has
                           done a commendable job of addressing a range of other social issues such as gender (jobs for
                           women) and monitoring of child labour. The project team will continue this effort to build capacity
                           on social issues with the project unit.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Roxanne Hakim (ECSSO)
                           Arcadii Capcelea (ECSEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes   This policy is triggered as the project will
                         BP 4.01                              support a series of activities which will generate
                                                              some environmental and social impacts. While
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              generally the project will provide many
                                                              environmental and social benefits (such as
                                                              increased food security and farmer income due
                                                              to higher agricultural productivity, enhanced
                                                              agricultural competitiveness, improved farmer
                                                              skills in land conservation and IPM practices or
                                                              increased opportunity for engagement in small
                                                              scale agri-businesses by farmers), it may also
                                                              cause some negative impacts. Expansion of
                                                              areas under horticulture and intensified
                                                              horticulture practices could result in increased
                                                              water use and use of inputs, including pesticides
                                                              and chemical fertilizers. The project may also
                                                              support import of alien varieties of fruits, nuts
                                                              and vegetables, which could result in loss of
                                                              native species biodiversity and introduction of
                                                              new pests and diseases, which could be
                                                              aggravated by climate change effects already
                                                              being seen in Uzbekistan. Sub-projects
                                                              anticipated for financing under the credit line if
                                                              not adequately implemented, may cause some
                                                              environmental impacts related to: (a) increased
                                                              pollution of ground and surface waters due to
                                                              soil erosion, use of fertilizers and pesticide, as
                                                              well as the processing of agricultural products;
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              (b) threats to human health and wildlife due to
                                                              poor handling of fertilizers and pesticides; (c)
                                                              increased siltation of water bodies due to soil
                                                              erosion; (c) solid wastes during processing of
                                                              agricultural products.

                                                              To address these potential negative impacts the
                                                              borrower will update the Environmental
                                                              Management Framework (EMF) prepared under
                                                              the current Second Rural Enterprise Support and
                                                              associated GEF Climate Change and Land
                                                              Degradation Projects which support similar
                                                              activities. This document covers: rules and
                                                              procedures for environmental screening;
                                                              guidance for conducting subprojects EIA and/or
                                                              preparing simple EMPs as well as of EMP
                                                              Checklist; possible mitigation measures for
                                                              different proposed activities and types of sub-
                                                              projects to be supported by the credit line;
                                                              requirements for monitoring and supervision of
                                                              implementing of EIA/EMPs requirements. The
                                                              EMF will be fully revised and adjusted to the
                                                              HDP before appraisal, as well as will be
                                                              disclosed and consulted in the country.

                                                              The EMF will also specify capacity building
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       TBD   No important wildlife and wildlife habitats are
                                                                 expected to be found in the vicinity of the
                                                                 potential locations for the implementation
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 project activities and subprojects to be
                                                                 supported under the credit line.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    This policy will be not triggered as all project
                                                                 activities will be implemented on existing
                                                                 agricultural lands.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes   The OP 4.09 is triggered. A separate Pest
                                                                 Management Plan will be prepared which will
                                                                 provide a platform for a thorough review of
                                                                 existing pest management issues, practices and
                                                                 capacity (among the research institutions and
                                                                 other support services as well as the target
                                                                 farmers) and to set out a specific program of
                                                                 monitorable activities and targets addressing
                                                                 both project components. These activities/
                                                                 targets will include promoting and supporting
                                                                 ecologically sustainable pest management, safe
                                                                 pesticide handling/use/disposal, and avoiding
                                                                 exceeding maximum pesticide residue levels on/
                                                                 in crops. Furthermore, the PMP will analyze if
                                                                 there are sufficient natural pollinators in the
                                                                 project areas, and whether there is a need for
                                                                 special measures to protect and encourage wild
                                                                 pollinators and/or to promote beekeeping as part
                                                                 of the technology package.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    There will be no impact on physical cultural
                         BP 4.11                                 resources as all proposed activities will be
                                                                 implemented on existing agricultural lands and/
                                                                 or within the laboratory facilities.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No    N/A

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No    As with RESP 2 it is unlikely that there will be
                         4.12                                    any activities that will warrant triggering of OP
                                                                 4.12. The project will not support activities and
                                                                 sub-projects that might result in resettlement.
                                                                 The EMF and the Project Operational Manual
                                                                 will clearly indicate that any infrastructure
                                                                 constructed under the project will be: a) located
                                                                 on land already owned by participants, or will
                                                                 be bought or leased on a willing buyer-willing
                                                                 seller basis, and, b) will be screened to ensure
                                                                 that it is free of legal encumbrance, or informal
                                                                 use or occupation by others who lack formal
                                                                 title. Hence the project will not support projects
                                                                 on land that is acquired involuntarily or triggers
                                                                                                                                 the policy in any other way. The EMF and
                                                                                                                                 Operations Manual will reflect this.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            N/A
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects on International                                         No                            Not triggered because the project will not
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            support rehabilitation of irrigation systems or
                                                                                                                                 financing for expansion of irrigated land
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             N/A
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Dec-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The EMF and PMP documents will be revised before appraisal. Their disclosure will be done via
                                      Internet and by submitting the draft documents to key stakeholders for review and comments.
                                      After that (in about 14 days) the EMF and PMP will be consulted at a special workshop with
                                      participation of all stakeholders and representatives from broad public and NGOs. All relevant
                                      consultation documents including invitations, announcement, list of attendees, minutes and
                                      summaries of comments received will be attached to the EMF and PMP for Infoshop disclosure.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Dilshod Khidirov

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name:                                                                                                                      Date:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Dina Umali-Deininger (SM)                                                                                            Date: 13-Sep-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
