                                                                  INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                           CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                          Report No.: ISDSC439
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Mar-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                       Africa                                 Project ID:                      P118213
                              Project Name:                  RCIP4 - Regional Communications Infrastructure Program - APL 4 (P118213)
                              Task Team Leader:              Maria Isabel A. S. Neto
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 20-Aug-2012                                 Estimated Board Date:            25-Oct-2012
                              Managing Unit:                 TWICT                                  Lending Instrument:              Adaptable Program Loan
                              Sector:                        Telecommunications (60%), Information technology (30%), Public administration- Information and communications
                                                             (10%)
                              Theme:                         Infrastructure services for private sector development (60%), Administrative and civil service reform (20%), Rural
                                                             services and infr astructure (10%), Regulation and competition policy (10%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                  Financing Source                                                                                                     Amount
                                  BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                        0.00
                                  International Development Association (IDA)                                                                             70.00
                                  IDA Grant                                                                                                               22.00
                                  Total                                                                                                                   92.00
                              Environmental Category:        B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              B. Project Objectives

                              The development objectives of the proposed project are consistent with the PDO of the RCIP Program. The development objectives of the
                              proposed RCIP 4 are to support the Recipient’s efforts to: (i) lower prices for international capacity and extend the geographicreach of broadband
Public Disclosure Copy




                              networks (the connectivity development objective); and (ii) improve the Government’s efficiency and transparency through e-Government
                              applications (the transparency development objective).

                              C. Project Description

                              This is the fourth horizontal phase of the Regional Communications Infrastructure Program (RCIP) that was approved on March 29, 2007. RCIP is
                              focused on closing the terrestrial connectivity gap by linking the capitals and major cities in East & Southern Africa (E&SA). Each project under
                              RCIP complements the submarine cable projects in the region by accelerating national infrastructure roll-out and facilitate uptake of services
                              through e-Government initiatives. To maximize flexibility and client responsiveness in this multi-country effort, RCIP has been designed as a
                              customizable menu of options from which individual governments can choose from and adapt to their unique circumstances. The menu of activities
                              is categorized under three overarching components: (a) enabling environment including monitoring and evaluation; (b) connectivity; and (c) e-
                              Government applications.

                              Closing the terrestrial connectivity gap under RCIP requires the combination of two key interventions: (i) investment support based on public-
                              private partnership as feasibility studies have shown that some segments of the infrastructure network would not be fully commercially viable on a
                              strictly private sector financing model and require demand-enhancing initiatives (e.g., e-Government applications); and (ii) policy and regulatory
                              support to ensure that once in place, the infrastructure is accessible to all service providers on open, transparent and non-discriminatory terms.

                              The recent development of submarine fiber optic cables connecting E&SA to the global communications networks ended the reliance of E&SA on
                              expensive and relatively low-quality satellite connections for international Internet bandwidth with SEACOM, TEAMS, and EASSy submarine cable
                              projects now operational. RCIP was designed to complement these new investments to ensure that terrestrial backbone infrastructure is in place to
                              take advantage of the submarine cables landing on the east coast of Africa. The implementation of RCIP 4 would better integrate Uganda and
                              Comoros within the region, allowing increase in regional trade as well as becoming more competitive internationally. Enhanced regional
                              connectivity would also provide Uganda and Comoros diversity of access to onward international connectivity on submarine cables improving
                              reliability. RCIP is designed to complement and benefit from other regional ICT activities that the World Bank Group is involved with including the
                              Eastern Africa Submarine System (EASSy), Central African Backbone (CAB), and West Africa Regional Communications Infrastructure Program
                              (WARCIP).

                              The proposed RCIP 4 project would include two country operations – RCIP Uganda and RCIP Comoros.

                              The proposed RCIP Uganda IDA credit would be for US$70 million over a period of five years, of which US$27 million would come from the
                              Regional IDA allocation. Discussions have been initiated for financing of related activities with the African Development Bank, the Islamic
                         Development Bank, and the Government of Korea should additional funding be required.
                         The proposed RCIP Comoros IDA grant would be for US$22 million over a period of five years, of which US$21 million would come from the
                         Regional IDA allocation (pending confirmation of the annual national IDA allocation for Comoros in the project approval year).

                         The proposed RCIP 4 project would consist of the following four components:

                         Component 1 - Enabling Environment. This component aims to promote further regional market integration, sector liberalization, and legal and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         regulatory reforms, and would include subcomponents focused on technical assistance (TA), capacity building, and training.

                         Under RCIP Uganda, this component (US5 million) would provide support for capacity building in order to strengthen the policy and regulatory
                         environment and promote further sector reform in order to maximize benefits from access to international capacity. The potential areas to be
                         financed include ICT policy, legal and regulatory framework including e-legislation, IT skills development, training, etc. This component wo uld also
                         finance TA necessary to support the successful implementation of the operation including environmental studies and providing support for
                         monitoring and evaluation (M&E).

                         Under RCIP Comoros, this component (US$3 million) would provide the Ministry of Transportation, Post & Telecommunications, Communication &
                         Tourism, and independent regulator, Autorité Nationale de Régulation des TIC (ANRTIC), with support through TA and capacity building for (i)
                         modernizing and harmonizing the legal and regulatory framework, including preparation of legal instruments for facilitating open access to cable
                         infrastructure; (ii) support for sector reform and establishing PPP (private-public partnership) arrangements for access to the submarine cable,
                         namely through hiring legal and business advisors to advise the government on negotiations with private operators, and by financing technical and
                         financial audits of the structure to be established during the first years of operation; (iii) technical assistance, as needed, to support the planned
                         transactions for the sector (introduction of competition and privatization of Comoros telecom); and (iv) performing environmental and social studies
                         and providing support for participatory M&E.

                         Component 2 - Connectivity. This component aims to (a) support the deployment of regional connectivity; (b) purchase bandwidth capacity for
                         targeted users (schools, universities, hospitals, eGovernment use); (c) deployment of the national backbones, on the basis of PPPs, leveraging
                         private sector investment; (d) support the establishment of government virtual private networks and to cater to all the government communications
                         needs (both data and voice/video); (e) support to extend ICT in rural areas and/or community-driven ICT development on the basis of PPPs with
                         competitive award of subsidies; and (f) support for country-specific innovative demand-stimulation programs.

                         Under RCIP Uganda, this component (US$30 million) would support ICT infrastructure connectivity in Uganda through the following
                         subcomponents: (i) pre-purchase of international bandwidth for priority targeted user groups (US$6 million); (ii) implementation of missing links to
                         improve availability and resiliency of NBI (US$12 million); (iii) implementation of alternative route to submarine cables for Internet bandwidth
                         through Mutukula (US$2 million); and (iv) provision of last mile broadband solutions for connecting Government MDAs, schools, hospitals, NGOs,
                         and businesses using PPP arrangements (US$10 million). This component would also cover implementation of recommendations stemming from
                         the relevant environmental studies.

                         Under RCIP Comoros, this component (US$18 million) would include (i) TA to conduct a feasibility study for the submarine cable to connect
                         Grande Comore to Mayotte; (ii) financing of the aforementioned Comoros-Mayotte connectivity; (iii) and financing of purchasing additional capacity
                         from EASSy and/or LION2.

                         Component 3 - eGovernment Applications. eGovernment applications apply the judicious use of ICT to enable governments to improve their
Public Disclosure Copy




                         internal systems, deliver services more efficiently and effectively, and make information more accessible to citizens. This component will support
                         selected major government services which would be candidates for transition to eGovernment through the use of technology, business process re-
                         engineering to streamline processes, and change management to ensure acceptance of the new methods of working. The applications will be
                         prioritized as follows: (a) activities which will have the greatest impact in terms of transparency and accountability; (b) services where there is a
                         change champion who could help promote adoption from within government; (c) possibility of private sector participation to enhance drive for
                         results, efficiency, and economies of scale; and (d) high potential for success with implementation and payback within a few years, hence the
                         possibility for quick wins.

                         Under RCIP Uganda this component (US$30 million) would support the development of e-Government in Uganda through the following
                         subcomponents: (i) development and implementation of the national databank as a identification source for all Ugandans with respect to e-
                         Government services (US$8 million); (ii) development and implementation of shared ICT services platform (Government “cloud?) for hosting all
                         existing and future e-Government applications (US$10 million); (iii) development and implementation of Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) (US$4
                         million); (iv) implementation of e-Government applications and support services to be identified by the e-Government readiness survey (US$4
                         million); and (v) activities to support Business Process Outsourcing (BPO)/IT Enabled Services (ITES) including incubation, training, studies, and
                         promotion (US$4 million). In addition, this component would also finance TA on e-Government related issues including interoperability, enterprise
                         architecture, and privacy and data protection safeguards.

                         While RCIP includes the possibility of e-Government related components, given that addressing the sector issues is a priority for Comoros, the
                         Government of Comoros and World Bank team have decided that the proposed project would focus on the connectivity elements only for
                         Comoros, and would not include financing for e-Government applications for this country.

                         Component 4 - Project Management: This component would consist of support to finance project management related issues including project
                         coordination, procurement, financial management, monitoring & evaluation, project communication, and environmental and social safeguards. This
                         component would also provide support through office equipment, incremental operating costs, and audits. Under RCIP Uganda and Comoros the
                         estimated amounts for this component is US$5 million and US$1 million, respectively.

                         A Social and Environmental Focal Point (SEFP) for each country would be identified to help ensure appropriate and timely implementation of social
                         and environmental aspects of RCIP4. These SEFPs would be the primary counterparts of the project Social and Environmental Safeguards
                         Specialists on the World Bank side who will provide them with the necessary induction on World Bank Operational Safeguards policies to ensure
                         compliance throughout project implementation.
                            D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                           National level: rural and urban areas in Comoros.

                           In Uganda, project locations would be concentrated in and around Kampala City and other major urban and periurban areas in Uganda, border
                           post of Mukulula, and transit corridors for the fiber-optic network. The exact routing of the network and auxiliary infrastructure (e.g., antennae,
                           masts, etc.) would be determined during project feasibility studies during implementation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

                           In Comoros, the Borrower has generally weak capacity on the management and understanding of the environmental and social safeguard aspects
                           of projects. The Ministry of Transportation, Post & Telecommunications, Communication and Tourism would be supported throughthe Project
                           Preparation Advance and its capacity will be strengthened throughout the life of the project.

                           In Uganda, the Borrower has abundant experience with linear infrastructure and telecommunication infrastructure projects, including World Bank
                           financed. The Borrower also has an established national EIA system that would be used to ensure environmental due diligence. The National
                           Information Technology Authority – Uganda would be the implementing agency and would prepare environmental due diligence documents by
                           engaging a consultant from an existing roster of registered environmental practitioners and would obtain approval by the National Environmental
                           Management Authority before proceeding with civil works.

                           As required by the screening and triggering of the safeguards policies (OP/BP 4.01 and 4.12), the recipient governments will prepare
                           Environmental and Social Management Frameworks (ESMF) and Resettlement Policy Frameworks (RPF) conforming to World Bank requirements.
                           Consultants might be hired to conduct the project environmental and social assessment and elaborate both safeguards instruments commensurate
                           to the magnitude of foreseen project impacts. These assessments would also advise on the capacity building needs and the institutional
                           arrangement to be adopted by the Borrowers to ensure implementation of environmental and social recommendations. Once completed, both
                           ESMF and RPF will be reviewed and cleared by ASPEN then publicly disclosed (i) in Uganda and Comoros, preferably on project sites, preferably
                           with the executive summaries in a language understandable by affected communities and all other key interest groups, and (ii) at InfoShop prior to
                           appraisal.

                            F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

                           Martin Fodor (AFTEN)
                           Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTCS)
                           Paul-Jean Feno (AFTEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

                            Safeguard Policies                               Triggered?        Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01              Yes                 RCIP 4 is assigned to social and environmental category B due to site specific
                                                                                               and easily manageable risks. There would be localized potential environmental
                                                                                               and social impacts associated with the infrastructure components of the project,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               particularly associated with: (i) the linear excavations for burying fiber-optic cable
                                                                                               (alternatively overhead stringing of the cable) and civil works associated with
                                                                                               building of national terrestrial backbones, rollout of rural networks, and of the
                                                                                               landing stations, and (ii) in Comoros, temporary perturbation of marine
                                                                                               ecosystem during the civil works of submarine cable. The borrowing countries
                                                                                               will prepare ESMFs that would set forth the basic principles and prerogative to
                                                                                               be followed during project implementation. Once completed, the ESMFs will be
                                                                                               reviewed and cleared by the Bank and then publicly disclosed both in-country
                                                                                               and at InfoShop prior to appraisal.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                      No

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                               No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09                          No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11           No

                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                    No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12              Yes                 The activities proposed to be funded under RCIP4 could involve land
                                                                                               acquisition for or loss of access (even temporarily) to some socioeconomic
                                                                                               assets during the construction of telecommunications infrastructure such as
                                                                                               ducts for laying fibers optic networks or access roads, however, whenever
                                                                                               possible, the linear infrastructure would be placed in the existing, unencumbered
                                                                                               rights of way (road reserves, railway reserves, etc.). To comply with OP/BP 4.12
                                                                                               policy requirements, borrowers will prepare RPFs that sets forth the basic
                                                                                               principles and prerogative to be followed during project implementation. Like the
                                                                                                                        ESMFs, once cleared, the RPFs will be publicly disclosed both in-country and at
                                                                                                                        InfoShop prior to appraisal.
                                Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                          No

                                Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                          No
                                7.50
Public Disclosure Copy




                                Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                              No



                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Jun-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
                                  should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                    As the detailed physical location of facilities or/and infrastructures to be financed are still unknown and would be determined only during
                                    implementation through feasibility studies, the Borrowers are tasked with preparing the required social and environmental safeguards
                                    instruments, namely the ESMFs and RPFs. These will set forth the principles and guidelines borrowers must follow to comply with the
                                    requirements of the triggered policies. To the extent possible, the ESMFs and RPFs would draw on existing frameworks prepared and
                                    implemented for similar types of infrastructure. These documents will be reviewed, cleared and disclosed at publicly accessible locations and
                                    in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons (i) in-country, and (ii) at InfoShop prior to appraisal.

                                    World Bank staff would help the Borrower with detailed guidance on the preparation of these environmental and social safeguard instruments
                                    and would conduct close supervision.

                         IV. APPROVALS
                                Task Team Leader:                                Name: Maria Isabel A. S. Neto
                                Approved By:
                                Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                 Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                     Date: 01-Mar-2012
                                Sector Manager:                                  Name: Doyle Gallegos (SM)                                                                             Date: 13-Feb-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
