                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA4053
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-May-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-May-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Mongolia                           Project ID:    P125964
                            Project Name:     Mongolia Livestock and Agricultural Marketing Project (P125964)
                            Task Team         Charles Annor-Frempong
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         29-Oct-2012                        Estimated   14-Jun-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    EASCS                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (50%), Animal production (25%),
                                              Agricultural extension and research (25%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural markets (50%), Rural policies and institutions (20%), Other environment
                                              and natural resources management (10%), Micro, Small a nd Medium Enterprise
                                              support (10%), Gender (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      11.49           Total Bank Financing:                 0.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                       Financing Gap:                        0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                  0.49
                              Global Agriculture and Food Security Program                                             11.00
                              Total                                                                                    11.49
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to improve rural livelihoods and food security in selected
                           aimags and soums through investments in enhancing productivity, market access and diversification
                           in livestock-based production systems.

                                                                      Page 1 of 11
                         3. Project Description
                         The proposed project design is based on the original proposal submitted by the Government of
                         Mongolia to GAFSP, which was approved by the GAFSP Selection Committee in November 2010.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Since then, the concept has been further refined and deepened. Key design features of the project
                         concept are:

                         Scope: The project would cover all critical aspects at the county (soum) level for developing the
                         sector. A criticism of some previous initiatives in the livestock sector is that they have been overly
                         focused on a single issue and therefore have not led to desired outcomes. The approach in this project
                         is to support both marketing and production issues, focusing not only at the herder level but also up
                         the marketing chain, to provide a more comprehensive model for the development of the sector,
                         albeit on a limited geographical scale. A core goal of the project is to develop stronger linkages
                         between herders and markets. This implies working closely with the private sector. The approach
                         taken will put agribusiness at the center of the approach, building services around emerging markets.

                         Geographic focus: The project will be geographically focused on five (out of 21) provinces (aimags),
                         and within each of these aimags on three or four soums, with support therefore targeted at a total of
                         approximately 15-20 soums (out of 330 nationwide). These are all areas either within or adjacent to
                         the proposed Foot and Mouth Disease-free zone. The limited geographical focus would concentrate
                         resources in order to demonstrate a meaningful impact on herder livelihoods and the livestock sector
                         within those locations. Approaches taken will be designed to be sustainable and would emphasize the
                         need to be replicable in other parts of the country.

                         Consistency with on-going programs: The project would contribute to achieving the goals of the
                         National Livestock Program and be consistent with the approach and activities included in the
                         Program. This includes contributing to achieving long term goals for the sector, for example to
                         increase the export market potential for the sector. The activities under the project would be
                         complementary to those on-going projects and prevent duplication.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed project design is based on the original proposal submitted by the Government of
                         Mongolia to GAFSP, which was approved by the GAFSP Selection Committee in November 2010.
                         Since then, the concept has been further refined and deepened. Key design features of the project
                         concept are:

                         Scope: The project would cover all critical aspects at the county (soum) level for developing the
                         sector. A criticism of some previous initiatives in the livestock sector is that they have been overly
                         focused on a single issue and therefore have not led to desired outcomes. The approach in this project
                         is to support both marketing and production issues, focusing not only at the herder level but also up
                         the marketing chain, to provide a more comprehensive model for the development of the sector,
                         albeit on a limited geographical scale. A core goal of the project is to develop stronger linkages
                         between herders and markets. This implies working closely with the private sector. The approach
                         taken will put agribusiness at the center of the approach, building services around emerging markets.

                         Geographic focus: The project will be geographically focused on five (out of 21) provinces (aimags),
                         and within each of these aimags on three or four soums, with support therefore targeted at a total of
                         approximately 15-20 soums (out of 330 nationwide). These are all areas either within or adjacent to
                         the proposed Foot and Mouth Disease-free zone. The limited geographical focus would concentrate
                         resources in order to demonstrate a meaningful impact on herder livelihoods and the livestock sector


                                                                     Page 2 of 11
                         within those locations. Approaches taken will be designed to be sustainable and would emphasize the
                         need to be replicable in other parts of the country.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Consistency with on-going programs: The project would contribute to achieving the goals of the
                         National Livestock Program and be consistent with the approach and activities included in the
                         Program. This includes contributing to achieving long term goals for the sector, for example to
                         increase the export market potential for the sector. The activities under the project would be
                         complementary to those on-going projects and prevent duplication.

                         Component 1 – LINKING HERDERS TO MARKETS (US$ 6.00 million)
                         The objective of this component is to create productive partnerships by linking producers of
                         livestock products (meat, fiber, milk and horticultural products) to markets and diversifying sources
                         of income and household nutrition. The component will also support traceability of products for
                         participating herder cooperatives. The objective will be achieved through 3 specific sub-components
                         as follows:

                         Sub-Component 1a:       Meat and Fiber Market Development (US$4.00 million)

                         The objective of this sub-component is to improve efficiencies along the value chain of the selected
                         livestock products, namely: meat, cashmere, and wool through productive partnerships (PPs)
                         between producer groups and buyers. This reduces the risks to agribusiness to invest in more remote
                         regions and increases the value added income for herders. A unique combination of incentives,
                         infrastructure, market conditions and sustainable supply, is needed to create and sustain well-
                         functioning productive partnerships. Formalized herder groups (NGOs or cooperatives) will be
                         linked with buyers and or processors of meat and fiber. Investments with the herder groups would
                         improve basic collection, handling, cleaning, sorting, packaging, storage and similar activities. This
                         will allow partners in the value-chain to formulate profitable strategies and coordinate operations.

                         The component will strengthen contractual agreements and collaboration within value chains
Public Disclosure Copy




                         between partners, ensuring market development. Lessons learned from similar projects elsewhere
                         show the need to support group organization and capacity development, partner sensitization of
                         producer group needs and context and also to provide partnership facilitation. This will be provided
                         through training and technical assistance by the service providers. The component will also
                         undertake a review recent market demand studies and SWOT analysis as part of investment
                         preparation and due diligence.

                         Attention will be paid to proactively identifying capable women’s groups (formal and informal)
                         during the recruitment process. Additionally, needs assessments and training programs will identify
                         any special requirements for training or technical support needed by women’s groups. All
                         applications for matching grants will require viable business plans that include the training required
                         to build production and management capacity. It will be the responsibility of the selected services
                         provider to ensure that productive partnerships are created between producers of meat and fiber.

                         Sub-Component 1b:       Dairy Market Development: (US$ 1.0 million)

                         The objective of this sub-component is to add value to milk and diversify the incomes of producers
                         and link them to markets. The project will support investments into small-scale milk collection and
                         processing plants and training to provide the opportunity to process dairy products locally, add value
                         and extend the marketing season. The facilities will be owned by the herder cooperatives. The

                                                                      Page 3 of 11
                         investment package will include all the equipment, tools, facilities, power, water and hygiene
                         systems necessary to ensure safe food production. The training and technical assistance package will
                         address on-farm and in-plant food safety, processing techniques, marketing, financial management
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and cooperative management. All applications will require viable business plans that include the
                         training required to build production and management capacity.
                         .

                         Sub-Component 1c:        Pilot Horticulture Production (US$1.0 million)

                         1.        The objective of this subcomponent is to diversify the sources of household nutrition and
                         incomes for small scale herders. The project will support income and nutrition diversification
                         through horticulture production and processing. Horticulture production will focus on female-headed
                         households, groups of unemployed families and herders with animals heads below the national
                         average, to establish basic vegetable production plots. This is a pro-poor investment. Beneficiary
                         selection will be done in cooperation with the soum social welfare office. The matching grants will
                         introduce productivity enhancing technologies, support diversification and improve post-harvest
                         marketing. Small-scale processing at the soum which allow all local growers to add value and shelf-
                         life to their products will also be provided by a matching grant. Women headed households will not
                         make any contribution to the matching grant, all others will provide 5 percent contribution in kind or
                         cash.

                         Component 2 – RAISING LIVESTOCK PRODUCTIVITY AND QUALITY (US$ 4.0 million)
                         This component is to ensure productivity increases and quality products for the markets. Support will
                         be provided through extension services in the areas of animal health, nutrition, breed improvement
                         and feeding to improve the productivity of the five traditional species (sheep, goat, horse, cattle/yak,
                         camel) within the semi-nomadic production system through breeding, feeding and animal health. The
                         target group for support will be the herder gro ups participating in component 1 to ensure
                         complementarity and synergy and will also be implemented through three sub-components namely:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sub-component 2a:        Promoting Animal health (approximately US$ 1.5 million)

                         35.      This sub-component aims at improving animal health status and productivity. This will be
                         accomplished through two streams of involvement: i) supporting and implementing national level
                         programs for foot and mouth disease (FMD) and brucellosis working in collaboration with other
                         programs and projects active on these topics; and ( ii) grassroots veterinary services and herd health
                         management in the 5 selected aimags. Specific activities include: (i) defining a “roadmap? for meat
                         export; (ii) supporting trade negotiations; (iii) raising the knowledge and skills of veterinarians and
                         paraprofessionals; (iv) strengthening the FMD free zone and brucellosis control campaign; and, (v)
                         upgrading animal health services and disease surveillance. Project investments will be made into: (i)
                         soum animal handling and veterinary equipment; (ii) border inspection post and buffer-zone check
                         points; iii) cold chain equipment; and, iv) aimag laboratory equipment. Herders are expected to pay
                         for the cost of treatment, drugs and artificial insemination.

                         Sub-component 2b:         Animal Breeding and Genetic Improvement (approx. US$ 1.5 million)
                         This sub-component will improve The breeding program will aim at improving economic traits
                         demanded by end-users within the 5 selected aimags focusing initially on the 15 selected 3 soums
                         during the project lifetime. The genetic improvement program will support the preservation of
                         indigenous Mongolian sheep and cashmere goat breeds. This is consistent with the national law on
                         genetic resources and the objectives for livestock genetics indicated in the NLP.

                                                                      Page 4 of 11
                         In the absence of a solid data, male animals will be selected on conformation means, look and in line
                         with breed standards. The project will supply males on loan to herders during the mating season to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         address the issue of inbreeding. In addition, 5 nucleus herds (one in each aimag) will be established
                         for cashmere goats and sheep to supply improved male animals. Dairy breed improvement will be
                         achieved through improvements in artificial insemination (AI) capacity. Beef breed improvement
                         will target improved carcass size and growth rates, economic traits for which packers are beginning
                         to offer price differentiation. This will be achieved by providing improved beef bulls from the dairy
                         program to herders. The genetic recordkeeping programs required for these initiatives can be
                         supported directly or indirectly through the DHIP which was established by the FAO. A detailed
                         breeding plan will be prepared through the FAO project to guide the implementation of the breeding
                         program.

                         Sub-component 2c:        Animal Nutrition (approximately US$ 1.0 million)

                         This sub-component will improve herders’ capacity to produce feeds and manage livestock feeding
                         programs especially during the winter season. The improved nutritional levels will improve
                         reproductive rates and weight gains and contribute directly to enhancing household incomes.

                         Matching grant financing will be provided for the establishment of forage production plots. in a way
                         that will enable citizens to enclose an area of land, in agreement with the soum authorities, to be used
                         for winter fodder conservation. The project will support micro-scale forage processing facilities at
                         soum level and participatory on-farm research. Selected herders herd will be used for
                         demonstration purposes so that producers at large can better understand the relationship between
                         nutrition, productivity and profitability.

                         Four types and scale of investment have been identified. The actual number and exact type of
                         investment will depend on herder groups that are identified, the willingness and ability of herder
                         groups to take on the investments, and the approval of a financially and technically viable business
Public Disclosure Copy




                         plan. The anticipated types of matching grant investments include: (i) large-scale forage plots (50
                         ha) growing improved perennial forages (alfalfa, brome grass) and cereals (barley and oats) to be fed
                         as baled or as silage to beef cattle on commercial basis; (ii) medium scale plots (10-20 ha) of alfalfa
                         and/or cereals (barley and oats) for dairy farms and nucleus herds of goats and sheep; (iii) support to
                         silvo-pastoralism whereby 15 hectares of land is utilized for a combination of livestock feeds,
                         vegetables, potatoes and berry bushes; and ( iv) micro-scale processing units to be used by herder
                         groups at the soum to make fodder products l The project will learn from their experience of other
                         projects piloting Land rights for land-use and fodder production and complement the activity.

                         Special attention will be paid to proactively identifying capable women’s groups (formal and
                         informal) who are engaged in animal activities. Additionally, needs assessments and training
                         programs will identify any special requirements for training or technical support needed by women in
                         relation to livestock nutrition, feed preparation and feeding programs. Beneficiaries are expected to
                         contribute 10 percent of total investment for all matching grants applications and additional 2 percent
                         by the soum government, while women headed households will contribute 5 percent of the total
                         value of investment. In an effort to ensure transparency and fairness in the process, all matching
                         grants will be administered through a matching grants committees at the soums, and national level
                         with membership and functions described in the accompanying Matching Grants Manual (MGM). A
                         Matching Grants Officer with qualifications and experience acceptable to the Bank will be selected
                         through a competitive process at the national level to assist the Project Coordinator in managing the

                                                                      Page 5 of 11
                         grants. The selected candidate will have day to day responsibility to ensure the effective delivery of
                         the matching grants as stipulated in the MGM.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 3: Project Management (US$1.0million)

                         This component will support the coordination of project activities and the fiduciary functions of the
                         Project Implementation Unit (PIU) to be established by the MIA. The PIU will be staffed and
                         equipped to enable it to effectively carry out these activities. The sub component will finance
                         incremental staff, consultants, operating costs, some technical assistance, training, M&E activities
                         and impact assessments, information dissemination and annual audits. The project will also support
                         the coordination of donor funded programs in the livestock sector, by holding semi-annual meetings
                         to review implementation progress and provide policy guidance to MIA.

                         The Project will engage the services of a service provider or an NGO with considerable experience in
                         value chain development to support herder/groups in developing productive partnerships with
                         marketers. The terms and conditions and contractual obligations for the successful NGO are
                         described in the Matching Grants Manual.

                         The GAFSP Selection Committee has approved USD12.5 million for financing the Mongolian
                         proposal. This will be split between this US$11 million project to be supervised by the World Bank
                         and a US$1.5 million Technical Assistance project executed by the FAO. While these are
                         institutionally separate projects, from Government and GAFSP perspective they are a joint project.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project will be implemented in five aimags: Gobi-Altai, Bayankhongor, Zavkhan, Arkhangai
                         and Khuvsgul. These are five western aimags stretching from the southern border with China to the
                         northern border with Russia. They cover several of the most prevalent ecological zones in Mongolia,
                         from arid desert in the south, through semi-arid grassland, to steppe and in the northern part the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         steppe-forest. Within the five aimags, three soums in each aimag will be selected. The criteria for
                         the selection of soums will be based on: (i) access to markets; (ii) potential for fodder production;
                         (iii) existence of herder groups/cooperatives; (iv) no overlap with other on-going similar projects and
                         ideally; (v) there is demand for value chain development support.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Zong-Cheng Lin (EASCS)
                         Feng Ji (EASCS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes               The overall impact of the project on the
                          BP 4.01                                             environment is expected to be positive. Livestock
                                                                              nutrition is a core theme of the project - required
                                                                              for improving quality of livestock and increasing
                                                                              productivity. A critical issue in the Mongolian
                                                                              livestock sector has been poor nutrition as
                                                                              animals depend upon open grazing – this has led
                                                                              to a decline in the quality of pastureland. Under
                                                                              the project, a greater emphasis on a more balance



                                                                      Page 6 of 11
                                 approach to nutrition would be promoted, with
                                 increased production of fodder, and, it is hoped, a
                                 reduced dependency on open pasture.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Given the nature and small scale of the proposed
                                 activities scattered in the five aimags/provinces
                                 under the project, a Category B project is
                                 proposed. However, there are likely to be some
                                 concerns relating to adverse impacts associated
                                 with Component 1 and Component 2, including,
                                 among others:
                                 •         impacts of improved fodder &vegetable
                                 production in project area and the potential
                                 pesticides which may be induced by the project.
                                 •         impacts on water resources, e.g. the
                                 digging of shallow wells for fodder production
                                 and vegetable plots;
                                 •         impacts of more intensive forms of
                                 livestock production, including manure
                                 management.
                                 •         small scale construction-related impacts
                                 (e.g. livestock sheds,);

                                 Therefore, for the purpose of mitigating any
                                 adverse impacts caused by these activities, an
                                 Environmental Management Plan (EMP) will be
                                 prepared including the following:
                                 •         Environmental guidelines to address
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 siting of fodder and vegetable production and
                                 potential adverse impacts from the production(e.
                                 g. likely use of fertilizer and pesticides, and water
                                 resources management);
                                 •         Environmental guidelines for siting of
                                 livestock production, manure management, and
                                 training arrangement for local farmers;
                                 •         Environmental guidelines to address
                                 general impacts of small scale construction (e.g.
                                 livestock sheds, small irrigation facilities, chance
                                 find procedures);
                                 • Environmental guidelines to address waste
                                 generated from laboratories financed under the
                                 project;
                                 • Some activities under Sub-component 1a may
                                 be determined until project implementation. For
                                 these activities the EMP will include selection
                                 criteria and general guidelines with regard to
                                 identification, monitoring and mitigation of



                         Page 7 of 11
                                                                                possible adverse environmental impacts of these
                                                                                activities.
                                                                                • Institutional arrangements for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                implementation of the above environmental
                                                                                guidelines/manuals.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09             Yes              The project will not procure or supply any
                                                                                pesticides. However, pesticides may be induced
                                                                                by the improved fodder and vegetable production
                                                                                activities. The PMP estimates that there is
                                                                                probability to use pesticide for agricultural use.
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No               Based on the available information, the project
                            BP 4.11                                             will not adversely affect sites with archeological,
                                                                                paleontological, historical, religious, or unique
                                                                                natural values. Chance finds during construction
                                                                                might occur and relevant clauses will be included
                                                                                in all construction contracts.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No               This project will not require land acquisition and
                            4.12                                                resettlement.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                Environmental Assessment. The EMP assesses the potential project impacts. The major impacts
                              on the environment include (i) impacts of improved fodder & vegetable production in project
                              area, such as stress on water resources due to the new wells that may be dug to support increased
                              local fodder and vegetable production and any irrigation undertaken, and soil erosion; (ii) impacts
                              of more intensive forms of livestock production; (iii) waste discharged from small-scale
                              processing facilities; and (iv) small scale construction-related impacts(e.g. livestock sheds,
                              irrigation facilities).

                             Pest Management. The project will not procure or supply any pesticides. However, pesticides may




                                                                        Page 8 of 11
                            be induced by the improved fodder and vegetable production activities. The PMP estimates that
                         2. there is probability
                             Describe                   pesticide
                                                 to useindirect
                                       any potential              for agricultural
                                                                and/or  long term  use.
                                                                                    impacts due to anticipated future activities
                            in the project area:
Public Disclosure Copy




                             N/A
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                            impacts.
                             N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                            assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             Environmental Assessment. An EMP was developed in accordance with Bank Operational Policy
                            OP4.01. The EMP proposes adequate mitigation measures such as soil conservation measures
                            including balanced fertilization, wind barrier around agricultural land; chemicals management,
                            requirements of waste management for small-scale processing facilities and livestock facilities.
                            Environmental specifications for contractors have been developed to mitigate the impacts
                            associated with small scale construction. The EMP also specifies monitoring plan, institutional
                            arrangements, capacity building activities, and budge for the EMP implementation.

                           Pest Management. A Pest Management Plan, as an annex for the EMP, has been developed. The
                           PMP proposes necessary activities to mitigate and prevent potential risks and negative impacts of
                           using and distributing of pesticides and provide relevant guidance. The proposed mitigation
                           measures consist of, among others: (i) promoting practices which reduce risks in the handling of
                           pesticides and minimize adverse effects on humans and the environment; (ii) promoting IPM to
                           reduce the use of toxic pesticides; (iii) training and capacity building for local farmers and
                           governmental agencies in controlling and monitoring on pesticide distribution, using, storage and
                           transporting; (iv)introducing biological and botanical pesticides and encouraging, promoting the
                           development of alternatives for reducing risks like biological control methods and techniques,
                           non-chemical pesticides and pesticides of low risk to humans and the environment; (v)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           strengthening monitoring; and (vi) reinforcing regulatory aspects. Implementation of the PMP
                           will be undertaken by all partners and stakeholders of LAMP, including farmers and herders’
                           groups, IPM researchers, extension agents, crop consultants, food producers, traders of biological
                           and chemical pesticides and application equipment, environmental inspectors and representatives
                           of consumer groups. The PMP also specifies the institutional arrangement, monitoring
                           requirements, and the budget for the PMP implementation.

                           A Project Implementation Unit (PIU) in the MIA will be established for the coordination of project
                           activities. Overall responsibility of the project monitoring, evaluation, and reporting rests with the
                           PIU. Day-to-day duties will be carried out by an M&E officer at the PIU who will work closely
                           with the Soum Coordinator in each Soum. At the Soum-level, the MIA Coordinator (Head of the
                           VABU) will assume full responsibilities as Soum Coordinator (SC) for the protect (SC), and
                           organize events, and monitor implementation together with the extension agents

                           MIA will establish a Project Steering Committee (PSC) to provide guidance to the Project Director
                           and the PIU. The PSC will approve activity and procurement plans, monitor and assess
                           implementation, ensure the appropriate use the grant and ensure coordination in project
                           management. PSC membership will include the MOF and the M&E Unit of MOFALI. The PSC
                           will meet semi annually and hold ad hoc meetings as required.



                                                                      Page 9 of 11
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             In accordance with Bank Safeguard policies, public consultations were conducted, with local
Public Disclosure Copy




                           farmers and other stakeholders such as officials of project soum administration and ASIA and
                           ADNET officials/staff, inspectors and local farmers on April 25-29 and on May 5-7, 2012. Their
                           opinions and concerns have been taken into account in the EA safeguards documents. The EMP
                           including the PMP was disclosed locally in September at the local governmental website and
                           province libraries. The final EA documents were sent to the Bank InfoShop for disclosure on
                           October 28, 2012.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      30-Aug-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   28-Oct-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Mongolia                                                         17-Sep-2012
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      30-Aug-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   28-Oct-2012
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Mongolia                                                         17-Sep-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]


                                                                   Page 10 of 11
                             If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a              Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
Public Disclosure Copy




                             in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                             Management Specialist?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Charles Annor-Frempong
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Garo J. Batmanian (SM)                       Date: 17-May-2013




                                                                      Page 11 of 11
