                                                                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                             APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA370
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Feb-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        Russian Federation                       Project ID:                       P123923
                              Project Name:                   RUSSIA FOREST FIRE RESPONSE PROJECT (P123923)
                              Task Team Leader:               Angela G. Armstrong
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 12-Dec-2011                                    Estimated Board Date:             03-Jul-2012
                              Managing Unit:                  ECSS3                                    Lending Instrument:               Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                         Forestry (50%), Sub-national government administration (35%), Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and
                                                              forestry (15%)
                              Theme:                          Biodiversity (35%), Other public sector governance (35%), Other environment and natural resources management
                                                              (30%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                        Amount
                                   Borrower                                                                                                                   80.00
                                   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                                      40.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                     120.00
                              Environmental Category:         B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              The Project Development Objective is to improve forest fire prevention and suppression in select forest ecosystems, including targeted protected
                              areas, and to enhance forest management in pilot regions.

                              3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Background. The project has three components: (1) enhancing forest fire prevention, management and control; (2) building forestry and protected
                              area management capacity; and (3) project management. There will be two implementing agencies for the project: the Federal Forest Agency
                              (FFA), which covers the extensive area of the forest fund, and the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment (MNRE), which will implement
                              the project in Protected Areas.

                              The Project will increase the Russian Government's preparedness for forest fires, by strengthening the capacity for forest fire monitoring and
                              response as well as strengthening the institutional and policy framework for forestry governance, which is also critical to the prevention of forest
                              fires and management of areas affected by fires. Furthermore, the project will contribute to raising public awareness and education standards in
                              forestry issues in general, with specific reference to forest fire prevention/control and forest governance issues. Given that the bulk of fires are of
                              human origin, the latter is as important as suppression of fires underway.

                              It is expected that project investments will support a decrease in the number of fires of human origin. Fires which occur will be better controlled
                              (and hence reduced in extent and severity) as they will be detected sooner, response time will be reduced due to better communications, fire
                              fighting capacity in terms of equipment and trained personnel will be increased, and interagency and interregional fire-fighting coordination and
                              cooperation will be enhanced. In addition, shortcomings identified in the forest policy and legislative framework will be addressed at both the
                              national and pilot region level, strengthening the management of forests and landscapes, which will in turn have a positive impact on the
                              prevalence and likelihood of forest fires.

                              Project components. Component 1: Enhancing Forest Fire Prevention, Management and Control. This component aims to improve the
                              effectiveness of forest fire prevention and management in select forest ecosystem, including targeted protected areas, by (i) strengthening the
                              capacity for early detection and quick response to fight forest fires and (ii) reducing the number of fires of human origin through awareness raising
                              and environmental education programs. Early fire detection is recognized as a key element in improving protection of forest from fires.
                              Management of fires requires clear coordination across the various agencies. The project will therefore support the establishment of Interregional
                              Forest Fire Centers (IFFCs) to improve detection and coordination across the various agencies. Fire prevention and environmental education will
                              be focused on children and youth as a means to encourage long-term behavior change. In particular, this component will provide technical
                              assistance, targeted toward selected pilot regions and Protected Areas, to (i) develop fire preparedness and management plans to strengthen
                              forest fire detection; (ii) review and upgrade fire danger rating and fire hazard indices; and (iii) develop public awareness and media/education
                              campaigns to decrease the incidence of forest fires of human origin. In addition, investments will be made to upgrade fire fighting systems and
                              machinery (e.g., rehabilitation of forest fire stations and provision of firefighting and communications equipment), and establish IFFCs.
                              Component 2: Building Forestry Management Capacity. Forest policy, legislation, institutions and silvicultural systems clearly have an impact on
                              how forest is managed which in turn has multiple effects on the environment, including the likelihood, extent and severity of forest fires. This

                                                                                                                                                                           Page 1 of 7
                         component will increase forest management capacity through (i) provision of technical assistance to help identify and address key policy and
                         legislative issues, identify the causes and assess the costs and benefits of addressing forest fires, the institutional framework (by supporting the
                         clear demarcation of mandates among federal and regional forest management institutions), and voluntary certification; (ii) targeted investments to
                         improve forest regeneration and restoration, survey of forest for pest infestation and treatment and develop model forests in the pilot regions, and
                         establish integrated forest management information systems that will function nationally; and (iii) improved training opportunities for both
                         professionals already in service and new forestry expertise of the IFFCs, Pilot Regions, and Protected Areas.
                         Component 3: Project Management. A Project Implementation Unit (PIU) will work with FFA, MNRE, and each of the participating Interregional
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Forest Fire Centers to ensure effective and continuous communication with project stakeholders. This PIU will coordinate all project activities,
                         procure works, goods, and consultants' services for project implementation, supervise and monitor project activities, and report regularly to FFA
                         and MNRE.

                         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         Planned project activities. The project will finance hardware, equipment and fire-fighting infrastructure, focusing on ground-based activities, and will
                         not involve significant or large scale physical interventions or major civil works. Besides the purchase of equipment, tools, protective gear and
                         vehicles, project funds will be used for the construction of observation towers and the rehabilitation of fire stations and warehouses for equipment
                         and machinery. Such activities will be carried out in areas, regions or other administrative units where some fire-fighting capacity already exists,
                         which can be enhanced and improved by the project's activities. These civil works will have localized, minor and reversible environmental impacts,
                         which are of a routine nature and will require only simple environmental management instruments.
                         The project will not finance airborne fire fighting, thus potential impacts from chemical agents commonly added to water dropped from fixed wing
                         aircraft and helicopters are not expected. (Such agents commonly include retardants, which slow down water evaporation and thus increase its
                         activity in a fire, and foam agents, which work in a similar manner and also have a smothering effect. One of the most commonly used retardants is
                         Ammonium Phosphate, which has a fertilizing effect.)
                         The planned activities on the development and support of policies, legal frameworks and institutional capacities would result in a general
                         strengthening of on the ground enforcement of laws and regulations by clarifying the rights and responsibilities of forest inspectors and rangers, as
                         well as forest users. This would improve overall control of the authorities and reduce illegal activities, including negligent behavior or willful setting
                         of fires.
                         In this context the project also aims to reduce the frequency of fires caused by arson, which appears to play a role in triggering forest fires. New
                         regulations shall target the currently existing perverse incentives to set fire to forests intentionally to secure income from salvage logging, avoiding
                         the complicated "red tape" associated with legally acquiring logging licenses. The project's activities aimed at building forest management,
                         education and training will include measures to improve outreach of forest authorities to the general public, increase awareness of the ecological
                         and economic value of forests and build / strengthen the sense of ownership of the population living close to forest resources.

                         The following specific activities and measures envisaged include:
                         1.          improving ground-based forest fire response, and the reconstruction, modernization and maintenance of forest fire stations in 5 pilot
                         regions (Khabarovsk Kray, Komi Republic, Krasnoyarsk Kray, Moscow Oblast, and Voronez Oblast);
                         2. establishing local forest fire brigades and providing firefighting and communications equipment;
                         3.          establishing and equipping Interregional Forest Fire Centers (in the Far East, Siberian, and Northwestern Federal Districts) for the
                         detection and suppression of large-scale fire outbreaks, coordination of response between regions and agencies, as well as pest treatment;
                         4. developing          public awareness and education programs and products (e.g., brochures, school curricula, posters, radio and TV media,
                         websites, blogs, etc.) to advocate forest fire safety rules;
                         5.          strengthening early fire detection and response by upgrading the fire danger rating and hazard index system in pilot regions and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         targeted Protected Areas (Meschera, Okskiy, and Meshcherskiy in the Central Federal Okrug; Kerzhensky, Buzuluskiy, Zhigulevskiy, and
                         Samarkskaya Luka in the Volga Federal Okruy; Sayano-Shushenskiy, Stolby, and Shushkenskiy Bor in Krasnoyarsk Kray (Siberian Federal
                         Okrug); and Bureinkiy, Komsomolskiy, and Bastak in the Far East Federal Okrug) and expanding the network of ground-based fire services,
                         including fire towers and observation points in key target areas;
                         6. enhancing fire fighting preparedness in targeted Protected Areas through the upgrading of forest fire stations, and construction and cleaning fire
                         breaks;
                         7.          upgrading of communications systems, supply of suitable firefighting machinery, equipment, protective clothing, gear and hand-tools;
                         8.          improving forest regeneration, afforestation and carbon sequestration by (i) expanding the network of laboratories to evaluate forest
                         seed quality and origin through DNA analysis to provide genetically certified seed; and (ii) establishing innovative seed centers to upgrade forest
                         regeneration activities through the construction of facilities and supply of equipment for seed harvesting, storage, growing and transportation and
                         to trial modern techniques of plantation maintenance and protection (from fire and wildlife);
                         9. designing and implementing a centralized database with standard geospatial information that will enable all types of forest monitoring (e.g.
                         forest fires, forest inventory and management, forest pathology, among others);
                         10. developing a national forest fire management strategy for Protected Areas that takes into account a differentiated approach to forest fire control
                         depending on regional environmental and socioeconomic conditions, the environmental landscape, economic aspects and international
                         experience;
                         11. developing standard operating procedures and guidelines for Protected Area zoning by fire protection level; preparing GIS-based fire
                         management plans in the largest Protected Areas most susceptible to fires; and developing respective guidelines and standard operating
                         procedures.

                         Location. As mentioned above, physical interventions will focus on 5 pilot regions (Khabarovsk Kray, Komi Republic, Krasnoyarsk Kray, Moscow
                         Oblast, and Voronez Oblast) and targeted Protected Areas (Meschera, Okskiy, and Meshcherskiy in the Central Federal Okrug; Kerzhensky,
                         Buzuluskiy, Zhigulevskiy, and Samarkskaya Luka in the Volga Federal Okruy; Sayano-Shushenskiy, Stolby, and Shushkenskiy Bor in Krasnoyarsk
                         Kray (Siberian Federal Okrug); and Bureinkiy, Komsomolskiy, and Bastak in the Far East Federal Okrug), which have been selected according to
                         geographic, economic, and environmental criteria. In addition, the project's geographical focus is on forests with high environmental or economic
                         value which may be situated close to settlements or infrastructure, and where fires would carry the risk of human life loss, severe human health
                         impacts, substantial damage to infrastructure or substantial loss of economic assets or valuable ecological resources (e.g., national parks).

                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                         Nicolas Perrin (ECSS4)
                         Wolfhart Pohl (ECSS3)


                                                                                                                                                                       Page 2 of 7
                         6. Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01      Yes          Project resources will support the installation of observation towers, and
                                                                               refurbishment of fire stations and warehouses for equipment and machinery. Such
                                                                               activities will be carried out in areas, regions or other administrative units where
                                                                               some fire-fighting capacity already exists, which can be enhanced and improved
                                                                               by the project's activities. These civil works are expected to have localized, minor
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               and reversible environmental impacts, which are of a routine nature and will
                                                                               require only simple environmental management instruments. In the case of
                                                                               infrastructure to be built inside Protected Areas (PAs), it will be necessary to
                                                                               confirm that it is consistent with the existing PA Management Plan. Also, in such
                                                                               cases the Checklist EMP might not be sufficient because there could be particular
                                                                               site-specific sensitivities to be addressed (or, a Checklist could be used but some
                                                                               additional issue/mitigation items might need to be added).

                                                                               Project activities supporting the development of policy, legal framework and
                                                                               institutional capacities are expected to result in a general strengthening of on the
                                                                               ground enforcement of laws and regulations by augmenting the rights and
                                                                               responsibilities of forest inspectors and rangers. This will improve overall control of
                                                                               the authorities and reduce illegal activities, including negligent behavior or willful
                                                                               setting of fires.

                                                                                In this context, the project also aims to reduce the frequency of fires caused by
                                                                               arson, which appears to play a significant role in triggering forest fires. New
                                                                               regulations will target the currently existing perverse incentives to set fire to forests
                                                                               intentionally to secure income from salvage logging, avoiding the complicated red
                                                                               tape associated with acquiring normal logging licenses legally. The project's
                                                                               activities aimed at building forest management, education and training will include
                                                                               measures to improve outreach of forest authorities to the general public, increase
                                                                               awareness of the ecological and economic value of forests and build / strengthen
                                                                               the sense of ownership of the population living close to forest resources.

                                                                               Physical interventions will be focused in 5 pilot regions, which have been defined
                                                                               by geographic, economic, and environmental criteria. Therefore, a general
                                                                               Environmental Management Plan (EMP) has been prepared before project
                                                                               appraisal, and specific EMP/EMP checklist (as applicable) will be prepared and
                                                                               disclosed before beginning works (during project implementation).
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04              Yes          The Natural Habitats policy is triggered as project activities are in natural habitat
                                                                               areas.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                       Yes          The Forests policy is triggered as project activities are in forest areas. However,
                                                                               the project will not finance the construction of new access or service roads.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09                  Yes          In the case that forest regeneration activities are included in the project, the use of
                                                                               herbicides to suppress competing vegetation in newly planted areas, pesticides to
                                                                               protect saplings from insects, and pesticides to treat insect infestations in fire
                                                                               damaged and other mature forest stands could be envisaged. The borrower will for
                                                                               such project activities prepare a pest management plan (PMP) in accordance with
                                                                               the World Bank's OP 4.09 that supports an integrated pest management (IPM)
                                                                               approach. In addition, the following criteria will apply to the selection and use of
                                                                               pesticide and herbicide products under the project: (a) They must have negligible
                                                                               adverse human health effects; (b) They must be shown to be effective against the
                                                                               target species; (c) They must have minimal effect on non-target species and the
                                                                               natural environment. The methods, timing, and frequency of pesticide application
                                                                               are aimed to minimize damage to natural enemies. Pesticides must be
                                                                               demonstrated to be safe for forest users and animals in the treated areas, as well
                                                                               as for personnel applying them; (d) Their use must take into account the need to
                                                                               prevent the development of resistance in pests; and (e) The Bank requires that any
                                                                               pesticides it finances be manufactured, packaged, labeled, handled, stored,
                                                                               disposed of, and applied according to standards acceptable to the Bank.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   No




                                                                                                                                                            Page 3 of 7
                               Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                   Yes              In accordance with the Bank’s Operational Policy for Indigenous Peoples, a review
                                                                                                was undertaken to screen for the presence of Indigenous Peoples in the areas of
                                                                                                project implementation and to assess potential impacts of the project on those
                                                                                                communities. Initial screening of the Indigenous People presence was held for all
                                                                                                13 federally protected areas where MNRE will implement project activities and the
                                                                                                5 pilot regions selected by FFA. The Social Assessment confirmed the presence
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                of indigenous people (IP) in forest areas in one of the five project-supported pilot
                                                                                                regions: Khabarovski krai. The OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples was triggered to
                                                                                                ensure the project will maximize the benefits and mitigate potential risks to those
                                                                                                communities. An Indigenous People Process Framework (IPPF) was prepared
                                                                                                and presented to representatives of those populations in Khabarovski krai. The
                                                                                                purpose of the IPPF is to ensure that the development process fully respects the
                                                                                                dignity, rights, economies, and cultures of Indigenous Peoples, and that the project
                                                                                                is able to gain broad community support of affected Indigenous Peoples.
                                                                                                Consultations confirmed that no significant negative impact was identified for the
                                                                                                project as well as the IPs overall support to the project activities. The process
                                                                                                framework outlines stakeholder consultation during the various stages of project
                                                                                                activities (preparation through implementation as well as completion) to ensure no
                                                                                                negative impacts will emerge. It also provides a menu of options to cover a variety
                                                                                                of scenarios. The IPPF also sets out necessary organizational arrangements for
                                                                                                the identification and effective management of IP related issues under the project.
                                                                                                An Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) will be prepared in Khabarovski krai at the start
                                                                                                of project implementation following the IPPF and OM detailed procedures which
                                                                                                will indicate how the IPs present in projects areas will be involved in project
                                                                                                activities, and how they have been, or will be, consulted. If a national forestry
                                                                                                policy is supported as part of the project activities, a more extensive IPP will be
                                                                                                prepared. However, no indication is given at this time that this is the case, and as
                                                                                                such, a simple IPP is considered sufficient for the time being.

                                                                                                The FFA, MNRE, and the PIU have the necessary knowledge of the Russian
                                                                                                Federation's legislation and have become familiar with the World Bank safeguards
                                                                                                policies during the preparation of the project. Concurrently, every effort will be
                                                                                                made to ensure that stakeholders are knowledgeable of environmental and social
                                                                                                issues. Consultative procedures have been built in the design of Components 1
                                                                                                and 2, ensuring that proper consultation is undertaken at all stages, and that
                                                                                                stakeholder feedback is incorporated in project implementation processes. The
                                                                                                PIU will be requested to have qualified environmental and social specialists as a
                                                                                                part of its staff. Training in the proper application of environmental and social
                                                                                                safeguards will be provided to FFA and MNRE and local authorities as a part of the
                                                                                                Component 3 activities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Stakeholders and PIU staff will be required to regularly monitor EMP and IPPF
                                                                                                compliance and if there are instances of noncompliance, undertake the necessary
                                                                                                mitigation measures. The local authorities with the support of the PIU will consult
                                                                                                and share information with stakeholders on a regular basis during the process of
                                                                                                activity preparation and implementation.
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12             No               Project screening indicates that no interventions on the ground will trigger the
                                                                                                Bank's OP 4.12 (on Involuntary Resettlement). The project will not necessitate
                                                                                                any land acquisition and no involuntary physical relocation is envisaged. The
                                                                                                project will finance refurbishment of existing regional fire stations and fire towers.
                                                                                                Most works will be carried out in isolated forest areas and are not expected to
                                                                                                disrupt local populations.
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                       No
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP       No
                               7.50
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60           No


                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                   It should be noted that the number of investments will not be very large. Five pilot regions and 13 Protected Areas in the Russian Federation
                                 will participate. All of the investments proposed by the Borrower for the project's support will be screened to identify specific (i) environmental/
                                 social baseline situations, (ii) severity impacts, (iii) availability and required effort for mitigation measures. The screening will be performed by
                                 the Borrower's implementing agencies, specifically MNRE, which has staff with the required skills and experience.

                                 Potential environmental impacts. Investments in forest fire prevention and the establishment of fire watch systems are not expected to cause
                                 adverse environmental and social impacts. They are expected to have a net positive effect due to the reduction of forest ecosystem
                                 degradation and the incremental reduction of emissions caused by forest fires. The investments are expected to decrease the number,
                                 frequency and average size of forest fires.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 4 of 7
                           Potential adverse environmental impacts relate mainly to the potential construction and reconstruction activities and could include the following:
                           -          dust, generation combustion emissions and noise due to construction;
                           -          generation of solid and liquid construction wastes and their proper disposal;
                           -          local destruction of topsoil and vegetation around construction sites, erosion of soils and silting of rivers;
                           -          potential accidental spillage, and need for regulated and diligent disposal of machine oil, lubricants, hazardous substances etc.; and
                           -          some of the potential investments dealing with forest regeneration activities may use herbicides to suppress competing vegetation in
                           newly planted areas, and potentially pesticides to treat insect infestations in fire damaged forest and other mature forest stands and to protect
Public Disclosure Copy




                           saplings from insects.
                           However, these impacts are minor and / or the risk of them occurring is low. They will be manageable during project implementation with tested
                           standard technology and mostly within good housekeeping practice for construction activities.

                           Expected safeguards categories: Under the project, only investments which correspond to the World Bank's safeguards categories C and B are
                           expected. Examples of typical investments are described below:
                           Category C investments will include the implementation and operation of GIS, communication and monitoring systems, meteorological stations,
                           procurement of equipment, training, etc. It is expected that a significant part of the project activities will fall into this environmental category.
                           Category B investments will be attributed mostly to the refurbishment and rehabilitation of forest fire stations (new building construction is not
                           anticipated under the project) and the construction of watchtowers and fire breaks. Building reconstruction, renovation and upgrading may
                           generate construction waste, potentially including hazardous construction waste (e.g., asbestos), and there may be construction activities in
                           fringe zones of or near protected areas, or close to natural habitats as defined by the World Bank's OP 4.04.

                           Environmental screening and assessment process: The purpose of the Environmental Assessment (EA) process is to identify the specific
                           environmental impacts of individual investments (both positive and negative) and design measures to prevent, minimize, mitigate or offset
                           adverse impacts.
                           a)         For Category C investments no specific environmental documentation is required, as significant negative impacts are not expected.
                           b)         The safeguards documentation for Category B investments will be covered by two alternative sets of instruments: either simplified
                           environmental management plans, which may be of a checklist nature or, in the case of more complex investments, following the standard
                           structure and contents for an EMP suggested by the World Bank's OP 4.01. Such investments might require an environmental assessment
                           (OVOS) under the legislation of the Russian Federation, which would be expected to have a large overlap with the EIA according to World Bank
                           standards and thus, have a good potential for exploiting synergies between the Russian Federation's and the Bank's systems.

                           The project will not trigger OP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) since it will not include any land acquisition and no involuntary physical
                           relocation is envisaged under the project. The project will finance renovation of existing regional fire stations and fire watchtowers. Most of this
                           renovation will be done in isolated forested areas and should note create any disruption to the local population.

                           In accordance with the Bank's Operational Policy for Indigenous Peoples, a review was undertaken to screen for the presence of Indigenous
                           Peoples in the areas of project implementation and to assess potential impacts of the project on those communities. Initial screening of the
                           Indigenous People presence was held for all 13 federal protected areas where MNRE will implement project activities and for the 5 regions
                           selected by FFA. The Social Assessment confirmed the presence of indigenous people (IP) in forest areas in one of the five project-supported
                           pilot regions: Khabarovski krai. The OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples was triggered to ensure the project will maximize the benefits and mitigate
                           potential risks to those communities. An Indigenous Peoples Process Framework (IPPF) was prepared and presented to representatives of
                           those populations in Khabarovski krai. The purpose of the IPPF is to ensure that the development process fully respects the dignity, rights,
                           economies, and cultures of Indigenous Peoples, and that the project is able to gain broad community support of affected Indigenous Peoples.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Consultations confirmed that no significant negative impact has been identified for the project and also confirmed the IPs overall support for the
                           project activities. The process framework highlights stakeholder consultation during the various stages of project activities (preparation through
                           implementation as well as completion) to ensure no negative impacts will emerge. It also provides a menu of options to cover a variety of
                           scenarios. The IPPF also sets out the necessary organizational arrangements for the identification and effective management of IP related
                           issues under the project. An Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) will be prepared in Khabarovski krai at the start of project implementation
                           following the IPPF and OM detailed procedures which will indicate how the IPs present in projects areas will be involved in project activities,
                           and how they have been, or will be, consulted. If a national forestry policy is supported as part of the project activities, a more extensive IPP
                           will be prepared. However, no indication is given at this time that this is the case, and as such, a simple IPP is considered sufficient for the time
                           being.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                            No long term or indirect impacts are anticipated in the project areas due to project activities.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                            As the impacts of the project activities are by themselves minor and easily mitigeable, no alternatives driven by impact reduction were
                           developed for the project.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                            and implement the measures described.
                             The screening and application of environmental safeguards instruments will be undertaken by MNRE staff with assistance and supervision
                           from the Bank's environmental safeguards specialist(s) assigned to the project. MNRE has staff experienced both in environmental protection
                           issues in the forestry sector, and familiar with the EIA process both according to Russian Federal legislation and the World Bank's policies.
                           MNRE actively prepared the general Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for the project which was judged by the Bank team to be of
                           satisfactory quality. The team is satisfied that EMP implementation will not be complex and that most measures will be within the due diligence
                           and good housekeeping measures routinely applied in the Russian Federation for comparable activities (small scale construction). The Bank
                           team will assist MNRE staff at project inception in operationalizing effective supervision and monitoring processes for project implementation.

                           In addition, the FFA, MNRE as well as the PIU have the necessary knowledge of the Russian Federation's legislation and have become familiar
                           with World Bank environmental and social safeguards policies during the preparation of the project. Concurrently, every effort will be made to
                           ensure that stakeholders are knowledgeable on environmental and social issues. Consultative procedures have been built in the design of
                           Components 1 and 2, ensuring that proper consultation is undertaken at all stages, and that stakeholder feedback is incorporated in project
                           implementation processes. The PIU will be requested to have qualified environmental and social specialists as a part of its staff. Training in the
                           proper application of environmental and social safeguards will be provided to FFA and MNRE and local authorities as a part of the Component
                                                                                                                                                                    Page 5 of 7
                           3 activities.

                           Stakeholders and PIU staff will be required to regularly monitor EMP and IPPF compliance and if there are instances of noncompliance,
                           undertake the necessary mitigation measures. The local authorities with the support of the PIU will consult and share information with
                           stakeholders on a regular basis during the process of activity preparation and implementation.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                            on potentially affected people.
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Consultations are generally governed by various parts of Russian environmental regulation and carried out on a routine basis for every
                           construction project of significant scale. Where activities that could have a negative impact on the environment are implemented, depending on
                           the scale a Public hearing is compulsory, in addition to wide ranging consultations with sectoral authorities (water, fire safety, construction,
                           monument protection, environment) as prescribed by the law "On Ecological Expertise."

                           In accordance with the World Bank's environmental policies (specifically OP4.01) the EMP has been disclosed by the Borrower and in the
                           Bank's InfoShop, and was presented to the relevant stakeholders for consultations in November 2011. Participants included international
                           environmental NGOs who responded positively and with support to the project design as well as the EMP. A prominent theme in many of the
                           NGOs questions related to their interest to continue to be informed about the project and the creation of a participatory mechanism to
                           mainstream NGO experience and expertise into the project.

                           The OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples was triggered to ensure the project will maximize the benefits and mitigate potential risks to those
                           communities. An Indigenous People Process Framework (IPPF) was prepared and presented to representatives of those populations in
                           Khabarovski krai. The purpose of the IPPF is to ensure that the development process fully respects the dignity, rights, economies, and cultures
                           of Indigenous Peoples, and that the project is able to gain broad community support of affected Indigenous Peoples. Consultations were held in
                           Khabarovski Krai at both the regional capital and settlement levels on the IPPF and EMP and representatives of the affected Indigenous
                           Peoples participated. These consultations confirmed that no significant negative impact is identified for the project as well as the IPs overall
                           support for project activities. The process framework outlines stakeholder consultation during the various stages of project activities
                           (preparation through implementation and also completion) to ensure no negative impacts will emerge. It also provides a menu of options to
                           cover a variety of scenarios. The IPPF also sets out necessary organizational arrangements for the identification and effective management of
                           IP related issues under the project

                           Regular consultations with representatives of the IP communities during project implementation will be carried out, by ensuring they are
                           beneficiaries of education and public awareness campaigns as well as informing them of and seeking their participation in forest fire protection
                           management plans. Participatory monitoring mechanisms and specific grievance mechanisms will be developed to ensure IPs participation and
                           representation.        The project has several mechanisms that promote education, participation and transparency. Information outreach
                           campaigns will inform the participants about the project's scope, objectives, implementation mechanisms, progress and impact. Public
                           awareness programs and media campaigns will be conducted to decrease the incidence of forest fires of human origin. Public awareness
                           programs and products (e.g., brochures, school curricula, posters, radio and TV media, websites, blogs, etc.) will be developed to advocate
                           forest fire safety rules, and will be carried out as part of a broader mass media campaign, together with FFA and MNRE. Local NGOs and
                           forest users associations, including IP groups, will be encouraged to participate in these awareness raising activities and regularly informed
                           about the project's progress through regular consultation mechanisms (such as regional project implementation coordination groups). In
                           addition, an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) will be prepared at the start of project implementation following the IPPF and OM detailed
                           procedures which will indicate how the IPs present in projects areas will be involved in project activities, and how they have been, or will be,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           consulted.

                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                          Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                             16-Nov-2011
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                         07-Nov-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                          15-Dec-2011
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                           Directors
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                          Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                             21-Nov-2011
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                         05-Dec-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                          15-Dec-2011
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                          Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                             16-Nov-2011
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                         07-Nov-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                          15-Dec-2011
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                         disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:

                                                                                                                                                                Page 6 of 7
                            The generic pest management plan has been disclosed as part of the EMP.

                            C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                              Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                     Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                              If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) natural   Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              habitats, does the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                            OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                              If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or SM? Are                   Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              PMP requirements included in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                              Management Specialist?
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                              If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and approved by           Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                              Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include provisions for              Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              certification system?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?                     Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language             Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for          Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?                     Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard           Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same               Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Task Team Leader:                     Angela G. Armstrong
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:      Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                                                      Date: 06-Feb-2012
                            Sector Manager:                       Name Benoit Paul Blarel (SM)                                                   Date: 03-Feb-2012




                                                                                                                                                                      Page 7 of 7
