                                                                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                             CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC450
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-Jan-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        Africa                                  Project ID:                       P094183
                              Project Name:                   Agricultural Productivity Program for Southern Africa (APPSA) (P094183)
                              Task Team Leader:               Nathan M. Belete
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 10-Sep-2012                                   Estimated Board Date:             14-Mar-2013
                              Managing Unit:                  AFTAR                                   Lending Instrument:               Adaptable Program Loan
                              Sector:                         Agricultural extension and research (75%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (25%)
                              Theme:                          Rural markets (20%), Other environment and natural resources management (20%), Rural policies and institutions
                                                              (20%), Regional integ ration (20%), Technology diffusion (20%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                        Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                          0.00
                                   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                                90.00
                                   Bilateral Agencies (unidentified)                                                                                           0.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                      90.00
                              Environmental Category:         B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              B. Project Objectives

                              The objective of the proposed operation is to (i) enhance regional specialization in agricultural research; (ii) enhance regional collaboration in
                              agricultural training and dissemination; and (iii) facilitate increased sharing of agricultural information, knowledge and technology across
                              boundaries of participating countries.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              C. Project Description

                              The program would build and strengthen linkages between regional centers of research leadership (RCLs) in line with the region’s R&D priorities.
                              IDA support for each country will include funds for RCLs to be established in the host country as well as financing for specialists from the host
                              country to participate in programs led by RCLs located in other countries, and for technologies and seeds to flow across boundaries. The project
                              would have three components:

                              Component 1: Technology Generation and Dissemination. The first component would support technology generation and dissemination activities
                              associated with regional centers of leadership. This would include research activities targeting the technology priorities defined through regional
                              dialogue and consistent with regional priority setting study. Research activities could cover a range of issues including breeding, germplasm
                              collection or characterization, farm management, processing, and socio-economics. The component would also support regional dissemination
                              programs or technology transfer sub-projects to link centers of leadership to institutions in other countries and enable scaling up of innovations.
                              Technology generation and dissemination activities would target participation from a range of institutions in line with Framework for African
                              Agricultural Productivity principles and aim to strengthen linkages between researchers, extension and end users.

                              Component 2: Center of Leadership Strengthening. The second component would support capacity building for RCLs including infrastructure and
                              equipment investments, capacity building and training for staff, and knowledge sharing and exchange. Targeted training and staff exchanges
                              would take place within the context of technology generation and transfer sub-projects. Long term training may be supported – external Msc and
                              Phd training – but primarily within the context of sandwich programs, where research is partially done in the home country, or through joint
                              supervision arrangements. Infrastructure and equipment investments would build on existing investments and would finance institutions within the
                              system that are part of the country’s center of leadership priority program.

                              Component 3: Coordination. The third component would finance coordination at the national level, which will be managed through the
                              establishment of coordination units or teams within existing structures in implementing agencies. At the regional level, the program will be
                              managed by CCARDESA for coordination of the planning and implementation of research and training activities, and the dissemination of
                              information among the Program countries. Each participating country will allocate resources to CCARDESA based on an agreed upon work plan
                              with an overall ceiling established during the preparation process.

                              D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                              The project will be implemented in Malawi, Mozambique and Zambia. Project activities will primarily take place on research stations and to some
                              extent on farmers fields. Exact project sites are not yet known.
                            E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

                           The three (pilot) countries participating in the program are familiar with World Bank safeguard policies as IDA is currently financing national
                           agricultural productivity initiatives in Malawi , Mozambique and Zambia (Malawi – Agricultural Development Program 2011-2015; Mozambique –
                           Market Led Smallholder Development Project 2007-2013 and PROIRRI 2011-2017; and Zambia – Agricultural Development Support Project
                           ADSP, 2006-2014). These operations all have Environment and Social Management Frameworks (ESMFs) in place which are currently
                           functioning. It is proposed these frameworks be assessed to see if they are sufficient for the purposes of APPSA implementation or if any gaps
Public Disclosure Copy




                           exist or adjustments are required or greater capacity building needed to update these ESMFs.

                            F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

                           Lungiswa Thandiwe Gxaba (AFTEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

                            Safeguard Policies Triggered                   Yes        No       TBD                                 Explanation
                            Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01              ✖                         The policy is triggered as a result of: (i) proposed research activities
                                                                                                       under component 1 which could include breeding, germplasm, farm
                                                                                                       management and processing; and (ii) capacity building for RCLs
                                                                                                       under component 2 which would include infrastructure and
                                                                                                       equipment investments. At this stage the program is considering
                                                                                                       assessing ESMFs for agricultural projects currently being
                                                                                                       implemented in the three participating countries for identification of
                                                                                                       gaps, adjustments, or greater capacity building that would be
                                                                                                       needed in order to adopt these ESMFs for the APPSA . The project
                                                                                                       is expected to be an EA category B.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                          ✖     The policy is not expected to be triggered as the program would not
                                                                                                       involve significant conversion of natural habitats through its direct or
                                                                                                       indirect activities. The program may encourage the expansion of
                                                                                                       agricultural production through the adoption of improved
                                                                                                       technologies which may have an indirect effect on critical natural
                                                                                                       habitats; however, the scale of this indirect impact is not known and
                                                                                                       would not specifically target natural habitats. The aim of the program
                                                                                                       would be to improve productivity of existing agricultural practices
                                                                                                       and hence would not be expected to result in widespread
                                                                                                       extensification. The technical mission will confirm whether or not this
                                                                                                       policy is triggered.
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                                         ✖               The policy is not triggered as program activities do not have any
                                                                                                       direct impacts on the health and quality of forests; people who
                                                                                                       depend on forests; nor is there an aim to change the management,
                                                                                                       protection, or utilization of forests. The physical area where the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                       program would be implemented – research centers or stations, and
                                                                                                       farmer fields where new technologies would be tested or adopted -
                                                                                                       are not known to include any natural forest areas.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09                          ✖                         The program would not supply any pesticides or agrochemicals to
                                                                                                       the RCLs or farmers. However, it is expected that improved
                                                                                                       agricultural technology and capacity for RCLs would result in
                                                                                                       increased pesticides and agrochemical use among farmers reached
                                                                                                       by the program. Depending on the decision taken on current Pest
                                                                                                       Management Plans currently being used in each of the participating
                                                                                                       countries, these would be adopted for the program, or new ones
                                                                                                       would be prepared.
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                     ✖               The policy is not triggered as program activities will not include the
                                                                                                       expansion of technology generation and dissemination activities on
                                                                                                       research stations or on farm demonstration plots that include
                                                                                                       physical cultural resources. Most research centers/stations were
                                                                                                       established in colonial era and have long established boundaries
                                                                                                       that are not known to include such resources. Technology
                                                                                                       dissemination activities would take place with participation and
                                                                                                       consent of farmers and would not target any physical cultural
                                                                                                       resources.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                              ✖               The policy is not triggered as there are no known indigenous
                                                                                                       peoples present in the project areas where the program will be
                                                                                                       implemented.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12              ✖                         The policy is triggered as program activities may include the
                                                                                                       expansion of technology generation and dissemination activities on
                                                                                                       research stations or on farm demonstration plots that results the
                                                                                                       alteration of access to productive land by individuals or communities
                                                                                                       that have previously used such land for agricultural activities on an
                                                                                                       informal or illegal basis. All demonstration plots or adaptation trials
                                                                                                       on farmer fields would be based on prior consent and agreement. As
                            Safeguard Policies Triggered                                      Yes           No           TBD                                             Explanation
                                                                                                                                    the location of activities is not known, a separate resettlement
                                                                                                                                    framework would be prepared for each country.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                                                      ✖        The project would not invest in dam construction, however as the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                    dam safety policy also includes small dams, such as retaining
                                                                                                                                    ponds, the policy is listed as TBD. The technical mission will confirm
                                                                                                                                    whether or not this policy is triggered.
                            Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                                        ✖                      The policy is not triggered as the project would not invest in any
                            7.50                                                                                                    large scale irrigation works that would adversely affect the quality or
                                                                                                                                    quantity of water flow within shared waterways. Small scale irrigation
                                                                                                                                    within the context of technology demonstration or research could be
                                                                                                                                    financed by the program but would be within the context of research
                                                                                                                                    facilities and would not exceed more than a few hectares per station/
                                                                                                                                    center.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                                            ✖                      The policy is not triggered as the area where the program will be
                                                                                                                                    implemented is not known to include any disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                           A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Apr-2012
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
                              should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                Safeguard related studies would take place between November, 2011 and June, 2012

                         IV. APPROVALS
                            Signed and submitted by:
                            Task Team Leader:                                Name: Melissa Brown                                                                                   Date: 16-Dec-2011
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                 Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                     Date: 06-Jan-2012
                            Comments:          I have amended the ISDS to explain a little better why certain OPs are "TBD" at this point. With my changes, the concept stage
                                               ISDS is cleared.
                            Sector Manager:                                  Name: Karen Mcconnell Brooks (SM)                                                                     Date: 18-Dec-2011
                            Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                             form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
