                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC732

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Sep-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Sep-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Vietnam                          Project ID:      P123960
                            Project Name:      Vietnam Social Assistance System Strengthening Project (P123960)
                            Task Team          Christian Bodewig
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          20-Sep-2013                      Estimated        06-Jan-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASHS                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Other social services (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Social safety nets (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         62.50              Total Bank Financing:             60.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            2.50
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                  60.00
                              Total                                                                        62.50
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective is to support the Government in strengthening the social
                           assistance system by developing innovations in management and delivery and by piloting these
                           reforms in four provinces.
                           C. Project Description
                           Vietnam’s economic and social transitions from a low to a middle income country, from an
                           agricultural to an industrial economy and from a young to an aging society are focusing the attention
                         of policy makers towards systematically strengthening the formal social protection system. Formal
                         social protection, including social assistance, has been increasingly replacing traditional informal
                         intra-family or community support mechanisms as the latter weaken due to migration and the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         transition from extended, multi-generational families to nuclear ones. While Vietnam’s traditional
                         formal poverty reduction policies emphasized in-kind and geographically-targeted programs
                         addressing structural sources of poverty in remote regions, the use of household- and individual-
                         based cash transfer programs has substantially expanded over the last few years. However, a close
                         examination of Vietnam’s current formal social protection and poverty reduction system reveals
                         important policy and implementation gaps that risk hampering long-term poverty and vulnerability
                         reduction. Moreover, delivery systems for social assistance and household-based poverty reduction
                         programs are weak, resulting in ineffective service delivery.

                         Vietnam’s social protection system today suffers from fragmentation of multiple poverty reduction
                         and social assistance programs with overlapping objectives but separate budgeting and delivery
                         mechanisms. There are about a dozen additional cash transfer programs, both regular and one-time.
                         These include most prominently (i) monthly cash support to the disabled, orphans, single parents and
                         lone elderly without means under Decree 67/2007/ND-CP, amended by Decree 13/2010/ND-CP, (ii)
                         a small monthly cash transfer to poor households to offset recent increases in energy prices (both
                         delivered through local social officers) under Decision 268/2011/Q?-TTg, and (iii) a cash transfer to
                         children from poor households in school for nine months per year delivered through the education
                         system (school principals) under Decree 49/2010/ND-CP. In 2013, a new program was developed to
                         give additional education support to high school students in remote and difficult areas (under Decree
                         12/2013/ND-CP). This fragmentation creates considerable inefficiency both from the perspective of
                         the implementers and the beneficiaries.

                         At the same time, the system does not provide adequate protection. Benefit incidence analysis on the
                         basis of the 2010 VHLSS shows that the main existing social assistance programs have limited
                         coverage of the poor, considerable leakage to the non-poor and low benefit adequacy. For example,
                         in 2010, only 24 percent of bottom quintile households were covered by the education subsidy and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         12 percent by Decree 67/13. At the same time, 43 and 54 percent of spending under these programs
                         respectively accrued to bottom quintile households. The education subsidy and Decree 67/13
                         accounted for 4 and 17 percent of consumption of bottom quintile households.

                         Recognizing changing needs and increasingly binding constraints, Vietnam is increasing its efforts to
                         strengthen key elements of its social protection system including non-contributory social assistance.
                         In 2012 the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Vietnam (CPV) adopted Resolution 15/
                         NQ-TW on “Major Issues in Social Policies of the Period 2012-2020? to help ensure by 2020 a
                         “guaranteed minimum level in income, education, health care, housing, clean water, and information
                         and communication, thus contributing to gradual improvements in incomes and ensured safe,
                         equitable and happy life for the people?. The Resolution specifically highlights the need to
                         consolidate and modernize the management of programs and policies, including with modernized
                         payment mechanisms and with an integrated beneficiary database, to ensure less fragmentation and
                         overlaps of programs. The vision of the Resolution has several implications. First, the role of social
                         assistance in the poverty reduction policy framework for the next five-year plan (2016-2020) is set
                         become considerably more prominent. Second, the new poverty reduction framework will allow for a
                         change in the mix of programs and a consolidation of the cu rrent multiple cash transfer programs
                         into fewer ones.

                         The SASSP will support the efforts by the Ministry of Labor, Invalids and Social Affairs (MoLISA)
                         to implement Resolution 15 in developing solutions for social assistance system modernization and
                         consolidation of programs and processes. It will also initiate the modernization process in four
                         provinces. In doing so, the project is expected to lay a solid foundation for further program
Public Disclosure Copy




                         consolidation and deployment of a modern delivery system in all 58 provinces across Vietnam during
                         the period of the next five-year plan (2016-2020).

                         The project has three components: Component 1 will help put in place critical elements of a
                         strengthened management and delivery system for social assistance. Component 2 will support the
                         testing of the strengthened system through a consolidated social assistance program (named the “Cơ
                         hội thoát nghèo truy?n kiếp? or “Opportunity to move out of inter-generational poverty? program;
                         “Opportunity program? in short) in four provinces for three years (Hà Giang, Quảng Nam, Trà Vinh,
                         and Lâm ?ồng). This program will replace three existing social assistance cash transfer programs.
                         Component 3 will provide support for program management and capacity building.

                         Component 1: Support to social assistance and poverty reduction system strengthening ($32m):
                         Project activities under component 1 will focus on the national level and on the four participating
                         provinces to build more robust delivery mechanisms for social assistance and to strengthen
                         performance monitoring, which will be the basis for promoting program consolidation. This includes
                         the following activities: (i) support to developing a national registry (i.e., a national database of
                         potential beneficiaries of social assistance programs); (ii) developing an integrated management
                         information system (MIS) for social assistance programs, including system development and testing
                         using the Opportunity program in the four participating provinces; (iii) promoting program and
                         process consolidation and strengthening service delivery through developing redefined operational
                         processes, a new payment mechanism through an independent professional agency, and management
                         arrangements based on the national registry and integrated MIS; and (iv) support for policy, research
                         and communication and outreach as well as comprehensive change management in order to build
                         broad-based consensus at all levels.

                         Component 2: Support for the launch of a consolidated social assistance program (US$25m): The
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Opportunity program aims to help parents make better health, nutrition and education decisions for
                         their children that will help reduce inter-generational transmission of poverty. This will be through:
                         (i) providing cash for parents to invest in their children, (ii) encouraging beneficiary households to
                         adhere to co-responsibilities around health and education-seeking behaviors, and (iii) supporting
                         parents through a network of social collaborators who will visit the households regularly to provide
                         parenting advice. The Opportunity program will provide a variable monthly benefit monthly benefit
                         to eligible households for three years in the pilot provinces (the amount being determined by the
                         current entitlements under the programs which it subsumes - cash allowance to students (under
                         Decree 49 and under Decree 12), and cash transfers for electricity (under Decision 268). This
                         component will provide gap financing for the benefits payments under the Opportunity program (i.e.,
                         in addition to the government budget provision for the programs being replaced) for a period of three
                         years in the pilot provinces. It will also finance the administrative costs for implementing the
                         Opportunity program through the modern delivery mechanism developed under Component 1,
                         including the improved poverty targeting system, the use of an independent agency for making
                         benefit payments, and the network of social collaborators. The program will be implemented in the
                         second year of the project, once the MIS and other elements of the delivery mechanism are in place.

                         Component 3: Program Management (US$3m): This component would support the establishment of
                         a National Project Management Unit (NPMU) and four Provincial Project Management Units
                         (PPMUs) to oversee the development of modern delivery systems, coordinate the consolidation of
                           social assistance programs, manage and monitor the implementation of the Opportunity program and
                           social assistance under Decree 67/13 and ensure appropriate fiduciary controls are in place. This
                           component would also support regular monitoring of project performance as a whole, including
Public Disclosure Copy




                           preparation of progress reports and audits. At the sub-national level, the project will rely on the
                           PPMUs and the existing provincial, district and commune committees for program implementation
                           and monitoring. The intent is to mainstream SASSP implementation as part of regular tasks and
                           program delivery rather than create separate project management units.

                           The project design has benefited from a partnership between MOLISA, and its technical working
                           group, and UNICEF, DFID and the World Bank. This partnership will continue and the SASSP will
                           be complemented by further technical assistance financed by UNICEF and UK DFID. This will
                           allow providing necessary start-up assistance and capacity building even prior to SASSP
                           effectiveness.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The Project implementation will be concentrated in four provinces i.e. Ha Giang Quang Nam, Lam
                           Dong and Tra Vinh. These provinces have a high share of ethnic minority people, in particular
                           among the poor who will benefit from the program.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Government of Vietnam has considerable experience with and capacity for safeguard policies.

                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Tuan Anh Le (EASVS)
                           Thuy Cam Duong (EASVS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/       No
                           BP 4.01
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No

                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No

                           Pest Management OP 4.09            No

                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      Yes             The project will concentrate in four selected
                                                                              provinces, to be chosen from a preliminary set
                                                                              of eight provinces. A high percentage of poor
                                                                              and near-poor households exists at these four
                                                                              provinces and a large part of the target
                                                                              beneficiaries are from ethnic minority groups.
                                                                              The Therefore, Bank’s OP 4.10 (Indigenous
                                                                              Peoples) is triggered. A social assessment will
                                                                              be conducted in accordance with the Bank’s OP
                                                                                                                                 4.10. Findings from this study will be
                                                                                                                                 incorporated into the design, implementation,
                                                                                                                                 monitoring and evaluation of the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 Potential social adverse impacts, if any, will be
                                                                                                                                 mitigated through consultation with affected
                                                                                                                                 ethnic minority peoples. Meanwhile, project
                                                                                                                                 design will ensure ethnic minority people in the
                                                                                                                                 project area have access to and receive project
                                                                                                                                 benefits that are culturally appropriate to them.
                                                                                                                                 Given that the majority of direct project
                                                                                                                                 beneficiaries are from ethnic minority groups,
                                                                                                                                 elements of an Ethnic Minority Development
                                                                                                                                 Plan (EMDP, equivalent to IPP) will be
                                                                                                                                 included in the overall project design. A stand-
                                                                                                                                 alone EMDP is, therefore, not prepared. A
                                                                                                                                 summary of the findings of the social
                                                                                                                                 assessment and how the project complies with
                                                                                                                                 Bank’s OP 4.10, particularly with EMDP
                                                                                                                                 requirements, will be presented in Annex 3 of
                                                                                                                                 the PAD. This summary will also be disclosed
                                                                                                                                 in Vietnamese locally, and in English at Bank’s
                                                                                                                                 Infoshop, and at Vietnam Development
                                                                                                                                 Information Center in Hanoi prior to project
                                                                                                                                 appraisal.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 11-Sep-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      A social assessment will be launched shortly after PCN review.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Christian Bodewig

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (RSA)                                                                                           Date: 11-Sep-2013
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Jehan Arulpragasam (SM)                                                                                              Date: 11-Sep-2013


                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
