                                                                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                             APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA176
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Apr-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        Nicaragua                                 Project ID:                       P126357
                              Project Name:                   Second Support to the Education Sector Project PASEN 2 (P126357)
                              Task Team Leader:               Michael Drabble
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 14-Oct-2011                                     Estimated Board Date:             17-Jan-2012
                              Managing Unit:                  LCSHE                                     Lending Instrument:               Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                         Primary education (100%)
                              Theme:                          Education for all (100%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                          Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                             7.95
                                   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                                  25.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                        32.95
                              Environmental Category:         C - Not Required
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              The objective of the Project is to: (a) improve the students' retention rate in Primary Education Schools located in the Participating Municipalities;
                              and (b) strengthen MINED's education management capacity.

                              3. Project Description

                              The core concept for this Project is to target interventions where primary education efficiency rates are the worst (low retention, high dropout and
Public Disclosure Copy




                              high repetition rates) and poverty levels are the highest. By focusing on the worst municipalities the Project aims to raise overall retention rates in
                              the most cost-effective manner, and demonstrate effective interventions which can be scaled-up elsewhere with other funding. Specifically, the
                              Project will focus on 40 municipalities in six departments, including the two Atlantic Autonomous Regions (RAAS and RAAN). The selected
                              municipalities are among the poorest in Nicaragua, where the percentage of population living in extreme poverty ranges from 44 percent in Santa
                              Maria to 87 percent in El Tortuguero. The total number of primary school children enrolled (236,000) in those 40 municipalities represents slightly
                              more than 25 percent of the total primary enrollment nationwide in 2009. The highest repetition and dropout rates are found in the targeted
                              municipalities of Murra (17%) and La Cruz de Rio Grande (29%), respectively. Average retention rates up to grade 6 in the 40 municipalities for
                              the three years 2009-2011 were just 18 percent, 21 percent and 26 percent, respectively. Interestingly, girls# retention consistently averaged
                              about 4 percentage points higher than that for boys. The average primary completion rate in the 40 municipalities is 58 percent, and it ranges from
                              as low as 12 percent in Tortuguero to as high as 97 percent in Morrito (although the high score is probably due to erroneous population census
                              data for this municipality). The percentage of children aged 7-13 not enrolled in primary schools in these 40 municipalities ranges from 10 % in
                              San Carlos to 67 % in La Cruz de Rio Grande. Based on MINED estimates, more than half of all primary schools in the 40 municipalities do not
                              offer all six grades, mostly in small rural villages with an average of just 80 students. To increase retention, this project will support interventions to
                              improve the supply of, and the demand for, education in the selected municipalities.

                              This first component aims to improve retention rates in primary education by: (i) financing demand-side incentives for the neediest children in the
                              selected municipalities; and (ii) providing furniture, equipment, textbooks and other student learning materials. This first sub-component would
                              finance the provision and distribution of approximately 50,000.

                              To effectively increase retention rates and transform scarce resources into learning outcomes, the Project will support a three-pronged strategy
                              aimed at: (i) integrating and improving MINED planning and statistical information systems within the General Directorate of Planning (DGP); (ii)
                              enhancing capacity for infrastructure planning and management; and (iii) improving project coordination and fiduciary management. The first sub-
                              component will seek to improve and Integrate MINED Planning and Statistical
                              Information System. This sub-component would provide technical assistance, training, and the purchase of software and equipment to develop a
                              new planning, monitoring and statistical system to integrate MINED#s information systems and facilitate use of information for decision making and
                              service delivery. In addition, the Project would support the transfer MINED#s telecommunication systems from analog to a Voice Over IP (VOIP)
                              platform. The second sub-component will seek to improve planning of school infrastructure to prepare pre-investment Studies. This sub-
                              component aims to strengthen the capacity of the General Directorate of Infrastructure (GDI) at the central and departmental levels to plan and
                              manage school infrastructure, and to prepare pre-investment infrastructure studies (actual civil works would be financed by other donors).
                              Moreover, the Project would support the DGI to set up, maintain and manage a school infrastructure inventory system. Specifically, the sub-
                              component would finance technical assistance, training, operational costs, and the purchase of ICT hardware and software for the GDI. In several
                              departmental offices the Project would also finance minor rehabilitation (works) to accommodate new staff and technology. This would enable the

                                                                                                                                                                             Page 1 of 4
                         GDI to: (i) establish and manage a geo-referenced database of all schools, (ii) prepare in the Project intervention areas a municipality-based
                         priority list for education infrastructure investment (including both rehabilitation and construction); and (iii) conduct pre-investment infrastructure
                         studies in approximately 600 schools. The latter would include activities aimed at supporting community-based approaches to leverage cost-
                         sharing and in-kind contributions and participation from local governments and communities, for greater ownership, sustainability and efficiency.
                         Information collected through the geo-referencing, the school inventory and priority list and the pre-investment studies will be recorded in the
                         school infrastructure inventory system. Finally, the third sub-component supports project management, fiduciary controls and audits. This sub-
                         component would provide support to the MINED for project implementation and fiduciary management. Specifically, the Project would finance
Public Disclosure Copy




                         technical assistance, training and ICT hardware/software to strengthen the capacity of staff in MINED#s Procurement and the Administrative and
                         Finance Units to effectively carry out procurement, project management, financial management, and external audits. Technical assistance
                         includes a Senior Financial Management specialist, an Accountant, an Expenditure Analyst, three Procurement Analysts, and an international
                         Procurement Advisor (whose primary focus would be on training, knowledge transfer and quality control). In addition, operational/supervision costs
                         and logistical support (small purchases of ICT hardware/software and furniture) for Project coordination would be financed. Finally, the Project
                         would finance minor rehabilitation/remodeling (works) of the DGAF to accommodate new ICTs and enhance productivity.

                         The Atlantic Regions (RAAN and RAAS) is the home of different ethnicities. The six major ethnicities are Afro-Caribbean (Creole), Mestizo
                         (Spanish-Indigenous), Garifuna, Miskito, Rama, and Sumo, the last three being indigenous groups. The diversity has made the area an
                         anthropological hotbed, with the majority of research historically on the coast focusing on indigenous cultures and relationships between cultures.
                         The challenge for the Project is to reach indigenous and afro-descendants communities, who most live isolated, in remote areas or in areas with
                         difficult access due to lack of adequate infra-structure. The recognition of the right to develop and use local languages was incorporated into the
                         earliest educational project of the Frente Sandinista. The right to be educated in one's native language was formulated in an official decree in
                         December 1980; and indigenous languages have been given official status in the Nicaraguan Const itution. The first bilingual programs for Miskitu
                         began in 1984, and linguistic research on Sumu and Rama began shortly thereafter. Active linguistic work on Nicaraguan indigenous languages
                         coincided closely with an increasingly mature and developed autonomy process in Nicaragua; the work presently being done on the indigenous
                         languages of the Atlantic Coast is a fundamental part of that process. This is one of the main social challenges for the Project. One of the main
                         findings of the SA and IPDP is that despite the fact the education has been bilingual it needs to be ethnically and culturally adequate to the
                         corresponding population (text books). Encourage girls# right to education, particularly, indigenous and afro-descendants is another important
                         challenge for the Project.

                         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         The Project will focus on 40 poor municipalities in Nicaragua in particular in the Atlantic coast and Atlantic autonomous regions.This will include: (i)
                         in the Department of Jinotega the following four municipalities: El Cuá, San José de Bocay, Santa María de Pantasma, Wiwilí de Jinotega; (ii) in
                         the Department of Nueva Segovia the following four municipalities: Ciudad Antigua, Macuelizo, Santa María, Wiwili de Nueva Segovia; (iii) in the
                         Department of Rio San Juan the following two municipalities: Morrito, San Carlos; (iv) in the Department of Matagalpa the following six
                         municapalities: Rancho Grande, San Dionisio, Matiguas, Rio Blanco, El Tuma la Dalia and Muy Muy; (v) in the Department of Madriz the
                         following five municipalities: San Lucas; Telpaneca, Totogalpa , Yalaguina and Las Sabanas; (vi) in the Department of Chontales the four
                         following municipalities: Comalapa, Santo Domingo, Cuapa and La Libertad; (vii) in the Northern Atlantic Autonomous Region (RAAN) the
                         following four municipalities: Prinzapolka, Siuna, Waslala, Waspám; and (viii) in the Southern Atlantic Autonomous Region (RAAS) the following
                         four municipalities: El Tortuguero, La Cruz del Río Grande, Paiwas. The Departments of Jinotega, Nuevo Segovia and Rio San Juan belong to the
                         North-Central Highlands region. The Central Highlands are a significantly less populated and economically developed area located in the north
                         but narrow southeastward between Lake Nicaragua and the Caribbean. Forming the country's temperate land, at elevations between 2,000 and
                         5,000 feet (610 and 1,524 m), the highlands enjoy mild temperatures with daily highs of it is per se challenging; but it is even more challenging in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         this region due to the issues mentioned under the previous point; and (iv) the project would need to face here not only the issue of how to retain
                         the students but also how to attract good teachers and retain them in the region minimizing as much as possible their desertion.

                         The Project will not engage in construction activities, nor is it expected to generate adverse environmental effects. The bulk of physical activities
                         involve refurbishing schools with furniture and school supplies and small repairs of MINED offices as well as limited renovations in Teacher
                         Training Institutions. The Project will strengthen the capacity of the General Directorate of Infrastructure (GDI) at the central and departmental
                         levels to plan and manage school infrastructure and will finance pre-investment studies for planned investments in educational infrastructure
                         outside of the Project. These pre-investment studies studies will be carried out in accordance with World Bank policies.

                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                         Mary Lisbeth Gonzalez (LCSSO)
                         Gunars H. Platais (LCSEN)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                            Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01              No
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                      No
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                               No
                         Pest Management OP 4.09                          No
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11           No
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                    Yes              Given that this Project will focus on the Atlantic autonomous regions, and the fact
                                                                                           the indigenous populations are inherently linked as potential beneficiaries and
                                                                                           affected peoples from the proposed activities under this strategy, the Indigenous
                                                                                           Peoples safeguard policy (OP 4.10) would be triggered.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12              No
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                        No




                                                                                                                                                                     Page 2 of 4
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP       No
                               7.50
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60           No


                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                  Indigenous Peoples (BP/OP 4,10) is triggered because of the presence of indigenous peoples in the Project area. It is expected that the
                                 project would have positive impacts in the entire population, including the indigenous peoples and the female population. The Project will face
                                 important challenges. The implementation strategy has been design to work with the Government of Nicaragua in implementing specific
                                 measures to overcome the identified challenges. Inclusion (i.e. making effective the right to receive education of good quality and taking into
                                 consideration the environment and the culture) is one of the greatest challenges of the Project. All the activities are oriented to target this
                                 challenge seeking to foster a more inclusive and participatory education for the indigenous peoples and the poorer groups of the country.

                                 A full social assessment and Indigenous Peoples Plan was finalized with the objective of identifying challenges and risks associated with the
                                 education and specifically with the bilingual education in the Atlantic and/or Caribbean Region, where most of the indigenous peoples and
                                 potential beneficiaries of the project reside. This work has identified challenging issues for the project, (i) inter-institutional coordination
                                 between the MINED, the Regional and local Governments; indigenous peoples authorities and the communities themselves, (ii) dispersion and
                                 isolation of the communities, in addition the weak road infrastructure available in the region increases the difficulty to supervise the quality of
                                 the education provided to these areas; (iii) the indigenous peoples territories and communities call for bilingual education that it is per se
                                 challenging; but it is even more challenging in this region due to the issues mentioned under the previous point; and (iv) the project would need
                                 to face here not only the issue of how to retain the students but also how to attract good teachers and retain them in the region minimizing as
                                 much as possible their desertion.

                                 The Project will not engage in construction activities, nor is it expected to generate adverse environmental effects. The bulk of physical activities
                                 involve refurbishing schools with furniture and school supplies and small repairs of MINED offices as well as limited renovations in Teacher
                                 Training Institutions. The Project will strengthen the capacity of the General Directorate of Infrastructure (GDI) at the central and departmental
                                 levels to plan and manage school infrastructure and will finance pre-investment studies for planned investments in educational infrastructure
                                 outside of the Project. These pre-investment studies studies will be carried out in accordance with World Bank policies.
                               2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                                  Political events could interfere with the activities of the Project. There are frequent demonstrations and strikes in Atlantic / Caribbean Region.
                                 These events could temporarily halt the Project and impact negatively on its implementation.
                               3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                                   To ensure that the Project promotes inclusive education some key measures are taken into consideration: (i) mainstream inclusive education,
                                 focusing on the poorest groups, including the indigenous peoples and women; (ii) provide stipends to increase enrollment in primary education,
                                 (iii) improve educational materials in indigenous languages, using culturally appropriated presentation and didactic methodologies; (iv) improve
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 the quality of teachers through training (This training will include alternatives ways to address bilingual education and how to foster inclusion of
                                 indigenous peoples in the education system); (v) develop and distribute new teaching-learning materials including textbooks in indigenous
                                 several languages; (vi) improve the supervision mechanisms to reduce the absenteeism of teachers; (vii) design and implement mechanisms to
                                 enhance inter-institutional coordination.; (viii) support children's health and nutrition contribution to improve attendance in school and learning
                                 outcomes; (ix) improve furniture and environment of classrooms and schools; and finally (x) develop the capacity for school management
                                 through training.
                               4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                                  and implement the measures described.
                                  Through the execution of the PASEN I, MINED has already acquired experience and expertise to work in the Caribbean Region. However, this
                                 Project will aim at improving the institutional capacity of MINED by developing an Action Plan to further improve its work in the Atlantic regions
                                 and with the indigenous populations in Nicaragua. The objective of this Plan is to include measures to improvethe coordination between central
                                 and regional offices of the MINED and between these and the Territorial Governments and the indigenous peoples.

                                 The pre-investment studies for education infrastructure financed by the Project will include appropriate environmental and safety
                                 considerations, such as: selection of construction materials in the Atlantic coast that minimize social and environmental impacts; environmental
                                 mitigation and monitoring measures to be taken during implementation; waste disposal measures; construction site management criteria,
                                 including proper safety protocols for construction workers, including the use of personal protective equipment; dust and noise control; and
                                 institutional arrangement for supervision and oversight of environmental measures.

                                 The Project will also finance small repairs of MINED offices at central and departmental levels as well as limited renovations in Teacher
                                 Training Institutions. These activities are not expected to generate adverse environmental effects. TORs and contract for civil works will comply
                                 with World Bank policies.

                                 In light of the fact that Central America is a natural disaster-prone area, school construction should be designed so that a school structure can
                                 at least take the brunt of a major earthquake sufficiently to get children and staff out safely. Measures to protect against floods will also be an
                                 integral part of the pre-investment studies process. The pre-investment analysis will also take into consideration measures to ensure that
                                 students and teachers attending the schools where any construction activities are taking place are not negatively affected. As appropriate, each
                                 civil works contract will specify the required environmental management measures to be followed at each site.
                               5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                                  on potentially affected people.


                                                                                                                                                                          Page 3 of 4
                               The main stakeholders in the Caribbean Region as identified by the social assessment and IPDP are the indigenous communities, their local
                              organizations (Territorial Governments), community-based organizations and the Regional Government, and the local authorities. The Ministry
                              of Education has departmental education offices in both Atlantic Autonomous regions.

                            B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                             Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                          Yes
                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                             06-Oct-2011
                              Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                         07-Oct-2011
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                          07-Oct-2011
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                            disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                            C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                              If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and approved by    Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?              Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language      Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for   Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?              Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard    Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same        Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Task Team Leader:                    Michael Drabble
                            Approved By:
                            Sector Manager:                      Name Janet K. Entwistle (SM)                                               Date: 23-Apr-2012




                                                                                                                                                                 Page 4 of 4
