                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSC1401

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Oct-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Maldives                         Project ID:       P131331
                            Project Name:      Education Sector Development Project (P131331)
                            Task Team          Harsha Aturupane
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          04-Mar-2013                      Estimated         30-Apr-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASED                            Lending           Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector:            Secondary education (55%), Primary education (25%), Tertiary education
                                               (10%), Public administration- Education (10%)
                            Theme:             Education for all (50%), Education for the knowledge economy (50%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                    10.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Total                                                                        10.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective is to develop and strengthen quality assurance of primary and
                           secondary education, and increase access to higher secondary and tertiary education.
                           C. Project Description
                           The ESDP will support the GoM education development program. The ESDP will be organized at
                           two levels: (a) front line school-level activities; and (b) supporting central-level activities.

                           Component One: Front line School-Level Development Activities

                           The final outcomes of the project will be at this level. The ESDP will support innovative
                           development initiatives at the front line school level.
                         Quality Assurance
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Maldives has developed a Quality Assurance (QA) framework, Child-Friendly Baraabaru
                         Schools (CFBS). The QA framework facilitates the assessment of education inputs, processes and
                         outcomes by schools (self-assessment) and by regional and national level authorities (monitoring and
                         supervision). The CFBS model helps to identify the strengths, weaknesses and development needs of
                         schools, and assists school-based development activities. The MoE is in the process of developing a
                         set of streamlined quality assurance indicators that focus strategically on learning. The ESDP will
                         assist the MoE to implement the quality assurance framework according to a regular quality
                         assurance cycle (plan-implementation-evaluation) in all schools in Male’ and the outer atolls.

                         Teacher Professional Development

                         The successful achievement of a high quality of education depends on the availability of
                         professionally educated and competent teachers. The MoE considers that school-based teacher
                         professional development (SBTPD) is the most effective model to improve teacher performance
                         through for continuing teacher education and training. This view is supported by the international
                         literature on teacher motivation and performance. The ESDP will assist the MoE to establish a
                         system for SBTPD. All schools in Male’ and the outer atolls would implement SBTPD programs,
                         according to a recurrent cycle, with project support.

                         The ESDP would also help the MoE to reduce the stock of untrained teachers (about 23 percent of
                         primary school teachers, and 2 percent of lower secondary and 3 percent of higher education
                         secondary teachers respectively) through suitable pre-service teacher education and equip teachers
                         with necessary skills, including for multi-grade teaching, which is needed in many schools due to the
                         small enrollment numbers in sparsely populated islands.

                         As part of its plans to enhance the quality of education, the MoE is considering implementing a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         system of teacher licensing for all school teachers. However, approximately 4,000 teachers in the
                         current teaching force do not possess a Diploma, which is a prerequisite for applying for a teaching
                         license. The project could support the Center for Open Learning (COL) and private higher education
                         institutions that offer such teachers the opportunity to pursue Diploma level courses online. There is
                         a high demand for such courses.

                         Strengthening the Leadership and Management Skills of Principals

                         The project will help strengthen the leadership and management capacities of school principals. This
                         is particularly important given the additional roles that school principals will have to play as school-
                         based management is expanded and greater responsibility and power is devolved to schools.
                         Currently there is no systematic leadership and management training for principals. The project
                         would support initiatives to install a systematic leadership and management training program. The
                         project would also support leadership and management training for leading teachers and deputy
                         principals, who are identified as good future school principals.

                         Component Two: Central Level Development Activities

                         The ESDP will support novel development initiatives at the central level to complement and support
                         the frontline school level activities.
                         Expansion and Diversification of Higher Secondary and Tertiary Education
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project also would support the strengthening of higher secondary education opportunities in
                         strategically selected islands with sufficient student numbers. The project would support the addition
                         of classrooms blocks, as well as ICT centers, science and language laboratories, and library resource
                         centers, where needed. The project will also help to enhance access to higher education through the
                         provision of bachelors and masters degrees scholarships targeted mainly for important personnel
                         needed for the development of the Maldivian education system (e.g. higher secondary teachers,
                         principals and education management staff). These scholarships would be made available for use
                         among both public and private higher education providers, and would therefore support private-
                         public partnerships for the expansion of tertiary education opportunities. The project would also
                         assist the MoE to extend the quality assurance framework to cover tertiary education.

                         Monitoring, Evaluation and Policy Research and Development

                         The ESDP would have a fund under which project and program monitoring and evaluation, as well
                         as policy research for future education development, would be supported. Some key areas for
                         assistance through this fund are:

                         School Report Cards

                         A school report card system could be introduced for program and project monitoring. This would be
                         a useful tool for decision-making by principals, teachers, school boards and parents. The information
                         in school report cards could motivate education reform and deve lopment at all levels, including
                         schools, atolls and the nation. The Policy and Planning Branch of the MoE would be responsible for
                         the development and administration of the school report card.

                         National Assessments of Learning Outcomes
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Maldives has conducted national assessments of learning outcomes in the past. Many middle-
                         income countries, and countries in South Asia including Sri Lanka, India, Afghanistan, Bangladesh
                         and Pakistan, are developing institutional capacity to undertake national assessments according to a
                         regular cycle and in line with the requirements of policy makers. The national assessments are useful
                         to determine: (a) how well students are learning in the education system; (b) whether there is
                         evidence of particular strengths and weaknesses in students’ knowledge and skills; (c) whether
                         particular subgroups in the population perform poorly; (d) which factors are associated with student
                         achievement; (e) whether the government standards are being met in the provision of resources; and
                         (f) whether the achievements of students change over time. The national assessment can provide
                         feedback into policy and program development. The information from these assessments can be used
                         by policy makers and technocrats in key areas such as curriculum development, teacher education
                         and teacher development, the production of educational materials, and the allocation of resources.
                         The MoE is considering a model to partner with the Faculty of Education (FE) of the Maldives
                         National University (MNU), to establish a reliable and regular system for the measurement and
                         analysis of learning outcomes and the use of this information in monitoring and policy design.

                         Management Information Systems

                         The Ministry of Education, in collaboration with the National Center for Information Technology
                         (NCIT), plans to develop and implement a Management Information System (MIS) for the
                         government. As part of this initiative, an Education Management Information System (EMIS) for
                         school education could be included. The project could support this work, provided a suitable
Public Disclosure Copy




                         modality could be found. In addition, the Department of Higher Education is keen on the
                         development of a comprehensive Higher Education MIS that includes, inter alia, student-level
                         information, staff-level information, and financial management information for all higher education
                         institutions. The Bank could explore possibilities for support during the project preparation process.

                         Policy Research and Development

                         Three areas were identified as key for policy research and development in the initial years of the
                         project. These are:

                         a)       a model for combined curricula schools, where schools would teach a combination of arts,
                         commerce and science streams in secondary education, rather than specializing in one stream as at
                         present;
                         b)       a system for teacher licensing; and
                         c)       the development of a master plan for higher education.

                         Other areas could be identified in subsequent years of the project.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the             safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Project will involve support to schools across Maldives. Certain outputs of the project will support
                         the entire education system in the country and other outputs will be targeted towards selected number
                         of schools. These targeted schools are yet to be identified and prioritized.

                         Maldives is an island nation in the Indian Ocean formed by a double chain of twenty-six atolls
                         oriented north-south off India's Lakshadweep Islands. The atolls of Maldives encompass a territory
Public Disclosure Copy




                         spread over roughly 90,000 square kilometres, making it one of the world's most geographically
                         dispersed countries. Its population of 328,536 (2012) inhabits 200 of its 1,192 islands. Maldives'
                         capital and largest city Malé had a population of 103,693 in 2006. The average ground level is 1.5
                         metres above sea level.

                         The atolls are composed of live coral reefs and sand bars, situated atop a submarine ridge 960
                         kilometres long that rises abruptly from the depths of the Indian Ocean. The reefs are composed of
                         coral debris and living coral. This acts as a natural barrier against the sea, forming lagoons. Other
                         islands, set at a distance and parallel to the reef, have their own protective fringe of reef.

                         The islands are made of 15 cm thick layer of humus forms the top layer of soil. Below the humus
                         layer are 60 cm of sandstone, followed by sand and then fresh water. Due to high levels of salt in the
                         soil near the beach, vegetation is limited there to a few plants such as shrubs, flowering plants, and
                         small hedges. In the interior of the islands, more vegetation such as mangrove and banyan grow.
                         Coconut palms, the national tree, are able to grow almost everywhere on the islands and are integral
                         to the lifestyle of the population. The ground water of almost all inhabitant islands are polluted and
                         the current supply of portable water is from rainwater harvesting and/or desalination of sea water.

                         The temperature of Maldives ranges between 24 °C and 33 °C throughout the year. Although the
                         humidity is relatively high, the constant cool sea breezes keep the air moving and the heat mitigated.
                         The weather in Maldives is affected by the large landmass of South Asia to the north. The presence
                         of this landmass causes differential heating of land and water. These factors set off a rush of
                         moisture-rich air from the Indian Ocean over South Asia, resulting in the southwest monsoon. Two
Public Disclosure Copy




                         seasons dominate Maldives' weather: the dry season associated with the winter northeastern monsoon
                         and the rainy season which brings strong winds and storms. The shift from the moist southwest
                         monsoon to the dry northeast monsoon occurs during April and May. During this period, the
                         northeast winds contribute to the formation of the northeast monsoon, which reaches Maldives in the
                         beginning of June and lasts until the end of August. However, the weather patterns of Maldives do
                         not always conform to the monsoon patterns of South Asia. The annual rainfall averages 254 cm in
                         the north and 381 cm in the south.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The Government of Maldives (GOM) has number of safeguards laws including Environmental
                         Impact Assessment Regulation, 2007; Law No. 4/93: The Environment Protection and Preservation
                         Act; By?law of Cutting Down, Uprooting, Digging Out and Export of Trees and Palms from one
                         island to another; and Traditional rights to land. While the legislative and regulatory framework for
                         environmental management in the Maldives is reasonably good, environmental monitoring and
                         enforcement is weak due to low human resources capacity. In addition, the construction industry is
                         guided by standards developed by the Ministry of Housing and Infrastructure (MOHI) and the
                         country's Building Code.

                         It is anticipated that the project will support improvements to higher secondary schools that may
                         involve construction of school facilities within existing school premises. Therefore, the only issues
                         that are of safeguards concerns will be related to planning of these facilities, obtaining construction
                         material and construction activities. While all land are under the state ownership, all Maldivians are
                         entitled to shelter. Therefore in Maldives, squatters are never found in public land or buildings.
                         Based on the Environmental Impact Assessment Regulation, unless buildings with over 10 stories are
                         to be constructed, no Environment Assessment is necessary, which will be cleared by the
                         Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Given the current scope of the project, it is very unlikely
Public Disclosure Copy




                         that there will be buildings constructed that will require EPA clearance. This also means the EPA
                         will not play a role in monitoring the construction activities supported by the project.

                         Therefore, all project activities that may have environmental and/or social impacts will be subject to
                         proper environmental analysis/screening as per the OP 4.01 – Environmental Assessment to ensure
                         that the adverse impacts are minimized. The project is categorized as safeguards category B. The
                         Ministry of Education (MOE) has agreed that the required due diligence on safeguards will be put in
                         place and they will prepare an Environmental and Social Assessment and Management Framework
                         in collaboration with the Office of Project and Programs (OPP) of MOHI who are responsible for
                         education-sector infrastructure development. During environmental and social assessment/screening,
                         consultations with respective island communities, Island Council and any Civil Society organizations
                         if present will be carried out and will be recorded.

                         The initial assessment of OPP indicated that OPP has engineering design and construction
                         monitoring capacity for the type of constructions proposed. They also have a reasonable monitoring
                         system to monitor construction activities, which also involves the participation of Island Councils.
                         For a given project within an island, the Island Council appoints a person to coordinate, monitor and
                         report on the project. The reporting from the Council to OPP generally takes place once a week. The
                         OPP is also currently being supported through an ADB technical assistance to develop their capacity
                         including construction standards for Maldives. It has been agreed with the OPP that Environmental
                               and Social management Plans that will be prepared at school level will budgeted where relevant and
                               be included as part of the bidding documents. It is envisaged that capacity building of OPP staff that
                               will be assigned for this project or any other staff (including Island Council staff) that will play a role
Public Disclosure Copy




                               in ensuring compliance and local contractors will be necessary to ensure acceptable level of
                               environmental due diligence.
                               F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                               Mohamed Ghani Razaak (SASDS)
                               Darshani De Silva (SASDI)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                                 Safeguard Policies                                                Triggered?                    Explanation (Optional)
                                 Environmental Assessment OP/                                      Yes                           Only construction planning and
                                 BP 4.01                                                                                         implementation-related safeguards issues are
                                                                                                                                 anticipated through this project, which will be
                                                                                                                                 small in scale and temporary. It is proposed a
                                                                                                                                 project-specific Environmental and Social
                                                                                                                                 Assessment and Management Framework will
                                                                                                                                 be prepared to address the likely impacts
                                                                                                                                 associated with the project.
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No
                                 BP 4.11
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Nov-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The site-specific environmental and social assessment/screening and related environmental and
                                      social management plans for the schools that will be improved during the first 18 months and the
                                      Environmental and Social Management Framework for the project will commence preparation by
                                      early October 2012 and is expected to be completed by late November, 2012.



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:   Name: Harsha Aturupane
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Sanjay Srivastava (RSA)   Date: 08-Oct-2012
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Amit Dar (SM)             Date: 19-Oct-2012
Public Disclosure Copy
