                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC1636

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-May-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 20-May-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Dominican Republic              Project ID:      P131109
                            Project Name:     DO Flexible Employment System Project (FESP) (P131109)
                            Task Team         Juan Martin Moreno
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         03-Jun-2013                     Estimated        30-Jul-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    LCSHS-DPT                       Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                              Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Vocational training (25%), Other social services (75%)
                            Theme(s):         Improving labor markets (40%), Social safety nets (20%), Social risk mitigation
                                              (40%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     20.00                   Total Bank Financing:         20.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                              Financing Gap:                   0.00
                              Financing Source                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                   0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                     20.00
                              Total                                                                     20.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives


                           C. Project Description
                           This project is comprised of 3 components that support two programs from the National Employment
                           System implemented by the Ministry of Labor (MoL), the Temporary Employment Project (TEP)
                           and the youth training program (PJyE). The last component is exclusively aimed at increasing the
                         transparency and visibility of the NES through the production and dissemination of monitoring and
                         progress reports, as well as the development of a rigorous impact evaluation:
                         Component 1:Enhancing employability among vulnerable populations. The TEP builds on the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         experience of the pilot temporary employment program ‘Santiago Trabaja’ implemented under
                         component 4 of the Youth Development Project (Loan DO 7371). The program improves the
                         employability of low-skilled, poor, and long-term unemployed job seekers by providing them with
                         temporary employment for six months, along with life-skills training (DCB, Desarrollo de
                         Competencias Básicas). After completion of the first stage, participants enroll in a technical and
                         vocational training (TVT) program for 2 months that is provided by Instituto Nacional de Formación
                         Técnico Profesional (INFOTEP). An intermediate certificate is issued to graduates from the TVT to
                         improve their chances of labor market insertion, or to continue with the certification of the
                         competencies acquired during the participation in the TEP. The enrollment of potential participants
                         of the TEP is channeled through the intermediation services at the Ministry of Labor (SENAE,
                         Servicio Nacional de Empleo). Both participants and non-eligible persons are able to participate in
                         SENAE’s intermediation activities. During the first four months beneficiaries will attend life-skills
                         training courses in parallel to the labor related activities. Over the last two months beneficiaries will
                         attend TVT courses that they have previously opted for. The selection of TVT courses to be offered
                         to participants is determined in consultation with the private sector. As part of the intermediation
                         services to be offered by SENAE, employers will be linked to graduating beneficiaries at the
                         graduation ceremony, facilitating the matching of vacancies and candidates (trained in the needed
                         competencies). The range of TVT courses to be offered to employers and employees is restricted to a
                         set of up to 200-hour courses provided by INFOTEP. Finally, the Civil Society Organizations
                         (CSOs) will be in charge of the execution of sub-projects, which will be competitively selected.
                         Component 2: Preparing At-Risk Youth for the Labor Market. The youth training component of the
                         FESP is focused on poor and disadvantaged young people that are neither at work nor studying, the
                         idle youth commonly referred as “No-Nis?. The third generation of PJyE will be implemented by
                         INFOTEP and consists of a 150-hour DCB/life-skills training course, plus an apprenticeship
                         experience of up to 2 months at the end of the beneficiary’s participation. The participants are
                         provided with the teaching material, plus a daily stipend of US$3, paid weekly during the 2 months
Public Disclosure Copy




                         that the person is on the program. The courses are provided alternatively by INFOTEP or a series of
                         pre-qualified in dependent training institutions that are competitively selected after each call for
                         proposals. These COS (Centros Operativos del Sistema) need to be previously inspected and certified
                         by INFOTEP and are responsible for enrolling potential beneficiaries, contacting private firms where
                         participants will develop the apprenticeship experience, delivering the training courses and paying
                         the beneficiary the daily stipend. The project will consolidate the knowledge transfer that took place
                         under the YDP when INFOTEP delivered 400 courses, both under the traditional private sector
                         modality and the promotion of entrepreneurship and self-employment, particularly in rural or
                         disadvantaged areas of the country where there are few salaried job opportunities.
                         Component 3: Strengthening Government Capacity for Policy Implementation, Monitoring, and
                         Evaluation. The objective of this component is to improve the MoL’s capacity to reach the target
                         population of the supported programs through strengthened program coordination, implementation,
                         monitoring and evaluation. This component is comprised of three main activities. The first one is to
                         scale-up the TEP by taking advantage of the l essons learned from the pilot program. The second
                         activity will support program monitoring with a particular emphasis on the production of periodical
                         reports that will be made public in order to improve the program’s transparency and legitimacy.
                         Finally, the third activity will finance an impact evaluation to rigorously identify the effects of the
                         TEP on the participant’s likelihood of finding a job and increasing their earnings.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The initial program was piloted in the province of Santiago, from where the new program will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         sequentially expand from the city in which it was originally piloted to cover 4 additional cities or
                         regions. These additional cities are left undefined on purpose to beable to adapt the delivery of the
                         program to cities or regions in which the economic crisis hits employment hardest. The geographical
                         distribution of sub-projects and beneficiaries is also left undefined to allow the MoL to adjust the
                         distribution according to the lessons learned from implementation (such as implementation and
                         financial capacity of local CSOs), and information from monitoring reports of the unemployment
                         incidence, distribution and evolution produced by OMLAD (Observatorio del Mercado Laboral
                         Dominicano) and included in the monitoring report of the TEP. The geographic distribution and the
                         expansion schedule will be submitted for approval to the Bank with the yearly Operations and
                         Procurement Plan.

                         As under the on-going YDP, the employment activities supported by the new project are expected to
                         focus on improving communities through small public works or services in urban/residential areas;
                         they are thus not expected to involve agricultural work or impose potential negative impacts on
                         forests or (other) natural habitats. However, these expectations will be revised or confirmed before
                         appraisal once the existing Environmental Management Framework (EMF) has been reviewed to
                         incorporate lessons learned from the pilot phase. This might imply triggering of further safeguards
                         and incorporating respective management aspects within the revised EMF as needed.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         Five basic measures comprise the borrower’s strategy to address the safeguards policies: (a) review
                         and revision, as needed, of the existing EMF before appraisal; (b) contracting of an experienced
                         environmental and social specialist in the project unit; (c) the provision of induction courses for sub-
                         project implementing entities (SIEs) to train them in the process of sub-project proposal presentation
                         to ensure inclusion of adequate environmental and health and safety measures and/or equipment; (d)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         training for teams of workers in regard to environmental management and health and safety; and (e) a
                         detailed OM that includes guidelines based on the EMF to be followed during the project cycle.
                         Again, the OM will be reviewed and potentially revised prior to appraisal.

                         The induction course for SIEs will provide a detailed training to level the capacities of different
                         institutions to present proposals that will be competitively selected. The induction course will be
                         provided by the project environmental and social specialists with support from the World Bank team
                         to leave capacities installed both at the institutional level (territorial support unit, UTAs), as well as
                         at the local level (SIE). The course will provide an overview of the institutional and legal framework
                         that regulates the activities to be undertaken in the sub-projects as reported in the EMF, which will
                         guide the evaluation of the proposals. In the case of presentation of proposals with potential adverse
                         impacts, they will be highlighted and special attention will be paid to the complementary pieces of
                         information to be attached to the presentation, such as suggested mitigation measures by the
                         implementing institution. Each UTA that is supporting and supervising sub-projects includes a team
                         specialist that will have specific environmental functions and capacities included in his/her Terms of
                         Reference (ToR).
                         The principal aspects taken into account within the EMF are:
                         A.       Sub-projects eligibility criteria: Given the characteristics of the program, with regard to the
                         profile of the beneficiaries and the objectives of contribution to the improvement of their
                         employability, the sub-projects should meet the following guidelines:
                           1.       Be of community interest.
                           2.       Generate public benefits.
                           3.       Fully implementability in six months.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           4.       Activities of a scale that imply a maximum of 25 beneficiary workers of the TEP.
                           5.       Be of low complexity. That is: (i) it does not require specialized structural designs, (ii) do not
                           need specialized studies such as on soil, seismology, etc., (iii) are not of Category A of resolution 06
                           of 2004 of SEMARN, and (iv) do not require sophisticated implementation mechanisms which
                           would exclude participation of the beneficiaries.
                           6.       Sub-projects that require intensive use of unskilled labor.
                           The sub-project typologies defined and their scope or accepted maximum dimensions are presented
                           in the EMF and OM. This has been done to ensure that only projects with low negative impacts will
                           be supported. In addition, sub-project preparation activities include consultation mechanisms to
                           ensure responsiveness to local considerations and inputs.
                           B.       Local Legal Framework: The municipal Law 176-07 creates the Municipal Environmental
                           Units (UGAM) with five basic functions: (i) preparation of the standards for environmental and
                           natural resources protection in the municipality; (ii) preparation of civic education programs for the
                           management and treatment of solid waste; (iii) assessment of environmental viability of sub-projects
                           submitted to the municipal council that require an environmental assessment; (iv) guarantee
                           compliance with the Ley General de Medio Ambiente at the municipal level; and (v) develop
                           programs for the use of public spaces (parks, plazas, green areas). Those municipalities that do not
                           have the ability to provide maintenance must partner with neighboring municipalities to allow for
                           such provision.

                           In addition, Law 64-00 requires every Municipal Council to belong to the National System of
                           Environmental Management of Natural Resources. It establishes the mandate of each municipality
                           and establishes the creation of UGAMs. The principal activities to be carried out by the UGAMs are
                           concerned with aspects that directly affect the community: garbage, noise, and environmental
                           complaints due to pollution. The main topics on which the above mentioned Law provides guidance
                           are: (i) solid waste management; (ii) environmental damages; (iii) environmental permissions; (iv)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           monitoring of management plans; and (v) concepts on project viability. Recognizing that the
                           UGAMs are not strong in regards to capacity, the UTA’s members with environmental assignments
                           will be interacting with these units, providing guidance, training, and support as necessary through
                           the project cycle.

                           The existing EMF has been disclosed within the country as well as in InfoShop. The EMF will be
                           reviewed and updated based on the experience from implementation of the YDP and any changes in
                           applicable national regulation. The revised framework will be disclosed prior to appraisal within the
                           country and in InfoShop. The EMF will form a part of the project’s Operational Manual.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Jose Vicente Zevallos (LCSSO)
                           Tuuli Johanna Bernardini (LCSEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes              The planned works and services that the project
                           BP 4.01                                                will finance will focus on relatively small sub-
                                                                                                                                 projects of community interest (please see
                                                                                                                                 below for examples). The project counts with
                                                                                                                                 the Environmental Management Framework
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 (EMF) of the YDP that was prepared in August
                                                                                                                                 2010. It provides guidance on classifying and
                                                                                                                                 evaluating proposed employment activities
                                                                                                                                 according to a typology that also forms a part of
                                                                                                                                 the OM for sub-project screening, design,
                                                                                                                                 approval, implementation, and closing. The
                                                                                                                                 EMF describes negative environmental impacts
                                                                                                                                 that different types of sub-projects could cause
                                                                                                                                 and guides on respective management measures
                                                                                                                                 to prevent, mitigate or compensate them. The
                                                                                                                                 EMF will be revised by appraisal as needed.
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No                            The project will not finance activities that would
                                                                                                                                 affect natural habitats as defined in Annex A of
                                                                                                                                 OP 4.04.
                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No                            The project will not finance activities that would
                                                                                                                                 affect forests or communities that depend on
                                                                                                                                 their services.
                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No                            The project will not finance activities that would
                                                                                                                                 involve purchase or use of pesticides or other
                                                                                                                                 agricultural chemicals.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No                            The project will not finance activities that would
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         affect physical cultural resources as defined in
                                                                                                                                 the introduction of OP 4.11. The EMF will be
                                                                                                                                 revised to include guidance for appropriate
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 action to be taken in case any chance finds
                                                                                                                                 would occur during project implementation.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            The project will not finance activities that would
                                                                                                                                 affect indigenous people groups.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            The project will not finance activities that would
                                 4.12                                                                                            imply involuntary resettlement or direct
                                                                                                                                 economic and social impacts as defined in OP
                                                                                                                                 4.12.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            TThe project will not finance any type of dams
                                                                                                                                 or activities that would depend on existing
                                                                                                                                 dams.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The project will not finance activities that would
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            affect international waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             There are no disputed areas within the project
                                 7.60                                                                                            area.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Dec-2012



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                             The existing EMF will be reviewed, revised, and disclosed by appraisal.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:      Name: Juan Martin Moreno

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name:                                                   Date:
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Mansoora Rashid (SM)                              Date: 20-May-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
