                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA5237
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Aug-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 02-Aug-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Ghana                             Project ID:    P144140
                            Project Name:      GH eTransform Ghana (P144140)
                            Task Team          Mavis A. Ampah
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          22-Jul-2013                       Estimated   26-Sep-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     TWICT                             Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         General information and communications sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         e-Government (50%), e-Services (25%), Managing for development results
                                              (25%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      97.00           Total Bank Financing:                  97.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                       Financing Gap:                          0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                97.00
                              Total                                                                                      97.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective of the eTransform Project is to improve the efficiency and
                           coverage of government service delivery using ICT.
                            3. Project Description
                           1.The proposed project is expected to be structured along four major components to reflect (a)

                                                                       Page 1 of 8
                         government’s efforts to develop more coherent and robust foundation to facilitate access to e-
                         government services (b) scaled use of ICT to transform quality of service in priority areas of
                         development; (c) enabling environment conducive to e-government applications and services; and (d)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Project management support. Details on components are given below:

                         Component 1 – Enabling Environment for Electronic Government and Business

                         2.       This component will support policies, laws, regulations and institutional capacity building to
                         stimulate supply and demand of electronic services with the help of a transparent, secure and open
                         environment. On the supply side, it will support the enabling environment for digital economy,
                         including facilitating interventions for more efficient storage of electronic data, and opening up of
                         data in a format that is usable by citizens for policy, research, and business development. On the
                         demand side, it will support better leveraging of digital platforms to create job and entrepreneurship
                         opportunities. Details of sub-components are as follows:

                         3        Storage, Protection, and Opening up of Government Data – The project will support
                         development of, and access to open government data with the help of shared infrastructure,
                         institutional development, and related policies and regulations. Project funds will finance the
                         software and hardware for developing a “private cloud”—a storage and back-up facility (with
                         increased storage capacity of about 4PB) that is managed in partnership with the private sector. The
                         new cloud infrastructure will be suitable for actively used data and will allow organizations, such as
                         NIA, Births and Deaths and other MDAs, to have more security and control over their data. Project
                         funds will also support the development of administrative and institutional arrangements for data
                         protection and electronic transactions as stipulated under the country’s Acts. Finally, project funds
                         will finance development of policies, regulations, development of datasets, capacity building for data
                         analytics, upgrade of any shared facilities for open data, and set up of certification authorities.

                         4.      Support for Innovation Centers for Entrepreneurship and Job Creation . The project will
                         support an environment where entrepreneurs can participate in launching new products and services,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         scaling up e-applications and services, and increasing uptake of e-applications. These activities have
                         potential to create job opportunities. Project funds in the form of grants will be provided to
                         strengthen the entrepreneurial and job-creation potential of the country through the development of
                         innovation hubs, including mHubs and mLabs. Innovation hubs will support young entrepreneurs in
                         Ghana’s mobile industry through venture incubation, and foster multinational and global
                         partnerships. To ensure sustainable operations, infoDev will act as a technical partner through the
                         course of project implementation and will provide technical support in the design of the mLab
                         including its governing structure, management, and performance monitoring.

                         5.       Institutional Capacity Building for Policy and Regulatory Institutions– The sub-component
                         will provide necessary capacity building to key policy and regulatory institutions in areas including
                         content, cybersecurity, consumer protection, and data protection. Regulating new information and
                         content is a potential challenge for today’s policymaking agencies and regulatory authorities in an
                         increasingly converged ICT industry. Regulation of content pushes the boundaries of the traditional
                         role of a telecommunications regulator. The unique role of broadcast signals, for example, is rapidly
                         disappearing amidst the world of convergence and the deluge of alternative content sources and
                         transmission media. Issues such as spectrum management, consumer protection in the commercial
                         mobile and digital space, and protection of increasingly sophisticated networks and infrastructure
                         present new challenges for both policy makers and regulators. Regulators and policy makers have to
                         decide on what or what not to regulate, how to use/manage scarce resources such as spectrum, and

                                                                      Page 2 of 8
                         how to incentivize further development of the ICT marketplace. The project wi ll support capacity
                         building of policy and regulatory institutions in Ghana to develop necessary capacity to define
                         standards, policies and relevant regulations to protect both government and citizens.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2 – Support for Upgrading National Identification System and Online Verification
                         Services

                         6. .     This component will provide support to develop a robust national identification system based
                         on international standards to help prepare Ghana for a modern e-commerce industry, improved e-
                         government services, and greater poverty alleviation. Support will also be extended to selected
                         agencies and institutions in adopting electronic identification and verification services into their
                         operating processes. The project will assist the government to link key agencies, including the Births
                         and Deaths Registries, the Department of Social Welfare, Electoral Commission, Statistics
                         Department, Social Security and National Insurance, and Immigration, using the national
                         identification number as a common identifier. Details under this component are as follows:

                         7. .     Support to for National Electronic ID System – The National ID system, in its current
                         form with 2D Bar code, has limitations in terms of durability, ability to store information, and does
                         not conform to some of the specifications provided by international organizations, such as ICAO,
                         ISO and ANSI. The limitation is also preventing a number of potential user agencies, including the
                         financial institutions, from using the current Ghanacard. The sub-component will therefore support
                         the government of Ghana to complete implementation and deployment of a well-functioning national
                         electronic ID system. The project will support distribution of 12 million biometric cards, including 3
                         million cards that have already been printed and 9 million cards that will be printed once citizen data
                         is confirmed. The project will review and update the back-office systems and processes under NIA to
                         ensure that the electronic ID system is properly functioning and the central office interacts
                         seamlessly with field offices and downstream agencies. To improve the speed and reduce the cost of
                         distribution of cards, project funds will finance the deployment of mobile registration workstations,
                         mobile verification systems and related software. Project funds will support the development of a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         needs assessment, a strategic plan and an implementation plan for the National ID Authority. Project
                         funds will also support an integrated solution that ensures the new Ghanacard meets international
                         standards and which spans: i) upgrade of the Automated Fingerprint Identification System (AFIS)
                         that allows capturing of 10 instead of the current 4 fingerprints, ii) data center and disaster recovery
                         center, iii) upgrade of printers for smart cards, and iv) instant issuance printers to allow on the spot
                         printing of electronic Identification cards. The new cards will be issued as replacement cards for a
                         fee to citizens.
                         8.       Support for Digitizing and Integrating Digital Identity and Verification Systems into User
                         Agency Operations - A prerequisite for effectively integrating a national identity system is digitizing
                         related paper-based public records such as birth and death certificates, and tax records. The
                         digitization program also offers unique employment opportunities for the youth that jobs to scan,
                         index, and electronically manage paper records, and setting up searchable and easy-to-use electronic
                         databases. Specific emphasis will be given on supporting key user agencies such as the Births and
                         Deaths Registry, the Registrar Generals, the Ghana Revenue Authority, and Immigration Services.
                         The program is expected to be extended to medical as well as digital content for schools. There is
                         potential to use the ten regional innovation centers, built under the eGhana project, as possible
                         venues for carrying out or administering the digitization work from the districts. Project funds will
                         also support key user agencies in the public sector to adjust their operating processes and software
                         systems to use e-ID verification services offered by the NIA system. Support to such agencies will be
                         in form of limited equipment, upgrade of database s, and related capacity building. All of these

                                                                       Page 3 of 8
                         agencies are expected to use the National Identification number as a common identifier. Project
                         funds will also be used to finance software and hardware for the development of a functional identity
                         management system, including Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) and issuance of digital certificates by
Public Disclosure Copy




                         a Certification Authority (CA). In electronic transactions, CA plays a critical role to guarantee that
                         the individual with a unique digital certificate is in fact who he or she claims to be. Under the NITA
                         Act 771 of 2008, NITA is mandated to facilitate the establishment of the CA and regulate their
                         activities. The location of the CA is being discussed with the government.
                         Component 3 - Scale up of Applications to improve service delivery in priority sectors (US$40.55
                         million)
                         9.        In response to the government’s request, project resources will also be used to use ICT to
                         improve quality and reach of services in the health and education sectors where the Government of
                         Ghana is lagging in achieving MDG goals, as well as to complete e-applications currently being
                         implemented under eGhana project. In the health sector, the objective is to: i) extend outreach of
                         medical services to rural and peri-urban areas using low-cost technologies, mobile-based remote
                         tracking and improved training of healthcare professionals; ii) improve communications between
                         rural and urban healthcare professionals, and collaboration between Ghana’s Medical Professionals
                         and counterparts abroad; and iii) provide basic information on health information in local languages
                         to citizens via the web/mobile/ call centers etc. in order to help improve access to basic health,
                         hygiene, reproductive health information etc. The project sub-components are as follows:

                         10.      Support for Integrated eHealth System in Ghana – The Ministry of Health has already
                         prepared a comprehensive scan of eHealth solutions and platforms in the country. The project will
                         build on this work to develop a more detailed strategy for using ICT solutions to improve delivery of
                         health services in Ghana. The strategy will aim to consolidate, map and synergize existing
                         infrastructure, systems and solutions (both from the public and private sectors) used for connectivity
                         and e-applications, and recommend a more integrated and interoperable approach for eHealth/
                         mHealth. The project will provide connectivity to priority district hospitals in the less developed
                         parts of Ghana. The project will set up three medical call centers to provide first response to citizen
                         inquiries about medical and healthcare issues in remote and rural parts of Ghana. The first response
Public Disclosure Copy




                         may entail providing healthcare advice and giving referral to appropriate health specialists and health
                         centers. In cases of emergencies, the first response may coordinate an emergency response with
                         ambulatory services and healthcare providers. The project will also support digitization of medical
                         records at selected teaching hospitals.

                         11.      Wireless Networks for the Selected District Hospitals and Secondary Schools. The project
                         will leverage the National IT Agency (NITA) Network to reduce the cost of connectivity to 200
                         secondary schools that face a greater need to improve quality of teaching and learning, and schools
                         that serve disabled and disadvantaged communities. Selected schools will be eligible for WiMax/
                         LTE installation to school site, devices, and up to 3Mbps of dedicated capacity for the project
                         duration of 5 years. The team is also working with the National Communications Authority to
                         leverage available spectrum which can be used cost-effectively to provide connectivity to remote
                         schools and hospitals. The project will provide computing equipment for computer labs in secondary
                         schools that have a clear plan for use of ICT in education, and have physical facilities to house
                         computing equipment.

                         12.     Teachers’ Network, Educational Portal and capacity building – The project will work with
                         the various teachers associations to support the development and maintenance of an educational
                         portal where teachers, students, parents and researchers can have access and access to good practice
                         lesson plans, curricular content, teaching and learning aids, on-line advice, research etc. The Portal

                                                                      Page 4 of 8
                         could also be a platform for knowledge exchange with national and international networks and for
                         participation in relevant discussion forums. In collaboration with Kofi Annan Center and other
                         international trainers as needed, project funds will also support intensive training to teachers as a part
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of the top-up teacher training for new and existing teachers in the use of computer/internet aided
                         education (beyond ICT literacy).

                         13.     Support for ex isting e-Applications – This sub-component will be aimed at completing e-
                         government applications for 4 key agencies and departments under the eGhana project for which
                         procurement packages have already been completed and funding is not available or inadequate under
                         the eGhana project. State-of-the-art technology relevant to Ghana will be used to simplify
                         administrative and business processes within and between agencies. Project resources will finance
                         the hardware, software and institutional capacity building for the implementation of: i) an e-
                         Parliamentary System which will allow a paperless flow of information, ii) e-Justice system -
                         improve on the effectiveness and efficiency of justice delivery in Ghana, iii) e-Procurement - a single
                         platform for “e-Sourcing”, “e-Tendering”, and “e-Purchasing”, iv) and an e-Immigration system –
                         which will improve immigration and border control services in Ghana. e-Immigration is in
                         implementation phase and the tender documents for the remaining 3 e-applications have been
                         completed.

                         14.                Support for e-Services – The project will build on pilot e-service applications
                         conducted under current eGhana project which include: (i) content management application for
                         hosted services on online portals; (ii) payment gateway to enable electronic payments for online
                         services; (iii) electronic form application to collect citizen information; and (iv) applications to
                         electronically manage documents. Project Funds will support expanded services from these
                         institutions such as online applications for permits and licenses, visas, and National ID Cards (both
                         internally and externally).

                         15.      Component 4 – Project Management Support - The MoC will serve as the Project executing
                         agency and will have overall responsibility for the management of the project. and given the multi-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         sectoral nature of the project, will work with relevant sector agencies for the effective
                         implementation of the project. The MoC has had extensive experience in implementing the eGhana
                         through a dedicated Project Implementation Unit, complemented by core group of consultants from
                         the National IT Agency (NITA) and the ITeS Secretariat who have managed the day-to-day
                         implementation and supervision of the e-Government and ITES components as well the financial
                         management, procurement, disbursement, monitoring and evaluation, progress reporting and
                         communication functions. It is expected that the project will leverage the expertise of some of these
                         experts. Subject to detailed assessment of the existing structure, Project funds will support the
                         existing team for the overall project coordination and management, and will provide communication,
                         procurement, financial management, and M& E. Additional resources will be provided to strengthen
                         capacity as needed, following the assessment. Also in view of the innovative and transformative
                         nature of the project, funds will be allocated to documenting successes and failures, as well as the
                         impact of the project on project beneficiaries.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Ghana

                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Alexandra C. Bezeredi (AFTSG)

                                                                        Page 5 of 8
                         Moses Yao Duphey (AFTN3)
                         Beatrix Allah-Mensah (AFTCS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         6. Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes            The anticipated negative environmental impact
                         BP 4.01                                         of the electronic network technologies to be
                                                                         applied in the e-transform project will focus on
                                                                         three aspects: energy, resources and pollution.
                                                                         1.       Energy and Power consumption: The
                                                                         implementation and expansion of the e-Transform
                                                                         services in the country will increase energy use
                                                                         since activities which were previously executed
                                                                         manually will be replaced with the use of
                                                                         electronic systems.
                                                                         2.       Resources: This includes physical and
                                                                         non physical infrastructural acquisition,
                                                                         distribution, installation, use and disposal. As
                                                                         much as possible, the physical components of the
                                                                         project will utilize existing infrastructure such as
                                                                         buildings and existing electrical connections.
                                                                         Where these are inadequate or nonexistent, they
                                                                         will be upgraded or new facilities will be
                                                                         provided.3.       Pollution from e-waste material:
                                                                         This relates to the disposal and management of
                                                                         potential hazardous substances from e-waste.
                                                                         Potential for generation of e-Waste; also there is
                                                                         opportunity to refurbish or use existing
                                                                         government buildings for ihub and mlab.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         Locations for these have not been confirmed yet.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No             The project is being implemented in facilities or
                         4.12                                            areas already owned
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

                         Projects on International         No
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50




                                                                 Page 6 of 8
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                The eTransform Project is largely focused on electronic applications and likely to have minimum
                              environmental impact. it is anticipated that a scaled up use of ICT applications and services in the
                              country will increase energy use since activities which were previously executed manually will be
                              replaced with the use of electronic systems.
                              Pollution from e-waste in terms of its disposal and management of the potential hazardous
                              substances could therefore be anticipated. However, it can be said that the negative environmental
                              impacts expected from the project within the ESMF is minimal.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                                None anticipated
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                                Team and clients to ensure that energy efficient resources with minimum negative environmental
                              impact are used.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                                Borrower has already implemented a similar project and quite familiar with safeguard policy
                              issues and mitigation plans. Borrower already prepared an ESMF which outlines the principles, the
                              institutional arrangements and identifies the potential negative environmental impacts. The ESMF
Public Disclosure Copy




                              also include management plans for addressing the potential negative impacts, which have been
                              classified as minimal and reversible. There is also capacity building arrangements for relevant
                              staff of the project team and implementing entities to ensure full comprehension prior to and
                              during project implementation. The ESMF was prepared since the specific location of activities
                              that would have such impacts were not known at the time of appraisal. During implementation
                              when these sites have been identified and agreed on, follow up management plans will be
                              elaborated using the outlined one in the ESMF to address specific issues.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                                Key stakeholders include Ministries of Education & Health, the National Identification Authority
                              and Births and Deaths Registry. Borrower has had public consultations to discuss ESMF as well as
                              published the ESMF in reputable local newspapers.
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                             Date of receipt by the Bank                                         30-Jul-2013
                             Date of submission to InfoShop                                      31-Jul-2013




                                                                        Page 7 of 8
                              For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                              Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                            "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Ghana                                                            31-Jul-2013
                              Comments:
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Mavis A. Ampah
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Randeep Sudan (SM)                           Date: 02-Aug-2013



                                                                       Page 8 of 8
