                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA3148
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Sep-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-Sep-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           India                              Project ID:    P131765
                            Project Name:      Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor - II (P131765)
                            Task Team          Benedictus Eijbergen
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          16-Sep-2013                        Estimated   12-Dec-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASDT                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Railways (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (97%), Climate change
                                              (3%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:    1670.00           Total Bank Financing:                 1100.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                  570.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                    1100.00
                              Total                                                                                    1670.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The development objectives of APL2 are to: (a) provide additional rail transport capacity, improved
                           service quality and higher freight throughout on the 393 kms Kanpur- Mughal Sarai section of the
                           Eastern rail corridor; and (b) develop the institutional capacity of DFCCIL to build, operate and
                           maintain the entire DFC network.


                                                                       Page 1 of 12
                          3. Project Description
                         The proposed EDFC2 Project consists of the following components:
                         (a)      Design, construction and commissioning of the Kanpur-Mughal Sarai section of the Eastern
Public Disclosure Copy




                         DFC Program consisting of 393 km of double-track electrified railway designed for freight only train
                         operations with 25-ton maximum axle loads at a maximum speed of 100 km/h.
                         (b)      Continuing institutional support to assist DFCCIL develop its capability to best utilize
                         heavy-haul freight rail systems.
                         The physical infrastructure proposed is the construction of 393 km Kanpur-Mughal Sarai section of
                         the Ludhiana-Kolkata Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor (1,839 km). The Kanpur-Mughal Sarai
                         section will be constructed as a double line ballasted track laid on concrete sleepers. It will be
                         electrified with 25 kV AC, 50 Hz power delivered by an overhead catenary system, and capable of
                         operating at a maximum train speed of 100 km/h. It will be designed for an initial maximum axle-
                         load of 25 metric tons on the track infrastructure and 32.5 tons for supporting structures (so that later
                         increases in axle-loads may be adopted). It will have automatic block signaling, new
                         telecommunications, and train radio and a SCADA control systems. The route alignment of the
                         Kanpur-Mughal Sarai section will run mostly parallel to the existing IR track; however, the
                         alignment will detour near big cities and towns.

                         On the parallel track section, existing level crossings that have relatively high traffic will be replaced
                         by Road Over Bridges or Under Bridges (ROBs/RUBs) spanning new and existing tracks. The
                         remaining level crossings will be improved by interlocking them with the train signaling system and
                         by providing electrically operated booms. Audio-visual warning systems will ensure safety of
                         pedestrians and vehicles. Some of these level crossings would be replaced over time by ROBs/RUBs.
                         The alignment will be fenced at critical locations to keep people and cattle off the track. On the
                         detour sections there will be no level crossings. The terrain in the subject stretch is generally flat and
                         there is a major crossing of the Yamuna River in the vicinity of Allahabad.
                         Construction will be under Design & Build contracts, with two civil works contracts (each consisting
                         of sub-grade, bridges and track), and two system contracts (one for electrification and the other for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         signaling and telecommunications) for the entire 393 km section.
                         DFCCIL has engaged a General Consultant/Owner’s Engineer (GC/OE) for preliminary design and
                         procurement. The General Consultant will draft the PS for DFCCIL review and include in the draft
                         bid documents.
                         The Institutional Support component will finance the institutional strengthening of DFCCIL and
                         assist DFCCIL to develop technical and operational capabilities needed to best utilize heavy-haul
                         freight capability. This component involves:

                         •       A study to analyze and understand different safety related aspects of the DFC program and
                         their implementation.
                         •       Energy optimization options for the dedicated freight corridor.
                         •       Study on heavy haul locomotives and wagons specifications and procurement.
                         •       Assessment of alternative approaches to non-discriminatory access and development of a
                         methodology for establishing track access charges.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The main corridors in India are part of a Golden Quadrilateral connecting New Delhi, Mumbai,
                         Chennai and Kolkata. They account for 16 percent of the railway network’s route length but carry
                         more than 60 percent of its freight task. The GoI has therefore approved a long-term plan to build


                                                                       Page 2 of 12
                         dedicated freight-only lines, paralleling the existing Golden Quadrilateral mixed traffic routes. The
                         first dedicated freight corridors (DFC) to be built are the Western and Eastern Corridors. The
                         Western Corridor (Delhi-Mumbai) is 1534km. The Eastern Corridor is 1839km and extends from
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Ludhiana to Kolkata. World Bank support for the Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor (EDFC) was
                         conceived as a series of projects in which the three sections would be delivered sequentially, but with
                         considerable overlap in their construction schedules. The first loan in the EDFC Program was
                         approved by the Bank in May 2011 and EDFC1 is already under implementation. This Project relates
                         to the EDFC2 section (Kanpur- Mughal Sarai). The table presents the sections included in the World
                         Bank support. Remaining 706 km of the EDFC will be funded by GOI.
                         World Bank Funded Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor (EDFC)


                         Projects Section Length (km)     Number of Tracks           Cost (US$ m)
                         EDFC1 Khurja- Kanpur 343         Double 1,453
                         EDFC2 Kanpur- Mughal Sarai       393    Double 1,670
                         EDFC3 Ludhiana- Khurja           397    Single 1439
                         Program                  1133           4562

                         The dedicated freight corridor traverses the Indo-Gangetic plain eventually connecting the port of
                         Kolkata on the Bay of Bengal in the east, to the industrial heartland of northern India in the north-
                         west. The proposed EDFC2 section traverses 7 districts and 372 villages in the state of Uttar
                         Pradesh. The ROW width is around 20-40 m in the parallel sections and 40-60 m in the detour
                         sections. Two Chief Project Managers have been appointed for the EDFC2.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Satya N. Mishra (SASDS)
                         Harinath Sesha Appalarajugari (SASDI)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              Project has been categorized as ‘Category A’,
                         BP 4.01                                              and has carried out an ‘Environmental
                                                                              Assessment’ to identify key environmental issues.
                                                                              An Environmental Management Plan has also
                                                                              been prepared and will be integrated with the
                                                                              contract documents for implementation.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09              No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/      Yes              Impacts on 70 physical and cultural properties
                         BP 4.11                                              have been identified in the EA and suitable
                                                                              mitigation measures (avoidance, restoration or
                                                                              relocation) have been formulated for
                                                                              implementation during the construction phase of
                                                                              the project.



                                                                      Page 3 of 12
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      Yes              The SIA has been carried out and Draft RAP
                            4.12                                                prepared.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The project involves major construction activities such as earthen embankments for the rail track,
                              number of major and minor bridges, rail fly overs and ancillary buildings. These activities are
                              expected to cause significant environmental impacts comprising acquisition of forest land, cutting
                              of trees, impact on community and cultural resources, and land acquisition and involuntary
                              resettlement. Considering the above, the Project has been categorized as ‘Category A’ and triggers
                              three safeguards policies- Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Physical Cultural Resources
                              (OP/BP 4.11) and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).

                             Environmental Impacts: Complying to the Safeguard Policies of the Bank and also the
                             ‘Environmental Management Framework’ developed during the preparation of EDFC1 for Eastern
                             Dedicated Freight Corridor, the project has carried out an ‘Environmental Assessment (EA)’ for
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the Kanpur to Mughal Sarai section (EDFC 2) and prepared an Environmental Management Plan
                             (EMP) to mitigate the anticipated impacts of the project. The project, based on detailed analysis
                             carried out in EDFC1 has also integrated the Silicosis Reduction Strategies (SRS) and Green
                             House Gas Emission Reduction Strategies (GHG strategies).

                             The EA analyzed, (i) the environmental profile of the project area through field investigations that
                             developed detailed environmental strip maps of the proposed alignment of the corridor (ii) base
                             line environmental features such as air, water quality, flora / fauna, etc. in the project area have
                             been developed for two critical seasons (winter and summer), (iii) noise and vibration impacts at
                             various sensitive receptors along the project alignment (iv) potential environmental impacts for all
                             the environmental parameters (v) ‘Project’ and ‘No Project’ scenarios, and alternative alignment
                             options (vi) impacts on cultural properties through a detailed inventory and assessment (vii)
                             impacts of cutting about 18148 trees and measures for mitigation, and (viii) impacts on surface
                             water drainage in the project area due to the proposed rail track.
                             The potential ‘environmental impacts’ identified in the EA included (i) acquisition of 0.098
                             hectares of forest land at one location along the alignment in Mirzapur district in the State of Uttar
                             Pradesh (ii) cutting of about 18148 trees for the entire 393 km of the alignment (iii) involvement
                             of about 28 million m3 of earth work in embankment and 2 million m3 of quarry stone material
                             for laying the rail track (iv) increased noise and vibration levels at 15 sensitive receptors (v)
                             impacts on 70 physical and cultural properties and (vi) health and safety issues to construction


                                                                        Page 4 of 12
                           workers during the construction phase of the project.

                           Social Impacts: The key social impacts associated with this Project include the loss of land,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           shelter/business, farming livelihoods, incomes and community properties and temporary
                           construction related impacts. As per the Social Impact Assessment, the Project requires acquisition
                           of 1400 ha of land, including 1250 ha (89 percent) private land and 150 ha government land.
                           About 13,034 families (some 64,000 people) are being affected. (Even as the land acquired and the
                           number of people affected may not increase, the number of families losing land could increase
                           with the updating of land records involving division of titles among the legal hairs). Some 95.7
                           percent of the affected families will lose their land in part or in full. Of these land losers, about 90
                           percent will lose less than 0.15 ha of land, whereas 14.6 percent will become landless, marginal or
                           small farmers. Physical displacement related impacts shall be limited with a total of 623 structures
                           are affected in 372 villages along 393 km. The 623 affected structures include: 430 residences, 98
                           shops, 25 kiosks, 15 tenants, and 55 community structures. Structures owners losing over 25
                           percent built-up area (constitute 90 percent of the affected), will be treated as displaced and
                           provided with additional R&R benefits. The displaced families will relocate within their village.
                           Traditional occupiers living on village (abadi) lands prior to 1961 have been recognized as title
                           holders. The land acquisition process carried out under the Railways Amendment Act, 2008 is in
                           advance stages for the EDFC2 with land compensation award declared for 98 percent of 1400 ha
                           being acquired.

                           According to a Social Safeguards Quality Audit carried out in January 2013, the loss of farm-
                           based livelihoods for hundreds marginal farmers remains a key adverse impact, which will be
                           addressed applying appropriately the resettlement framework for restoring livelihoods and with
                           measures to strengthen income generation. The temporary construction related impacts such as
                           health and safety, labor in-migration, accident risks, dust and noise, movement of materials etc. are
                           covered in the EIA.

                           According to a Social Safeguards Quality Audit carried out in January 2013, the loss of farm-
Public Disclosure Copy




                           based livelihoods of hundreds marginal farmers remains a key adverse impact, which has to be
                           addressed applying appropriately the resettlement framework for restoring livelihoods. The
                           temporary construction related impacts such as health and safety, labor in-migration, accident
                           risks, dust and noise, movement of materials etc. are covered in the EIA.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             The key long term environmental impacts of the proposed project include (i) impacts on the land
                           environment due to quarrying large quantities of quarry stone material (about 2 million m3) and
                           borrowing earth (about 28 million m3) for laying the rail track and (ii) increased noise and
                           vibration levels during operation phase at about 15 sensitive locations along the railway track. The
                           indirect impacts of the project include (i) impacts on the natural drainage of the project area due to
                           the project alignment in embankment and (ii) land use changes in the project area.

                           The environmental management plan prepared for the project, proposes specific mitigation
                           measures to minimize the above impacts, through detailed management plans for the development
                           and closure borrow areas and quarry sites. The environmental management plan also recommends
                           construction of noise barriers, vibration reduction measures and cultural property management
                           plans, along with sample designs cost estimates for implementation by the contractor.



                                                                       Page 5 of 12
                           At few locations including habitations close to the new EDFC tracks, movement of local
                           communities and local traffic may also be affected. The project proposes Rail Over Bridges and
                           Pedestrian over-ridges to minimize such risks. The ROBs are listed as linked activities to which
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the Bank’s safeguards policies will apply as per the resettlement policy framework agreed with
                           DFCCIL.

                           There is a likelihood that DFCCIL may seek to develop along the EDFC corridor a few transport
                           hubs and undertake other business development activities. Whereas, the exact nature and impact of
                           such development activities is not known, these activities may require acquisition of additional
                           lands, and on the positive side, could generate new employment and income opportunities for the
                           local people. As such, on the positive side, the project is expected to provide employment and
                           income opportunities to the local communities.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             The measures taken to avoid or minimize adverse environmental, LA and involuntary
                           resettlement impacts include: (a) maximum use of the existing railway land within the existing
                           ROW (b) using the minimum ROW at critical locations (c) negotiation with the Indian Railways to
                           transfer unutilized loop lines and yards to DFCC where available, (d) exploring alternative
                           alignments, reducing track distances at some locations (Jigna, Baridubey, Bamrauli, Nodiya
                           ahmadkarari, Dayramithepuri, Baragaon, Pansaur and Sayed Sarawan), (e) reducing embankment
                           heights, (f) ruling out service roads in built-up stretches, (g ) providing retaining wall/fencing of
                           DFC at suitable distance from last track of DFC, three meter extra width (if land is available) from
                           residences to the retaining wall in order to provide access to the local residents, if additional land
                           is not available, with access to residents from other side of their house, to be planned during
                           implementation, and (h) making short detours at congested locations such as Fatehpur, Khaga,
                           Sirathu, Barwari, Allahabad, Manda and Mirzapur.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Public Disclosure Copy




                             (a) Borrowers Measures to address environmental safeguard Issues

                           Environmental Management Plan: The EA recommended a comprehensive environmental
                           management plan to address the impacts identified and an Environmental Management Plan
                           (EMP) with specific mitigation measures. The measures include (i) compensatory afforestation to
                           compensate with the loss of forest land and the loss of tree cover, in complete compliance with the
                           Forest Conservation Act of Government of India (ii) Avenue Plantation at 10 trees per km all
                           along the alignment (iii) Rehabilitation Plan for the Borrow Areas developed for the earth work for
                           the project (iv) noise barriers in 15 critical locations and mitigation measures for the management
                           of increased noise levels in other sensitive locations (v) specific vibration reduction and
                           management measures in the locations where vibration levels are expected to be high (vi) cultural
                           properties rehabilitation plan for all the affected properties and (vii) specific construction safety
                           and environmental management measures for the construction phase of the project. The EMP
                           measures will be integrated in the bid documents for implementation by the contractors of the
                           project

                           Silicosis Reduction Strategies: A separate analysis of measures required to mitigate the potential
                           impacts of ‘Silicosis’ on the construction workers was carried out in EDFC1 and specific measures
                           were recommended to be integrated into the bid documents of the project, for implementation by
                           the contractor. These measures including the EMP will be integrated in the bid documents of the

                                                                      Page 6 of 12
                         project

                         Environmental Management Framework: The borrower has developed an Environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Management Framework (EMF) during the preparation of EDFC1, for the eastern dedicated
                         freight corridor. The framework defines environment management approach for identifying the
                         environmental issues associated with the proposed projects, identifies the requirements of
                         conducting EA studies and provides guidance to integrate environment safeguard measures during
                         the planning, designing and construction phase of DFC East. DFC continues to follow the
                         framework for EDFC2 and also the upcoming EDFC3.

                         Linkages: Concurrent to the construction of EDFC2, the project is expected to construct some
                         ROBs/RUBs without Bank financing. DFC is taking measures to ensure that, all these activities
                         physically connected to the project including ROBs/RUBs will comply with the requirements of
                         EMF agreed for the project. The western Dedicated Corridor financed by JICA is not directly or
                         significantly related to the Bank financed corridor, as this corridor is on a separate alignment
                         spread in a different geographical zone and does not meet the lineage criteria outlined in the OP
                         4.12.

                         GHG Emission Analysis: An analysis of the potential to reduce GHG emissions was carried out in
                         EDFC1, which estimated that the eastern corridor will reduce about 13.19 million tons GHG
                         emissions by 2041-42, a reduction of 55 percent of GHG emissions from 23.29 million tons
                         without DFC to only 10.48 million tons with DFC. In addition, the analysis has also recommended
                         a number of measures such as (i) regenerative breaking (ii) communication based train control (iii)
                         green building measures for offsite construction activities (iv) solar and wind power generation in
                         railway properties / lands.

                         Climate Screening Analysis: The borrower has also agreed to “Pilot the Climate Screening Tool?
                         being developed by the Bank’s Climate Change Team’ and incorporate its findings in the design of
                         various components of the project. This will ensure that the project is well prepared for climate
Public Disclosure Copy




                         variability and associated issues.

                         (b) Assessment of Borrowers Capacity to Plan and Implement the Safeguard Measures

                         The environmental regulations of GoI do not mandate railway projects to obtain environmental
                         clearances from the Ministry of Environment & Forests (MoEF). However, as part of the
                         programmatic implementation of Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor supported by the Bank,
                         DFCIL has developed an Environmental Policy and Environmental Management Framework
                         applicable for all its activities. As part of these proactive initiatives, the agency has also carried out
                         “Green House Gas Emission Analysis? of both the Eastern and Western corridors. Considering the
                         nature and scale of construction activities DFCIL has also developed ‘Silicosis Reduction
                         Strategies’ to be implemented in its construction activities.
                         To implement these initiatives, DFCIL has set up a Social and Environmental Management Unit
                         (SEMU) headed by a General Manager. SEMU implements all the safeguard activities at DFCIL,
                         and is supported by an AGM and one environmental and social specialist each.
                         This unit has successfully carried out the safeguard due diligence activities such as (i) Carrying out
                         Environmental Assessment for EDFC2 (Kanpur – Mughul Sarai) Section (ii) carrying out an
                         Environmental Assessment of EDFC1 (Khurja – Kanpur Section) (iii) Environmental Assessment
                         of Tundla Detour of EDFC1 (iv) Environmental Assessment of Rail Over Bridges in EDFC1 (iv)
                         Secured clearances from Taj Trapezium Authority, Archaeological Department for Tundla

                                                                     Page 7 of 12
                         Detourn in EDFC1 (v) permissions for majority of forest land diversion and tree cutting
                         clearances, etc in EDFC1 and (v) initiated forest land diversion clearances for EDFC2. In addition
                         to the above the Environmental Assessment of Ludhiana – Khurja Section (EDFC3) is also in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         advanced stage of preparation.

                         By performing these safeguard activities; DFCIL has demonstrated its commitment to
                         environmental management and ability to comply with safeguard policies of the Bank. However,
                         DFCIL has limited experience in implementing Environmental Management Plans (EMP). This
                         would require further handholding and capacity building of SEMU and Project Managers Staff in
                         the field. The Bank team would work with DFCCIL and will ensure these capacities are
                         developed.

                         Social Safeguards Measures: The safeguards policy arrangements for EDFC2 are a continuation of
                         those agreed for the EDFC1. The World Bank Operational Policy 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement)
                         and OP 4.11 (Physical and Cultural Resources) are triggered and appropriate safeguard measures
                         proposed. OP 4.10 has not been triggered as no tribal people are affected. The land acquisition
                         (LA) for EDFC will continue to be carried out applying the Railway Amendment Act (2008), with
                         adopting the National Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy (NRRP) 2007 for giving
                         resettlement and rehabilitation (R&R) assistance, as was done for APL-1. DFCCIL has carried out
                         a Social Impact Assessment and prepared a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for EDFC2. The RAP
                         for EDFC2 is in line with the RPF agreed or EDFC1.

                         The Bank carried out A Resettlement Quality Audit in collaboration with the Borrower (DFCCIL)
                         in January 2013 with the help of a resettlement expert hired by the Bank for EDFC1 to record
                         progress, lessons and to suggest improvements for EDFC2. The audit confirmed impressive
                         progress in LA, without displacing anyone without paying compensation/ R&R benefits, noted
                         positive measures taken by the Borrower to effectively manage social safeguards including: (i)
                         holding wider community consultations; (ii) using land survey consultants to demarcate impacts;
                         (iii) updating of land records and title transfer with compensation payment; (iv) handling of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         grievances by the field staff; (v) providing land title to traditional occupiers settled on Abadi lands
                         prior to 1961; (vi) effective vertical monitoring and inter-agency coordination with the state
                         government; and (vii) taking special initiative to impart skill training to the affected youth for
                         income generation.

                         The Audit recognized that the entitlement framework was adequate and recommended further
                         measures to improve implementation quality. Based on the audit recommendations, DFCCIL has
                         agreed to: (i) strengthen district grievance mechanisms; (ii) ensure compensation at replacement
                         value using independent evaluators; (iii) pay livelihood assistance to those losing livelihoods and
                         left with marginal, or no land plots; (iv) clarify regarding jobs for land losers; (v) impart job skill
                         training to the poor, eligible, and affected youth; and (vi) improve implementation capacity. The
                         RAP has been updated to this effect.

                         Borrower’s Social Safeguards Management Capacity: The institutional arrangements for EDFC2
                         will be a continuation of the system established for EDFC1. The Social and Environment
                         Management Unit (SEMU) of DFFCIL, led a General Manager, assisted by an AGM and a Social
                         Development Specialist, plays a coordinating role with NGOs for providing field-level
                         implementation support. The Chief Project Managers (CPM) will continue to operate as Chief
                         Resettlement Officers, assisted by a number of Assistant Project Managers (Social).



                                                                     Page 8 of 12
                         M&E. Regular performance monitoring of RAP implementation will be done by the internal
                         oversight mechanisms of DFCCIL, in which SEMU and the CPM office will have key roles.
                         SEMU and the CPM office will be assisted by PMC and the facilitating NGOs. DFCCIL will hire
Public Disclosure Copy




                         SESMRC for third party monitoring and quality audit of LA and R&R measures. SESMRC will
                         provide quarterly progress reports (QPR) and yearly Safeguard Review Reports for follow up
                         action. The procurement process for hiring SESMRC has been started.

                         A multi-stage Grievance Redress Mechanism will handle grievances of Project-affected persons.
                         The Competent Authority appointed for carrying out LA will hear and resolve preliminary
                         objections/grievances, whereas Revenue Commissioners appointed as Arbitrators will hear
                         Project-affected persons’ claims seeking higher compensation. DFCCIL has established a multi-
                         level independent Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM). The field level grievance committee
                         (FLC) shall be convened by CPM where the Additional District Collector shall be the member,
                         and other members will be the President, Zila Parishad (District Council) and a representative
                         from a reputed local NGO. The Headquarters level grievance committee (HLC) shall be convened
                         by GM/SEMU where the Director, Project and Planning shall be the member and there will be one
                         member from Ministry of Railways. Arbitrators have been appointed to hear grievance cases
                         relating to payment of compensation for land to be acquired under RAA, 2008. DFCCIL has
                         appointed an Ombudsman to hear any outstanding grievances with regard to the RAP
                         implementation, and is in the process of hiring NGOs, SESMRC and appointing District-GRCs for
                         EDFC2. The DFCCIL is in the process of commissioning a land acquisition information system
                         (LAIS) developed for tracking LA and R&R activities including the grievance redress process.

                         Whereas, the SEMU has demonstrated its capacity by completing the SIA and RAP for EDFC2,
                         and by successfully carrying forward the LA process, the Resettlement Quality Audit indicated
                         gaps in field level implementation capacity, with regard to information dissemination and people’s
                         mobilization. DFCCIL will need to enhance its LA and R&R management capacity at the field
                         level; it will require training and sustained technical support during the implementation period.
                         The Bank safeguards team is working closely with the DFCCIL with regular field visits, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         providing training support.

                         Risks and Mitigation Measures:

                         The key social safeguards risks identified in the resettlement audit include: (a) farmers’
                         dissatisfaction with low compensation offered in some villages at older circle rates; (b) income
                         restoration of land losers; (c) delays in payment of R&R assistance; (d) challenges in coordination
                         with revenue officers of the state government; (e) poor public awareness regarding GRM
                         established at district and DFC levels; (f) inadequate field capacity for LA and R&R; (g) disputes
                         regarding eligibility for compensation and R&R benefits; (h) loss of access to local roads; and (i)
                         impacts on marginal farmers and vulnerable groups.

                         DFCCIL is taking several steps to minimize risks associated with land acquisition. These include
                         providing livelihood assistance to displaced shopkeepers, and land losers rendered landless and
                         marginal; and addressing compensation issues through arbitration and grievance redress
                         mechanism. An independent R&R monitoring and review process will enable identifying and
                         addressing any emerging risks. Gender and social inclusion issues are addressed by extending
                         special R&R entitlements to families headed by women, single women, persons with disability and
                         poor widows under the category of vulnerable project-affected persons. The RAP offers special
                         benefits to small/ marginal/landless farmers, artisans, vulnerable persons and families living below

                                                                   Page 9 of 12
                           the poverty line.

                           Income Restoration. The RAP provides 750 days of wages as livelihood assistance to those
Public Disclosure Copy




                           becoming small, marginal, or landless farmers; or those losing shops. DFCCIL has started a skill
                           training program for the affected youth along Eastern and Western Corridors. DFCCIL will
                           prepare and implement a Skill Building Plan to strengthen Income Generation amongst the poor,
                           eligible and affected youth. This income generating initiative will focus on financial literacy, skill
                           building and entrepreneurship development for the affected people, in collaboration with potential
                           partners. DFCCIL will earmark a budget for this to support the initiative.

                           New Land Acquisition Bill. The Government of India has enacted a new Right to Fair
                           Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition Bill in September 2013, which is awaiting
                           Presidential signature. The Railway Act (2008) is exempt from the purview of this new legislation.
                           Nonetheless the Entitlement Matrix adopted for the DFC project provides for paying
                           compensation as per the Railway Act (2008) or any other policy or legislation applicable in the
                           State in which the land is acquired, whichever is higher. This provision will enable any additional
                           compensation to be paid in line with any new laws enacted by the State governments. Moreover,
                           the independent safeguards quality review framework in the RAP allows updating of entitlements
                           and implementation process if required. The land acquisition for EDFC2 is at an advanced stage of
                           implementation with award declared for 98% of the 1400 Ha required.

                           The policy framework for EDFC2 will apply to linked activities in continuation of the framework
                           agreed for the EDFC1. Gender and social inclusion issues are addressed by extending special R&R
                           entitlements to families headed by women, single women, and widows under the category of
                           vulnerable PAPs, and vocational skill training targeting women. The RAP offers special benefits
                           to small/ marginal farmers, artisans, vulnerable Project-affected persons and families living below
                           the poverty line.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The resettlement quality audit of January 2013 confirmed that public consultations were held in
                           most villages, even as the degree and intensity varied with the extent of farmers’ demands. A total
                           of 326 consultations were held in villages and 41 consultations at Tehsil levels. These
                           consultations were meant for disseminating information about the Project and its likely impacts
                           and elicit people’s views for minimizing/ mitigating impacts. Key issues discussed during these
                           consultations included: potential environmental impacts, employment opportunities, vibration
                           impacts on structures close to the DFC tracks, compensation, loss of common properties, accident
                           risks, etc. Draft RAP and EMP were prepared incorporating these issues and were shared with the
                           people during follow-up consultations. Mitigation measures proposed to address people’s concerns
                           include: provision of foot over bridges, cross drainage structures, road over bridges, and boundary
                           walls at certain locations and compensation and resettlement assistance and RAP Implementation
                           arrangements. The Bank team undertook field visits during the preparation to interact with the
                           affected people and other stakeholders to have a firsthand assessment of impacts and issues on the
                           ground. The RAP and EMP for EDFC2 have been disclosed in DFCC’s web site and other public
                           places accessible to the local people. The RAP and the EMP were disclosed in the Bank’s Info
                           shop on January 3, 2013 and January 7, 2013 respectively. The list of eligible Project-affected
                           persons verified with community consultations by NGOs will be disclosed at the local level.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements


                                                                      Page 10 of 12
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      25-Dec-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   07-Jan-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      25-Sep-2013
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            17-Dec-2012
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      12-Oct-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   03-Jan-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            30-Sep-2012
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?




                                                                     Page 11 of 12
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Benedictus Eijbergen
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Zia Al Jalaly (RSA)                            Date: 26-Sep-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Karla Gonzalez Carvajal (SM)                   Date: 27-Sep-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 12 of 12
