                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSA3147
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 20-Jun-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 21-Jun-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Ecuador                             Project ID:    P143996
                            Project Name:      EC Manta Public Services Improvement Project (P143996)
                            Task Team          Oscar E. Alvarado
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          24-Jun-2013                         Estimated   08-Aug-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     LCSWS                               Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (50%), Urban Transport
                                              (50%)
                            Theme(s):         City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (90%), Water resource
                                              management (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     115.00           Total Bank Financing:                  100.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                       Financing Gap:                            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                     15.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                       100.00
                              Total                                                                                       115.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to support the Municipality of Manta in increasing the
                           quality and sustainability of public services for water, sanitation and urban mobility.

                           The objective will be achieved by (i) increasing availability of water supply and efficiency of water

                                                                        Page 1 of 13
                         and sewerage services; (ii) improving urban mobility and accessibility through improvements to the
                         street network, including sidewalks; and (iii) enhancing the capacity of the municipal government in
                         planning and managing the provision of water and sanitation and urban transport services.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Project Description
                         The proposed project will finance four components, described below:

                         Investments in water supply and sewerage collection are in support of the second phase of EPAM’s
                         Water and Sewerage Master Plan for which Phase 1 was successfully implemented, and interventions
                         will take place in the three urban districts of Manta, Tarqui and Los Esteros. As for the investments
                         in road improvement, in support of the Municipality’s Mobility Study (carried out jointly with the
                         Manta port expansion strategic plan) and interventions will take place in the four urban districts of
                         Manta, Tarqui, Los Esteros and Eloy Alfaro. Works in the two sectors will be closely coordinated in
                         the districts where overlap is planned in order to minimize disruptions and pavement cuts.

                         Component 1: Investments in Water Supply and Sewerage ($44.0 million). This component will
                         support infrastructure investments including: (i) storage capacity increase and water network
                         rehabilitation including household connections and meters; (ii) sewerage network rehabilitation,
                         including pumping stations and household connections; and (iii) associated works supervision. The
                         interventions will be in support of the second phase of the Master Plan developed by EPAM to
                         address service coverage deficiencies and deteriorating water and sewerage networks. The water and
                         sewerage network rehabilitation include works in the districts of Tarqui, Manta and Los Esteros,
                         accounting for approximately 50 percent of the overall networks.

                         Component 2: Investments in Road Improvement ($49.9 million). This component will support
                         infrastructure investments including: (i) urban streets upgrading, consisting in widening to include
                         sidewalks and street furniture, including upgraded bus stops and tree planting; (ii) urban street
                         resurfacing, including street paving and resurfacing of roads in poor conditions, allowing for
                         improved access to expand and improve the quality of public transport options, including in lower-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         income neighborhoods; and (iii) sidewalk construction and reconstruction, including the provision of
                         pedestrian facilities, with a concentration to the core urban center and the introduction and piloting of
                         traffic calming measures.

                         Component 3: Institutional Strengthening ($7.6 million). This component will support institutional
                         strengthening activities for EPAM, the Traffic Directorate and the Public Works Directorate of the
                         Municipality of Manta. These activities will include, in water and sanitation: (i) institutional
                         strengthening of the management of water and sanitation services by EPAM, including operational
                         and commercial efficiency and strategic planning; (ii) the development of a household connections
                         program for both water and sewerage to improve water usage and tariff collection, as well as
                         promote the health and environmental benefits of connecting to the network; (iii) the elaboration of a
                         water and sewage quality control program, including a monitoring plan, the construction of
                         laboratories to measure water quality, related equipment and training, as well as technical assistance
                         in improving the operation and maintenance of the existing wastewater treatment plant; and (iv) the
                         preparation of a water resources integrated management plan for EPAM.

                         The activities in transport will include institutional strengthening of: (i) the Traffic Directorate,
                         including updating the mobility plan and developing the road safety plan; and (ii) the Public Works
                         Directorate in road management. The Project will provide capacity building activities to enable an
                         incremental shift to integrated corridor management citywide so as to improve the efficiency and


                                                                       Page 2 of 13
                         effectiveness of urban transport options, in particular of public transport services and non-motorized
                         transport, as well as safety aspects. In addition, the Project includes institutional strengthening
                         activities to enable multi-year planning and programming of road maintenance activities to allow
Public Disclosure Copy




                         preserving the overall road network in good or regular condition. The Project also envisions training
                         for the staff of both directorates on technical matters such as traffic analysis, urban transport
                         planning, bridge inspections, road asset management, road safety and relevant M&E, amongst others.

                         Component 4: Project Administration ($13.5 million). This component will finance costs associated
                         with program management, including project-related audits, monitoring and evaluation, equipment
                         and training to strengthen the project implementation unit, as well as individual consultants. It will
                         include staff support related to environmental and social management, including land acquisition and
                         resettlement. This component will also finance workshops to promote positive environmental and
                         social impacts (benefits) such as a public communications campaign on sustainable water usage,
                         sanitation, river and ravine protection and solid waste management. The component costs also
                         include value added taxes.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is located in the municipality of Manta, and mostly in the City of Manta. The project area
                         is mainly urban or semi-urban, with a population of approximately 226,000. Component 1 (water and
                         sewerage) works will be installation of water supply distribution pipes and wastewater collection
                         pipes in existing streets in urban areas. These will include replacement of existing pipes or
                         installation of new. Component 2 (roads) works will consist of mainly rehabilitation or paving of
                         existing urban streets, some of which have been encroached upon by informal vendors, and will also
                         require land acquisition of six private properties. There are no environmentally protected areas in the
                         project locations. There are no environmentally protected areas in the project locations.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Martin Henry Lenihan (LCSSO)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Carlos Vargas Bejarano (LCSEN)
                         Robert H. Montgomery (LCSEN)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The project is classified as environmental
                          BP 4.01                                             category B per OP/BP 4.01, as components 1 and
                                                                              2 activities involve relatively standard works with
                                                                              potential environmental or social impacts that are
                                                                              short-term, not significant, and that can be readily
                                                                              prevented or mitigated with standard measures.

                                                                              Component 1 works will consist of the
                                                                              installation of water supply distribution pipes and
                                                                              wastewater collection pipes in existing streets in
                                                                              urban areas. These will include replacement of
                                                                              existing pipes or installation of new pipes. There
                                                                              are no project works involving primary
                                                                              wastewater collectors, construction of water
                                                                              treatment plants or construction of new or


                                                                      Page 3 of 13
                                 upgrades of existing wastewater treatment
                                 systems. An Environmental Impact Assessment
                                 (EIA) was developed in October 2010 for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Manta Water and Sewerage Master Plan
                                 (consisting of 3 phases) for which a portion of
                                 Phase 2 consists of Component 2 works (Note:
                                 phases 1 and 3 and other portions of the Plan are
                                 not part of the Bank project). The EIA, which
                                 includes an Environmental Management Plan
                                 (EMP), was approved by the Ministry of
                                 Environment and Phase 1 works of the Plan have
                                 been completed. The potential project negative
                                 impacts associated with Component 1, which are
                                 short-term and of limited nature and can be
                                 readily mitigated with standard measures, include
                                 increased dust and noise, sediment transport to
                                 storm water lines or water bodies, traffic
                                 interruptions. An Environmental Audit of the
                                 Master Plan's Phase 1 works was performed by an
                                 independent auditor and identified
                                 recommendations to improve the EMP. The
                                 EMP has been recently modified for the Phase 2
                                 works (including those financed by the Bank
                                 Project) based upon the audit and Bank
                                 suggestions (e.g., related to traffic management
                                 and mobility during construction, management
                                 and rehabilitation of public services, attention to
                                 potential claims and disputes with the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 community, re-vegetation measures, and
                                 contingency plan ). Component 1 construction
                                 contracts will require compliance with the EMP
                                 and applicable regulatory requirements. During
                                 preparation of the EIA, various activities were
                                 carried to consult with stakeholders, including the
                                 communities in the area of influence,
                                 organizations, associations and public authorities.
                                 The draft EIA was made available to the public.
                                 Social participation was encouraged through the
                                 publication of notices in newspapers with local
                                 coverage. Public hearings were conducted. The
                                 EIA consultation/participation process was
                                 overseen by an independent facilitator appointed
                                 by the Ministry of Environment, as required by
                                 law. Principal issues included potential areas and
                                 timing for new potable water supply connections
                                 and concerns about potable water quality. There
                                 was good support for the water program.



                         Page 4 of 13
                                 Regarding the wastewater treatment lagoon
                                 system for Manta, the lagoons are primary,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 secondary and tertiary. Related to sludge and
                                 sediments from the wastewater treatment lagoons,
                                 these occur mainly from anaerobic lagoons
                                 (primary) due to the hydraulic retention time (3-5
                                 days) which settles most wastewater suspended
                                 solids. The facultative lagoons (secondary) also
                                 produce sediments and sludge, mainly by
                                 biological processes occurring, algae, bacteria
                                 and other microorganisms, which contribute to
                                 the formation of this sediment. The operation and
                                 maintenance manual of the lagoons establishes
                                 procedures for measuring sludge level regularly,
                                 and determines the time at which the sludge must
                                 be removed (e.g. primary ponds sludge is
                                 removed approximately every five years). The
                                 sludge removed from the lagoons, once dry, can
                                 be disposed of in landfills or used as a soil
                                 additive. The elevations of the lagoons are above
                                 the Manta river and there has been no reported
                                 flooding events or natural disasters affecting the
                                 lagoons. The Municipality will work with EPAM
                                 to implement actions related to the wastewater
                                 lagoons including water quality monitoring,
                                 potential use of lagoon sediments, and pest
                                 management. It is reported that the elevation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 the dikes is sufficient to prevent impact from
                                 flooding. The estimated average discharge is
                                 approximately 400 l/s and is presently being
                                 discharged into the Manta River. Discharge
                                 measurements have shown some moderately
                                 elevated levels (in comparison to Ecuadorian
                                 discharge limits – TULAS) of suspended solids
                                 and biological and chemical oxygen demand.
                                 (BOD and COD). The Municipality is attempting
                                 to improve the operating conditions in the lagoon
                                 system to improve contaminate removal
                                 efficiency as designed. The Municipality and the
                                 Pacifico Refinery and Municipality of Manta
                                 have signed an agreement for the refinery to use
                                 part or all of the wastewater effluent to irrigate
                                 green areas in an environmental buffer zone
                                 around the planned new refinery. Additionally,
                                 the Municipality and the Refinery have signed an
                                 agreement to develop a comprehensive plan for



                         Page 5 of 13
                                                                     the treatment of sewage and industrial wastes for
                                                                     the Municipality of Manta. The agreement
                                                                     includes contracting consultants to perform
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     feasibility design studies.

                                                                     Related to Component 2, the works involve
                                                                     simple urban road repavi ng and a limited number
                                                                     of straightforward urban road re-alignments
                                                                     within existing right-of-ways which have limited
                                                                     potential environmental impacts and risks. An
                                                                     EMP has been developed to reduce, mitigate and
                                                                     monitor the potential environmental and social
                                                                     impacts. The Community Development
                                                                     Directorate has consulted communities and
                                                                     stakeholders in the road section areas regarding
                                                                     the proposed scope of works for Component 2
                                                                     and the EMP.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No              This policy should not be triggered since the
                                                                     Project will not involve the significant conversion
                                                                     of natural habitats or critical natural habitats.
                                                                     Within the area of project influence, there are no
                                                                     forests, protected areas or related that will be
                                                                     affected by the Project. In Component 2, a few
                                                                     trees will be removed and either replanted or new
                                                                     ones planted associated with road regeneration
                                                                     works. These trees are located in the median of
                                                                     existing roads and do not include any species of
                                                                     significance. Applicable measures are established
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     in Component 2 EMP under OP 4.01.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No              This policy should not be triggered since the
                                                                     Project will not affect forests, forest-dependent
                                                                     communities nor will it involve changes in the
                                                                     management of forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       Yes             The Project does not involve the purchase or use
                                                                     of significant quantities of pesticides and the
                                                                     Project does not support the construction or
                                                                     rehabilitation of the existing municipal
                                                                     wastewater lagoons. In relation to the lagoons,
                                                                     there have been no reported problems with
                                                                     mosquitoes or other vectors. The operation and
                                                                     maintenance manual for the lagoon system
                                                                     recommends the removal of weeds from ponds,
                                                                     dikes cleaning, and other recommended measures
                                                                     to control foam. It includes permanent removal of
                                                                     vegetation on the dikes of the ponds and regular
                                                                     inspections are carried out on the dikes to identify
                                                                     the presence of rodents. However, the


                                                             Page 6 of 13
                                                                         management of the lagoons does include the
                                                                         contingency of using pesticides if needed for
                                                                         insect control. This issue will be managed under
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         OP 4.01, by having the operation manual for the
                                                                         wastewater lagoons include applicable good
                                                                         practice procedures for pesticide use, and prohibit
                                                                         use of pesticides excluded under OP 4.09.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes            The Project does not contemplate any impacts
                         BP 4.11                                         related to physical cultural resources. However,
                                                                         as part of sound construction management as
                                                                         prescribed under OP 4.01, the EMPs for
                                                                         components 1 and 2 include chance finds
                                                                         procedures that will be implemented during
                                                                         construction of the works.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No             The Project is located in an urban area that does
                                                                         not incorporate historically indigenous
                                                                         communities or their ancestral lands.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes            Because the road investments under Component
                         4.12                                            2 will require the acquisition of over 6,800 m2 of
                                                                         private land (from 6 different owners) and
                                                                         displace at least 106 informal vendors, the Bank’s
                                                                         Policy on involuntary resettlement is triggered.
                                                                         Most of the land to be acquired is vacant,
                                                                         although two sites are currently used for
                                                                         commercial purposes - one is occupied by two
                                                                         renters who have already found alternative sites
                                                                         near the same location, while the other site is
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         owner-occupied, but with sufficient space
                                                                         remaining to continue operation. The informal
                                                                         vendors to be displaced currently occupy the right
                                                                         of way for investments on Calle 113 and Avenida
                                                                         Nov. 4 and will need to be relocated to alternative
                                                                         sites as the new one-way system will not allow
                                                                         cars to stop at these locations. These impacts will
                                                                         be managed using a Resettlement Action Plan
                                                                         (RAP) prepared by the Client, based on a
                                                                         comprehensive census of affected persons and an
                                                                         inventory of affected assets.

                                                                         It has been confirmed by the Client that
                                                                         Component 1 (Water and Sewerage) will not
                                                                         result in land acquisition. However, it is possible
                                                                         that these investments will result in the temporary
                                                                         displacement of informal vendors encroaching on
                                                                         sidewalks which will need to be dug up during
                                                                         construction. An initial screening of the network
                                                                         sections to be rehabilitated by the Client did not


                                                                 Page 7 of 13
                                                                   find any encroachments. However, as a
                                                                   precautionary measure, a Resettlement Policy
                                                                   Framework (RPF) was prepared by the Client,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   requiring the preparation of a RAP in case
                                                                   subsequent screenings identify resettlement
                                                                   impacts. This framework also covers potential
                                                                   impacts related to borrow-pits or the storage of
                                                                   equipment by contractors during implementation.

                                                                   During preparation, it was confirmed that no
                                                                   other works necessary to achieve the objectives of
                                                                   the Project were planned for the period of
                                                                   implementation. As a precautionary measure, the
                                                                   RPF will apply to such associated activities
                                                                   should they arise during implementation.

                                                                   According to EPAM (Manta's water utility), land
                                                                   was acquired two years previously for existing
                                                                   wastewater lagoons (50 ha of a 70 ha site). This
                                                                   expropriation was settled in 2010, and there are
                                                                   no outstanding claims. There are no resettlement
                                                                   or expropriation issues associated with existing
                                                                   facilities necessary for the project.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   Yes            While the Bank project or the Manta Water and
                                                                   Sewerage Master Plan do not support the
                                                                   construction or rehabilitation of dams, a source of
                                                                   water for the Municipality of Manta's water
                                                                   system includes a reservoir (Poza Honda dam).
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   The Municipality contracted an independent firm
                                                                   to assess dam safety of the Poza Honda Dam,
                                                                   including the structural, operational, maintenance
                                                                   and service aspects. The study (April 2013)
                                                                   concluded that the Poza Honda dam is in good
                                                                   operating condition and proposes
                                                                   recommendations for the National Water
                                                                   Secretary (SENAGUA), which is responsible for
                                                                   the operation and maintenance of the dam, on
                                                                   improving operating conditions and maintenance.
                                                                   These include: (i) immediately perform a
                                                                   thorough maintenance inspection of the tunnel
                                                                   and associated mechanical facilities, in
                                                                   particularly given the internal metal coating
                                                                   exhibits a substantial degree of corrosion; (ii)
                                                                   perform routine tunnel and related facility
                                                                   inspections at least every two years; (iii) acquire
                                                                   an emergency generator to cover the basic needs
                                                                   of the dam, particularly with the capacity to



                                                           Page 8 of 13
                                                                                 operate the winch lock gate and Howell-Bunger
                                                                                 valves for flow regulation; (iv) re-establish in
                                                                                 good operating condition all control
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 instrumentation and monitoring of the dam: (v)
                                                                                 perform a new bathymetry to determine the actual
                                                                                 volume of sediment accumulated in the reservoir;
                                                                                 (vi) implement maintenance work on the access
                                                                                 road to the dam and diversions facilities; (vii)
                                                                                 allocate an annual budget for the operation and
                                                                                 maintenance in accordance with the actual needs
                                                                                 of the dam and reservoir; (viii) maintain the
                                                                                 reservoir surface clean of water hyacinths
                                                                                 (Eichhornia crassipes) implementing an early
                                                                                 removal system to prevent the accumulation of
                                                                                 vegetable matter; and (ix) monitor environmental
                                                                                 conditions in the catchment area of the dam in
                                                                                 order to preserve reservoir water quality. The
                                                                                 Municipality has provided the report to
                                                                                 SENAGUA and is committed to following-up
                                                                                 with SENAGUA on the report recommendations
                                                                                 and operation and maintenance of the dam.
                            Projects on International            No               This policy should not be triggered as the
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 Project will not finance activities involving the
                                                                                 use or potential pollution of international
                                                                                 waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                   This policy should not be triggered as the
                            7.60                                                 Project will not finance activities in disputed
                                                                                 areas as defined in the policy.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               None
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                               The primary project long-term impacts are positive. Component 1 will result in access to potable
                              water and thus improved public health. Component 2 will result in improved transportation and
                              indirectly improved quality of life and improved air quality (e.g., less vehicle emissions). A survey
                              of residents and businesses along the roads to be regenerated has shown broad support for the
                              investments. The permanent relocation of informal vendors to nearby sites with similar
                              characteristics and potential is necessary due to planned introduction of a one way system
                              preventing cars from stopping to avail of vendor services. Also, road improvements can lead to
                              speed increases and associated safety concerns. The Project has therefore included measures to
                              calm traffic along the project roads as well as institutional strengthening to target enhanced overall
                              safety management.


                                                                         Page 9 of 13
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            Given the types of works in components 1 and 2, there are no really relevant alternative analysis.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The installation of water supply and wastewater collection pipes needs to be located where
                           residential and commercial buildings are located. Component 2 works all relate to existing roads.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            Related to Component 1, an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) was developed in October
                           2010 for the Manta Water and Sewerage Master Plan (consisting of 3 phases) for which a portion
                           of Phase 2 consists of Component 2 works (Note: phases 1 and 3 and other portions of the Plan are
                           not part of the Bank project). The EIA, which includes an Environmental Management Plan
                           (EMP), was approved by the Ministry of Environment and Phase 1 works of the Plan have been
                           completed. The EMP was updated based upon results of an independent environmental audit
                           related to Phase 1, and the EMP has been approved by the Ministry of Environment and covers
                           potential environmental, social and worker health and safety impacts/risks. Related to Component
                           2, an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) has been developed to reduce, mitigate and monitor
                           the potential environmental and social impacts and worker health and safety risks. The
                           construction contracts will require compliance with the EMP and applicable regulatory
                           requirements. The project Operational Manual will include relevant environmental and social
                           aspects, including compliance with project EMPs and resettlement framework, inclusion of
                           environmental and social conditions in project contracts, use of independent supervisors for
                           project contracts, supervision responsibilities of Municipality of Manta environmental/social staff,
                           required activities related to safety of dams, and updates to wastewater lagoon operational
                           manuals. See explanation related to OP 4.01 for additional details.

                          The Municipality of Manta will be responsible for ensuring implementation of environmental and
                          social management plans and has successful experience in implementing works similar to those in
                          the project, such as potable water supply and wastewater collection pipe installations, road paving
Public Disclosure Copy




                          and related works, and stream and drainage cleanup works. The Ministry of Environment was
                          responsible for issuing the relevant environmental permits for each project component.
                          Environmental performance monitoring for both project components will include: (i)
                          environmental monitoring and reporting by construction contractor, (ii) environmental supervision
                          of construction works by independent consultants, and (iii) supervision by Municipality of Manta
                          environmental staff. In addition, related to Component 1, an environmental audit by an
                          independent third party will be performed upon completion of Phase 2 of the Manta Water and
                          Sewerage Master Plan.

                          Related to environmental, health and safety aspects, the Municipality and EPAM successfully
                          implemented Phase 1 of the Manta Water and Sewerage Master Plan (Phase 2 of the plan is
                          associated with this project). The Municipal Environmental Directorate also has successfully
                          managed environmental aspects in various road paving and related works in the city, as well as
                          stream and drainage cleanup works.

                          A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) has been prepared to address land acquisition and displacement
                          of informal vendors under Component 2, and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to address
                          potential impacts of Water and Sewerage investments under Component 1 (this will be upgraded
                          to a RAP when designs are ready). The RAP is based on a comprehensive census of affected
                          persons, and a valuation of affected properties using commercial valuation techniques. Mitigation


                                                                     Page 10 of 13
                          measures proposed include the payment of cash compensation equivalent to market value for
                          privately owned assets, the provision of alternative business sites and moving assistance to
                          informal vendors, and the provision of essential material assistance (food-aid, building material,
Public Disclosure Copy




                          training, medicine) to vulnerable PAPs and those experiencing difficulties during the transition
                          period. This assistance is intended to subsidize the essential needs of vulnerable informal vendors,
                          or those who might become vulnerable during the period of transition period. Negotiation,
                          Consultation and Grievance redress mechanisms have been identified, including recourse to the
                          Manta Center for Mediation, and establishing complaints handling committees for informal
                          vendors. The RPF makes similar provisions in order to adhere to the requirements of OP 4.12.

                           In terms of implementation arrangements, the Autonomous Decentralized Government (GAD) of
                           the Municipality of Manta has put together a team including the members of the Community
                           Development Directorate, the Legal Directorate, the Cadaster-Valuation Directorate, Public
                           Works, Planning and Environmental Directorates to prepare and implement resettlement
                           instruments. The Resettlement Instruments prepared assign specific responsibility to different
                           directorates at different stages of the process, although the team will remain in place to ensure
                           coordination. Key members of the GAD Manta resettlement team (legal, community development
                           and cadaster) have experience working together to negotiate land acquisition and carry out
                           resettlement projects. This has included the resettlement of 100 households from a flood prone
                           area. The specialists from GAD Manta also benefited from a RAP preparation workshop provided
                           by the task team social development specialist and country analyst, which focused on how to adapt
                           GAD Manta and Ecuadorian procedures, so they conform to OP 4.12. Therefore, the team has
                           significant capacity, to implement the resettlement instruments prepared, and will benefit from
                           implementation support from the task team social development specialist. This team will be
                           responsible for issuing regular (quarterly) reports on progress with resettlement plan
                           implementation as well as any complaints received. Similarly, they are committed to continuously
                           monitoring the affected people, to provide timely material assistance to meet essential household
                           needs, and to conduct a repeat of the census on completion of the civil works (serving as a final
                           evaluation).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Related to Component 1, an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) was developed for the
                           Manta Water and Sewerage Master Plan (consisting of 3 phases) of which a portion of its Phase 2
                           is associated with the project's Component 1 works. During preparation of the EIA, which includes
                           an Environmental Management Plan (EMP), various activities were carried to consult with
                           stakeholders, including the communities in the area of influence, organizations, associations and
                           public authorities. The draft EIA was made available to the public. Social participation was
                           encouraged through the publication of notices in newspapers with local coverage and public
                           hearings were conducted. The EIA consultation/participation process was overseen by an
                           independent facilitator appointed by the Ministry of Environment, as required by law.

                          Related to Component 2, an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) has been developed to
                          reduce, mitigate and monitor the potential environmental and social impacts. The Community
                          Development Directorate has consulted communities and stakeholders in the road section areas
                          regarding the proposed scope of work for Component 2 and the EMP.

                          The resettlement instruments prepared will be disclosed by the Community Development



                                                                    Page 11 of 13
                           Directorate who will lead consultations with affected people, and other relevant stakeholders (e.g.
                         B.trader associations,
                            Disclosure          residence associations, and local non-governmental organizations).
                                         Requirements
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      03-May-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   07-Jun-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ecuador                                                          07-Jun-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      09-Jun-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   10-Jun-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ecuador                                                          09-Jun-2013
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      24-May-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   07-Jun-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Ecuador                                                          09-Jun-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         Is part of the Project Environmental Management Plans.
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)         Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector          Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated    Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?        Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]


                                                                     Page 12 of 13
                             Is a separate PMP required?                                     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             property?
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                            OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                             Have dam safety plans been prepared?                            Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                             Bank?
                             Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Oscar E. Alvarado
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                          Date: 21-Jun-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Anna Wellenstein (SM)                          Date: 21-Jun-2013



                                                                       Page 13 of 13
