                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA3263
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-May-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-May-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Tajikistan                        Project ID:    P126130
                            Project Name:      Tajikistan Health Services Improvement Project (HSIP) (P126130)
                            Task Team          Wezi Marianne Msisha
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          07-May-2013                       Estimated   30-Jul-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSH1                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Health (60%), Compulsory health finance (40%)
                            Theme(s):         Child health (50%), Health system performance (30%), Injuries and non-
                                              communicable diseases (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      23.00           Total Bank Financing:                  15.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                       Financing Gap:                          0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          3.20
                              IDA Grant                                                                                  15.00
                              Health Results-based Financing                                                              4.80
                              Total                                                                                      23.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to contribute to the improvement of the coverage and
                           quality of basic primary health care (PHC) services in rural health facilities in selected regions.



                                                                       Page 1 of 7
                         The Project’s main beneficiaries would be the Tajik population of selected regions who would
                         benefit from improved PHC services. Primary health care providers would also directly benefit from
                         the Project through performance-based incentives and capacity building. Women, especially poorer
Public Disclosure Copy




                         rural women, would be a major direct beneficiary group as much of the Project is focused on
                         improving maternal health services in the PHC facilities. By focusing on the underserved areas in the
                         country, the Project would reach out to target the poorer sections of the rural women.

                         The key indicators of achievement of the Project Development Objective in the selected intervention
                         areas are as follows:

                         (a)     Percentage of pregnant women receiving antenatal care four or more times from a skilled
                         health provider;
                         (b)     Contraceptive prevalence rate;
                         (c)     Average Health Facility Quality of Care Score;
                         (d)     Percentage of children under-five with diarrhea treated with any Oral Rehydration Therapy.
                         3. Project Description
                         The proposed project will consist of the following three components:

                         Component 1: Performance-Based Financing (USD12.8 million, of whichUSD6.0 million from IDA
                         Grant,USD4.8 million from HRITF, & USD2.0 million Government contribution)

                         This component would support a performance based financing (PBF) pilot at the PHC level in eight
                         rayons (or districts) in Khatlon and Sogd oblasts (regions). Under the PBF pilot, Rural Health
                         Centers (RHCs) and their subsidiary Health Houses (HHs) would be eligible to receive a
                         performance-based payment each quarter based on the quality and quantity of MCH and Non-
                         communicable Diseases (NCD) services delivered. The first level verification of the accuracy of
                         activities reported by the PHC facilities would be done quarterly by a District PBF Committee. The
                         performance-based payments would then be made to a RHC and its associated HHs, to encourage
Public Disclosure Copy




                         better teamwork and co-ordination. These payments would be supplementary to the funds routinely
                         received from the public sector budget. The use of the performance-based payments would be
                         governed by simple spending rules designed to promote provider autonomy and ensure transparency
                         and accountability. The payments may be used for performance bonuses to facility staff and to
                         purchase minor health facility inputs within these spending rules.

                         Component 2: Primary Health Care Strengthening (USD6.0 Million). This component would aim to
                         improve the capacity of Primary Health Care (PHC) providers to deliver quality services.

                         Sub-component 2.1 Quality Improvement (USD2.5 million). The sub-component would finance the
                         training of PHC doctors and nurses from the project districts and selected comparison districts in a
                         six months Family Medicine training program. Nurses and doctors from all PHC facilities in the
                         project districts and selected comparison districts would also participate in continuous medical
                         education on clinical treatment protocols for MCH care and selected NCDs. The training would
                         utilize recently updated and MoH approved modules developed by other development partners
                         including GiZ, UNICEF, UNFPA, and WHO. This sub-component would also support the
                         introduction of a collaborative quality improvement process focusing on the management of three
                         priority areas - preliminarily acute respiratory illness, child under-nutrition, and hypertension.

                         Sub-component 2.2: Physical Infrastructure Improvements (USD3.5 million). This sub-component


                                                                      Page 2 of 7
                         would support the improvement of PHC infrastructure in the project districts. This would include the
                         provision of basic medical equipment and supplies to all PHC facilities in the project districts, and
                         some rehabilitation and reconstruction works for selected PHC facilities to ensure basic functionality.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Approximately twenty-four PHC facilities in the project districts have been identified for works
                         according to agreed criteria (i.e. only rural health centers, size of population catchment area,
                         reasonably sound, feasible building superstructure facilities that are currently functional and
                         confirmed to be on state owned land, and facilities following the Health Sector Master plan
                         recommendations). The designs for the facilities would start to be developed upon Project
                         effectiveness, and the actual rehabilitation work would start in the second year of the Project.

                         Component 3 Project Management, Coordination and Monitoring & Evaluation (USD4.2 million).
                         This component would finance the expenses associated with the implementation and management of
                         the project at the central, regional and district levels. Recurrent costs, office equipment and furniture,
                         vehicles for project supervision, consultant salaries, travel expenses, study tours to enhance the
                         knowledge on PBF schemes, and training for the Coordination Group (CG) members and project
                         implementation staff at regional and district levels, monitoring and evaluation, and project audits
                         would be supported.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project would be implemented in 8 districts of Khatlon and Sogd regions of Tajikistan.

                         Twenty-four PHC facilities have been identified for refurbishment based on agreed criteria The 12
                         sites have been screened for environment and social impacts. It has been confirmed that there will be
                         no land acquisition, nor any restriction in access to physical assets, resources or services as a result of
                         project works. All the sites are being used as PHCs and there are no persons from the community
                         using that land for any other purpose nor are there any structures on it. Hence OP 4.12 is not
                         triggered.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project entails civil works related to improving the physical infrastructure of Rural Health
                         Centers, to upgrade them to basic levels of functionality to be able to provide satisfactory health
                         services in accordance with the Project Development Objective. A preliminary assessment indicates
                         that the facilities are substantially degraded and will need significant rehabilitation and civil works to
                         improve availability of basic utilities and services including water, sewerage, sanitation and
                         electricity. Older building structures may contain asbestos, which will require sound management
                         during dismantling and disposal. While there is no foreseen substantial increase of quantity of
                         medical waste, or change in waste types or composition, site specific assessments will be undertaken
                         to determine appropriate waste disposal options which will be provided for sound management of
                         infectious waste. Given the above environmental issues related to project activities, OP4.01 is being
                         triggered.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Roxanne Hakim (ECSSO)
                         Ruma Tavorath (SASDI)

                          6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes               Environmental issues related to construction and
                          BP 4.01                                               rehabilitation of healthcare facilities and waste



                                                                        Page 3 of 7
                                                                                 management (construction debris, asbestos and
                                                                                 infectious waste) necessitate triggering OP 4.01.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No                The sites are all functioning PHCs and there are
                            4.12                                                 no persons who have constructed any structures
                                                                                 on the site, nor using any resources, assets or
                                                                                 services on the site. Hence there will be no
                                                                                 involuntary impacts as defined by OP 4.12.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The project entails civil works related to improving the physical infrastructure of Rural Health
                              Centers (RHC), to upgrade them to basic levels of functionality to be able to provide satisfactory
                              health services in accordance with the Project Development Objective (PDO). While there is no
                              foreseen expansion of the constructed area or substantial increase of capacity, the current situation
                              of the facilities are quite degraded and will need significant rehabilitation and civil works to
                              improve availability of basic utilities and services including water, sanitation and electricity. An
                              environmental assessment of sample facilities indicates that none of them have access to safe and
                              adequate drinking water. Water is brought carried in buckets from neighborhood residential areas
                              and office buildings. The water is then boiled prior to use, using water heaters. Sewage systems
                              are inadequate, and are basically essentially non-concrete pits dug out in the RHC backyards.
                              Once filled, such pit lavatories are covered up and new pits are dug, resulting in potential gradual
                              soil and groundwater contamination. Most RHCs have restricted power access and utilize potbelly
                              stoves which are expensive to operate and inefficient with poor heat retention. The use of quality
                              of the fine blend coal is poor which results in harmful indoor air emissions and, charcoal-black
                              deposition inside buildings all of which is harmful for staff and patients. Due to the shortage of
                              coal, firewood is used as an alternative, resulting in degradation of neighboring bushes and forests.
                              Most of these older building structures may contain asbestos, which would require sound
                              management during dismantling and disposal. Waste disposal facilities are inadequate, and all

                                                                         Page 4 of 7
                          categories of healthcare waste are collected in first aid boxes and burned in pits located within the
                          premises. New pits are routinely dug, after others are filled, further resulting in soil and air
                          contamination (mercury, dioxins and furans) and hazards due to scattered sharps. While there is no
Public Disclosure Copy




                          foreseen substantial increase of quantity of medical waste, or change in waste types or
                          composition, but the new constructions will address environmentally sound ways of disposing
                          infectious waste generated from healthcare services. Site specific assessments would be
                          undertaken to determine characteristics and suitability of existing waste disposal facilities.

                           There are no such impacts with regard to social safeguards.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            Localized soil and water contamination due to poor sanitation and inadequate waste management.
                           Toxic air emissions due to poor incineration/burning practices of unsegregated waste.
                           Contamination due to poor management of construction waste and indiscriminate disposal of
                           asbestos.
                           No such impacts with regard to social safeguards.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.

                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             The MoH has undertaken an assessment of sample RHC facilities and has prepared an EMF. The
                           EMF defines critical mitigatory measures to be taken to address environmental impacts prior to
                           and during the construction phase. These include issues related to design, water supply, sanitation
                           and sewerage, power supply and waste management including construction debris and asbestos.
                           Worker safety during construction and occupational safety and healthcare waste management
                           during facility operations are also addressed in the EMF. Site-specific Environment Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Plans will be prepared and approved prior to commencement of civil works at each site and EMP
                           requirements will be included into bid contracts for civil works. In addition to regular monitoring
                           and supervision requirements during and after construction, the EMF also requires a third-party
                           independent assessment to be carried out 8 months prior to the end of the Project life.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The project’s main beneficiaries are the general population and specifically, women and children.
                           The stakeholders will include healthcare staff and medical doctors from the MOH and the RHCs,
                           the Environmental and construction management agencies which will be involved in providing
                           clearances and undertaking the civil works, the neighborhood communities residing near the RHCs
                           and those who utilize the services of the RHCs.

                          The MOH has translated and re-disclosed the final EMF on their website and in the central level
                          and regional health department offices on May 10, 2013. Consultations were held with relevant
                          public sector agencies, CO (Community Organizations), NGOs and medical professionals starting
                          from April 29, 2013 to get feedback on the draft EMF, before it was finalized before project
                          approval and implementation.

                          The community will also be consulted with regard to alternative location for continuation of RHC
                          services during the time of construction and restoration. Site-specific EMPs will be consulted with


                                                                     Page 5 of 7
                           relevant stakeholders in the Oblasts to discuss proposed facility design, scheduling of construction
                           hours, habitat/ecosystem management and waste management. These will include neighboring
                           communities, patients, residents, healthcare staff and workers, local businesses and neighboring
Public Disclosure Copy




                           shops and local authorities. Grievance mechanisms need to be instituted to ensure that
                           communities can provide feedback or voice their concerns, if any.

                           There are no persons who will be affected by Involuntary Resettlement. The project will focus on
                           poorer rural women as a major beneficiary group through emphasis on maternal health services in
                           the Primary Health Center facilities in underserviced areas in the country. The improvements in
                           infrastructure will also enhance the experience of visiting the PHCs for women due to availability
                           of facilities like toilets, waiting areas etc. On the supply side, focus on improving nurse training
                           and post-graduate experience would also target women in the area of service delivery, as the
                           majority of nurses in Tajikistan are women. Children and infants are also a specific target
                           beneficiary group. The Project Development Objective indicators show the strong focus on
                           outcomes related to children’s health. The focus on underserved rural areas will directly target
                           children from poorer families. Improved child health will have a direct positive impact on
                           benefiting women who are the primary care givers, as well as school attendance rates.

                           The project M & E will disaggregate data to the extent feasible to capture the impacts on women
                           and children as well as the elderly.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      10-May-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   10-May-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Tajikistan                                                       10-May-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)      Yes [       ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector       Yes [       ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [       ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information

                                                                      Page 6 of 7
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Wezi Marianne Msisha
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                            Date: 15-May-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Daniel Dulitzky (SM)                           Date: 15-May-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 7 of 7
