                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA1498
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Mar-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 28-Mar-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Montenegro                         Project ID:    P122139
                            Project Name:      Montenegro Industrial Waste Management and Cleanup Project (P122139)
                            Task Team          Frank Van Woerden
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          27-Mar-2013                        Estimated   23-May-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSEN                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector:            Solid waste management (60%), General industry and trade sector (20%),
                                               Energy efficiency in Heat and Power (10%), Other Mining and E xtractive
                                               Industries (10%)
                            Theme:             Pollution management and environmental health (70%), Environmental policies
                                               and institutions (30%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     77.10                       Total Bank Financing:        66.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                                  Financing Gap:                0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      11.10
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                         66.00
                              Total                                                                         77.10
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           The Development Objective of the Project is to reduce contamination of Montenegro’s natural
                           resources and public health risks of exposure to this contamination from selected industrial waste
                           disposal sites.

                           The Project will achieve its objective through: (i) the development and implementation of a


                                                                       Page 1 of 11
                         remediation investment program for selected legacy industrial waste disposal sites; and (ii) related to
                         these interventions, supporting institutions and the related industries in bringing the management of
                         industrial waste in compliance with Montenegrin legislation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Project Description
                         The proposed project would have three components: (1) Remediation of Selected Legacy Industrial
                         Waste Disposal Sites; (2) Future Industrial Waste Management; (3) project management.

                         The Project comprises of three components as summarized below.

                         Component 1 – Remediation of Selected Legacy Industrial Waste Disposal Sites (US$ 61.6 million
                         equivalent)
                         This component supports investments to remediate the four selected first-priority waste disposal
                         sites. The feasibility study with site investigations, comprehensive and site-specific Environmental
                         and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and basic designs were completed for all four sites during
                         project preparation and financed by the Project Preparation Facility. The investments and main
                         environmental impacts and benefits on the four sites are following:

                         (a)       Mine tailings disposal facility Gradac. The 12.5 ha disposal facility in Gradac contains
                         tailings (inert residues) from former zinc-lead ore flotation processing.
                         The current impact from the tailings site at Gradac includes several negative impacts on the
                         environment and on the social-economic environment. The three most significant current
                         environmental impacts are:
                         •        Humans’ exposure to heavy contaminated dust particles.
                         •        Impact on groundwater from percolating contaminated water.
                         •        Impact on river water from contaminated drain water.
                         The selected remediation option comprises of in-situ slope stabilization and full encapsulation with
                         reshaping, top cover and re-vegetation. Water management is based on prevention of infiltration into
                         the tailings body and diversion of run-off water. The re-cultivation of the tailings surface will reduce
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the possible particle transport by wind erosion and further limit the uncontrolled spreading of
                         contaminated material. In addition, the sealing of the surface and the installation of drainage systems
                         for melting snow water and rainwater will limit the percolation through the waste body and minimize
                         the leakage of contaminated water. This remediation is selected because it significantly limits both
                         the impact from dust and the impact on river water and groundwater. The remediation has a
                         significant positive impact on the environment.

                         (b)      Maljevac Coal ash disposal facility in Pljevlja. This 53.5 ha facility for disposal of ash from
                         the lignite fired power plant in Pljevlja is owned and operated by Elektroprivreda Crne Gore (EPCG),
                         the Montenegrin state-owned power company. The current impact from the dumpsite at Maljevac
                         Ash Dumpsite includes several negative impacts on the environment and on the social-economic
                         environment. The three most significant current environmental impacts are:
                         •        Human exposure to dust particles
                         •        Risk of dam failure
                         •        Impact on river water
                         The selected solution for closure and remediation of the ash disposal facility in Pljevlja is
                         comparable to the preferred option in Gradac: reshaping, drainage, encapsulation with re-vegetation
                         and investments in water management. The remediation has a significant positive impact on the
                         environment.
                         An associated investment to the Maljevac Ash Dumpsite is the development of the new Ash Facility


                                                                      Page 2 of 11
                         in the Sumani site by EPCG. The Sumani site earmarked for the Sumani Ash Facility development is
                         an abandoned lignite mine located in the south of Pljevelja TPP. The former open cast mine is some
                         15 m deep and has not been re-cultivated. EPCG is planning an ash facility at the Sumani site and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will prepare a resettlement plan if required for possibly affected residences at the Sumani site. New
                         ash handling and disposal will be operated in line with good international practices. Water
                         consumption will be reduced by factor 6 to 10 compared to the current facility in Maljevac area
                         currently in operation and dust emissions will be reduced.

                         (c)      Ship blasting waste and site contamination at Bijela shipyard. This shipyard is located at the
                         Boka Bay and has an estimated volume of 60,000 tons of contaminat ed blasting grid stored in big
                         bags. Blasting grid is used for ship paint stripping and cleaning, and the historic volumes of blasting
                         grid contain heavy metals and should be considered as hazardous waste. Due to reduction of heavy
                         metals in ship paints, the newly produced blasting grid is not considered as hazardous waste
                         anymore.
                         The earlier bulk storage of this material has caused soil pollution in an area of around 1.5 ha and it is
                         expected that excavation works necessary for the redevelopment of the site, will generate an
                         estimated volume of 40,000 tons of contaminated soil and and 7,200 tons of contaminated sediments.
                         The current impact from the dumpsite at Bijela Shipyard includes several negative impacts on the
                         environment and on the social-economic environment. The three most significant current
                         environmental impacts are:
                         •        Exposure to human from contaminated dust
                         •        Direct exposure of human (employed at the shipyard) to contaminated waste
                         •        Impact on sea water quality
                         The selection of remediation option consists of the removal of the contaminated blasting grit
                         (hazardous waste) and the volumes of excavated contaminated soil from the site to meet
                         redevelopment standards. The contaminated soil volumes are classified as non-hazardous waste and
                         qualify for disposal within Montenegro in one of the municipal waste landfills in the country that
                         meet the standards of the national waste law and the EU Landfill Directive. The large volume of
                         blasting grit is foreseen to be exported in compliance with requirements of the Basel Convention.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The remediation has a significant positive impact on the environment.

                         (d)      Red-mud basins and solid waste disposal site at Kombinat Aluminija Podgorica (KAP). Red-
                         mud is a by-product from the processing of bauxite in the alumina production, the main input
                         material for the electro-chemical production of aluminum. It is the high alkalinity of the red-mud that
                         causes high mobility of some heavy metals but also cyanide, fluoride and aromatic hydrocarbons
                         from the basins are found in soil and groundwater, but in time, without adding fresh red mud, the pH
                         gradually decreases to more neutral levels, reducing environmental risks.
                         The current impact from the contaminated sites at KAP includes several negative impacts on the
                         environment and on the social-economic environment. The three most significant environmental
                         impacts are:
                         •        Risk of impact on groundwater
                         •        Exposure to human from contaminated dust
                         •        Impact on river water
                         The proposed remediation consists of draining basin water after treatment, reshaping, covering and
                         stabilization of the impoundment slopes. Further groundwater contamination and migrating of
                         pollutants in groundwater is not expected but should be carefully monitored. If for unexpected
                         reasons the polluting will keep migrating in the groundwater system, a future pump-and-treat system
                         could be considered, if needed. The remediation has a significant positive impact on the environment.



                                                                       Page 3 of 11
                         The solid waste disposal site of 11 ha at KAP contains both hazardous and non-hazardous waste.
                         Also this disposal site has been a substantial source of soil pollution, although disposal practices in
                         recent years have somewhat improved because now waste categories are sorted and stored separately
Public Disclosure Copy




                         with hazardous materials stored on concrete surfaces, but still in the open and subject to whether
                         conditions. Remediation is costly, due to the special nature of the waste which contains toxic
                         materials that require tailored techniques for containment and the fact that all materials needs to be
                         removed, sorted and put in special cells for final disposal. To facilitate the disposal of future
                         hazardous waste from KAP’s aluminum production which is in principle to largest source of
                         hazardous waste production in the country, the remediation containment will have a separate cell
                         with the same environmental protection standards to receive this waste. This will also have a
                         significant positive impact on the environment.

                         Implementation will start with the preparation in parallel for each site of the detailed design for
                         remediation works, including the detail design Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) prepared in
                         line with the WB safeguards policies and national legislation and , for national environmental and
                         construction permitting purposes and bidding documents for the works.

                         Component 2 – Future Industrial Waste Management (US$ 1.2 million equivalent)

                         This component will support actions of the government and industries related to the remediation sites
                         under Component 1 managing future industrial waste generation in a manner that complies with
                         national and EU legislation, since three out of the four identified priority sites are still actively in use
                         for waste disposal from current industrial operations. In addition, this component also serves a
                         broader purpose and will support strengthening regulation of industrial waste management in
                         Montenegro and explore options for developing infrastructure for industrial waste disposal at the
                         national level. Specifically, in addition to the support for proper arrangements for future waste for the
                         industries related to the priority sites to be remediated under the Project, the component will also
                         support the further development and implementation of a national industrial hazardous and non-
                         hazardous waste register which will be an integral part of the Environmental Information System and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         workshop and trainings for industrial waste generators regarding separation of waste streams and
                         proper interim storage requirements in line with EU legislation as well as reporting obligations.

                         The component will also support the planning and national permitting process for the realization of
                         infrastructure for management and disposal of hazardous waste for possible future industrial waste
                         from generators other that the industries related to the project sites under Component 1. Based on the
                         more detailed overview of the different types of hazardous waste generated which will be part of the
                         national industrial waste register, this component will also include an analysis of the possibility to
                         allow acceptance of third party hazardous waste of similar characteristics on the KAP site (in the
                         waste disposal cell to be constructed under Component 1 for future waste from KAP) or whether
                         other options such as export or a different location for such infrastructure would be more suitable
                         given the small quantities generated in Montenegro and the required planning process.

                         Component 3 – Project Management (US$ 1.2 million equivalent)
                         The objective of this component is to support project management in accordance with the project’s
                         objectives and procedures as outlined in the Project Operational Manual (POM) which will be
                         finalized before project effectiveness.
                         Under this component, the project will finance the following sub-components: (i) Project
                         Management; and (ii) Establishment of a Monitoring and Evaluation system.



                                                                        Page 4 of 11
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The priority sites for remediation under Component 1 are: (i) the solid waste disposal site and the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         red-mud basins of the Aluminum Plant in Podgorica (KAP); (ii) the Bijela Adriatic Shipyard, located
                         at the Boka Bay; (iii) the coal ash disposal facility of Pljevlja Thermo-Electric Power Plant and the
                         associated investment in the new Sumani Ash coal ash facility (EPCG); and (iv) the lead and zinc
                         tailing disposal facility in Gradac near Pljevlja.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Bekim Imeri (ECSSO)
                         Natasa Vetma (ECSEN)

                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes               The project includes remediation of the
                          BP 4.01                                            industrial waste disposal sites that partly include
                                                                             hazardous waste and development of hazardous
                                                                             waste disposal cell in KAP. According to OP 4.01
                                                                             the comprehensive Environmental and Social
                                                                             Impact Assessments (ESIAs) for all sites
                                                                             including the associated investment for the
                                                                             Sumane site for ash disposal in Pljevlja have been
                                                                             commissioned and conducted by an independent
                                                                             environmental consultant. During the design
                                                                             stage, updated site specific EIAs will be prepared
                                                                             according to the national and WB requirements
                                                                             by independent consultant for national
                                                                             environmental permitting purposes.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No                While KAP is in the vicinity of Lake Skadar
                                                                             which is a national park and Ramsar site, OP 4.04
                                                                             is not triggered as the KAP site itself is an
                                                                             industrial estate with substantial environmental
                                                                             issues (brownfield site).
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09            No

                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No
                          BP 4.11
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No

                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     Yes              The closure and remediation of the Pljevlja coal
                          4.12                                               ash disposal facility is not possible without the
                                                                             development of an alternative ash disposal
                                                                             facility in the area which will be located at the
                                                                             Sumane site. It is possible that, depending on the
                                                                             pace of development of this alternative facility



                                                                     Page 5 of 11
                                                                              and its footprint, land expropriation could be
                                                                              required in the future. The detail design and pace
                                                                              of the development of the footprint of the new
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              facility is currently not know, which is why a
                                                                              Resettlement Policy Framework has been
                                                                              developed based on which RAP would be
                                                                              prepared if resettlement or loss of assets, income
                                                                              or access is involved.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         Yes               Some of the industrial waste disposal sites have
                                                                              materials contained within embankments that
                                                                              require stabilization works and which trigger this
                                                                              policy. Dam and slope stabilities of these objects
                                                                              have been investigated and reviewed in the
                                                                              feasibility study for remediation works under
                                                                              project preparation. The existing dams are not
                                                                              considered objects of high hazards, as defined by
                                                                              the Policy. Resulting from the feasibility study
                                                                              and a review by one of the Bank’s experts on dam
                                                                              safety, measures related to dam safety have been
                                                                              defined to be included in the detailed design and
                                                                              the remediation works during project
                                                                              implementation, including stabilization measures.
                                                                              The detailed design and the works will be
                                                                              reviewed by independent dam safety experts.
                            Projects on International         Yes               The following activities as part of remediation
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                              works trigger the policy: (i) some limited
                                                                              contaminated sediment dredging in a shipyards
                                                                              operational area in the Kotor Bay; (ii) the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              diversion of a creek currently passing ash dump
                                                                              in Pljevlja; and (iii) the possibility that surface
                                                                              water from KAP red-mud basins after treatment
                                                                              will be discharged into the Moraca river. For the
                                                                              first two activities an exception of the notification
                                                                              requirement was sought and which is pending
                                                                              approval since these are rehabilitation work on
                                                                              existing schemes which do not have adverse
                                                                              impact on quality or quantity of waters. For the
                                                                              third activity, the notification letter was sent on
                                                                              March 06, 2013 to Albanian government due to
                                                                              potential impact on Skadar lake.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

                                                                      Page 6 of 11
                             The project is expected to result in substantial improvement in the environmental situation in
                           Montenegro, particularly in areas surrounding the project’s remediation sites. These improvements
                           will be achieved both through the actual remediation of some of the most pressing environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                           legacy issues in Montenegro and through improvements in environmental performance from
                           enhanced management of ongoing waste production with the industries related to the remediation
                           sites. In addition, it is expected that that the capacity of local and central authorized bodies to
                           manage environmental liabilities will be strengthened through their involvement in the project.

                           In line with the World Bank's OP 4.01, the project has been assigned an environmental assessment
                           category 'A'. The Government of Montenegro has contracted a qualified consulting team to
                           undertake comprehensive and site specific Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs)
                           under terms acceptable to the Bank. The ESIAs covered all existing remediation and new planned
                           KAP disposal cell. The overall objectives of the comprehensive ESIA study for the remediation of
                           the contaminated sites were: a) to identify and assess environment and social impacts, both
                           adverse and beneficial, in the project’s area of influence; to avoid, or where avoidance is not
                           possible, minimize, mitigate, or compensate for adverse impacts on communities and the
                           environment; c) to ensure that affected communities are appropriately engaged on issues that could
                           potentially affect them; d) to ensure that the procedure of public consultation is carried out and
                           documented according to the national and World Bank requirements. Draft ESIA reports,
                           including Environmental Management Plans (EMPs), were completed in July 2012 and underwent
                           several rounds of public consultation at the local level. The final version of the comprehensive
                           ESIA was published by the World Bank InfoShop in August 2012 and a revised version was
                           published in the Bank’s Infoshop on January 23, 2013 to take into account the associated
                           investment in Sumani coal ash facility, and was made available publicly in the country. More
                           detailed site specific EIAs, satisfactory to the Bank and in line with the EMP will be prepared in
                           parallel with and independently from the detail design work.

                           The requirements triggered by the Bank's Safety on Dams safeguard policies (OP/BP 4.37) are
Public Disclosure Copy




                           observed through the input of international dam safety experts in the core team of the Consultant
                           that has prepared the feasibility study and the conceptual design for the remediation works that for
                           some locations include existing dams or impoundments that trigger OP/BP 4.37. During project
                           preparation site investigations and preliminary dam / slope stability and risk assessments have
                           been conducted for these sites and stabilization measures identified, which will be incorporated in
                           the remediation designs of these sites. A review of investigation data, the conceptual designs and
                           an inspection of the dams by one of the Bank’s dam safety specialists confirmed that previsions of
                           the Policy for existing dams apply to the three dams of the Project as these dams are not
                           considered to have special hazards that would require a regime for high-risk dams. This review
                           resulted in the following recommendation for measures during project implementation in addition
                           to the remediation/stabilization works identified in the feasibility study: (i) for the dam of the ash
                           disposal facility in Pljevlja, to include monitoring equipment and commence a frequent monitoring
                           program with early warning system upon completion of remediation work; and (ii) for the
                           impoundment of the red-mud basins at the KAP site, to collect addition geotechnical site data
                           during the detailed design stage of project implementation. These measures and independent
                           monitoring and review actions for implementation of the project in compliance with the Safety of
                           Dams policy will be confirmed during project appraisal for inclusion in the Loan Agreement.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:



                                                                      Page 7 of 11
                             Project implementation will result in substantial reduction in environmental impacts and risk to
                           public health and the environment. It is also expected that the project will support efforts in
                           Montenegro to identify long-term solutions for on-going day-to-day industrial waste management
Public Disclosure Copy




                           issues.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             Significant adverse impacts from the Project are not expected. For some of the industrial waste
                           sites a comprehensive and site specific ESIA looked at the different remediation methods
                           indicating potential impacts and benefits of each method. A comprehensive remediation approach
                           has been adopted to minimize future impacts or post-remediation maintenance efforts.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             The client has prepared comprehensive and site specific ESIAs. The purpose of ESIA was to
                           assess the existing situation, present technical alternatives for site closure, determine current and
                           future environmental impacts and prepare the associated Environmental Management Plans
                           (EMPs) to determine the mitigation measures, environmental monitoring plans, institutional
                           arrangements, capacity development and estimated costs for the mitigation measures and
                           monitoring programs for both the construction and operation phases. The documents have been
                           prepared on the basis of national legal requirements as well as applicable Bank safeguard policies.
                           The EMPs include environmental monitoring programs for both construction and operation
                           phases. The parameters to be monitored include noise, dust, soil quality, water and groundwater
                           quality, and waste disposal. To ensure the strict and efficient implementation of the mitigation
                           measures proposed, including environmental obligations during construction, a program of
                           monitoring activities has been developed as part of the EMP. The project progress reports
                           furnished by the implementing agency will include a section for EMP implementation and related
                           environmental monitoring reports.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           It was assessed that all activities envisaged under Component 1, beside remediation of the Lead
                           and Zink Tailing Ponds in Gradac might affect international waterways. The KAP red mud basin
                           present a current risk due to potential leakages of alkaline waters to local groundwater and to the
                           Moraca and Cijevna Rivers, which are tributaries of Skadar Lake. The alkaline water will be
                           removed and treated, after which treated waters will be discharged into the sewage system or into
                           the Moraca or Cijevna Rivers, dependent on the final design. For this reason, the client sent a
                           notification letter on March 6, 2013 regarding this investment to notify the Government of Albania
                           as the Skadar Lake basin is shared with Albania. For the remaining remediation activities that
                           could involve the use or potential pollution of international waterways under OP 7.50 envisaged
                           under Component 1, especially a) Bijela Adriatic Shipyard, located at the Boka Bay and b) the
                           Ash Dump Facility of Pljevlja Thermo-Electric Power Plant, While OP 7.50 has been triggered for
                           these activities, a notification exception under paragraph 7 of OP 7.50 is being sought as the works
                           will not adversely affect the quantity or quality of water flow to any riparian states, and will be not
                           adversively affected by the other riparians' possible water use and it was determined that the works
                           qualified as rehabilitative in nature and therefore as on-going scheme as referred to in the OP
                           7.50 . More importantly, the envisaged works will minimize risk of pollution of the riparians’
                           waters. Montenegro is signatory of Barcelona Convention and also involved in several
                           partnerships with the above riparian countries in the framework of the Adriatic Ionian Initiative for
                           the Protection of the Adriatic Sea. The proposed Project activities do not conflict with any of the
                           principles of the above agreements, and those agreements do not require additional notification of


                                                                      Page 8 of 11
                          other riparians. Montenegro is also a party to the International Commission for the Protection of
                          the Danube. However, because of the nature of the works, there is no requirement for notifying
                          other riparians of the proposed project under this treaty.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          For the associated investment in the Sumani Ash coal ash facility which is being developed by
                          EPCG. Upon the completion and approval of the detail design for the new Ash Facility and the
                          planning for the development of that facility in relation to settlements, the possible impacts and
                          timing of the development of the Sumani site and the footprint will be known. Due to the current
                          uncertainty of the exact impacts as well as the phasing from the development of Sumani site, it is
                          not known whether and when there would be a need for resettlement. Therefore, according to the
                          OP/BP 4.12 precautionary principle, a Resettlement Policy Framework with the principles for the
                          resettlement has been prepared and disclosed which would require preparation of a Resettlement
                          Action Plan if resettlement or loss of assets, income or access is involved.

                          The existing legal framework in Montenegro is of a great significance as it provides for the
                          establishment of an integral management system for natural resources, prevention and pollution
                          control, informing the public and public participation in decision making. Implementation of this
                          legal framework still possess some challenges due to conflicts between environmental legislation
                          and other laws that do not necessarily mention the need for EIA as a part of the permitting process.
                          However, the EU-type national Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), that will be the
                          implementing agency for the Project, has been established in November 2008. Montenegro has
                          developed environmental protection instruments that include environmental standards; strategic
                          environmental assessment (SEA), several sector-wide EIAs; system for Integrated Pollution
                          Prevention and Control; spatial and physical development plans; EMAS and other instruments for
                          environmental protection established by special regulation. However, their implementation is not
                          yet uniform throughout the country due to lack of institutional capacities. The environmental
                          inspection and enforcement capacities have been strengthened during past two years, although
                          their further improvement is required in order to reach EU-compatible levels. During the early
                          stage of project implementation the team in EPA will participate in WB organized safeguards
Public Disclosure Copy




                          training.

                           Montenegro has declared itself an ecological state and its prospects hinge strongly on development
                           of tourism sector, which puts additional pressure on the government to deal with the existing
                           (historic) industrial pollution hot-spots.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The beneficiaries of the project would be (a) Communities neighboring currently poorly managed
                           legacy pollution sites, which would benefit from reduced exposure to public health risks related to
                           the production and inadequate management of industrial waste; (b) National industries, from the
                           cleanup of legacy waste disposal sites that are now part of their facilities and from the
                           development of a national facility to manage hazardous waste in the future, which is currently a
                           particularly difficult category of industrial waste to dispose of; (c) Government institutions with
                           responsibilities in the domain of industrial (hazardous and non-hazardous) waste management,
                           who will get support to further develop the regulatory framework and instruments to execute these
                           institutional roles adequately; and (d) the tourism and service industry which will benefit from the
                           reduced risks of pollution of natural resources and the elimination of the presence of open and
                           visible industrial disposal sites.



                                                                     Page 9 of 11
                           Implementation of the Project will start with the preparation of detailed designs for the
                           remediation works including an active separate cell with the same environmental protection
                           standards to facilitate the disposal of future hazardous waste from KAP’s aluminum production.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           As part of procedures for obtaining environmental and construction permits under national
                           legislation, detail design EIAs will be prepared for these works that will incorporate further public
                           consultation steps, which will be satisfactory to Bank and in line with the EMP. The procedures
                           for further consultations and resulting EIAs will be reviewed by the Bank prior to commencement
                           of the works.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      01-Aug-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   08-Aug-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      02-Aug-2012
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Montenegro                                                       27-Jun-2012
                           Comments: and updated ESIA disclosed in-country on January 23, 2013
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      15-Mar-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   15-Mar-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Montenegro                                                       15-Mar-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [     ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [     ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                          Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [     ]
                          arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                          Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [     ]
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information


                                                                     Page 10 of 11
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Frank Van Woerden
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                            Date: 27-Mar-2013
                            Coordinator:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Elisabeth Huybens (SM)                         Date: 28-Mar-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 11 of 11
