                                              INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC2697

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-May-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-Jun-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            India                         Project ID:      P144678
                            Project Name:       Prepare:Program toEstablish Pilots for Access through Renewable Energy
                                                (P144678)
                            Task Team           Ashish Khanna
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       16-Jun-2014                       Estimated        14-Oct-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: SASDE                              Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                              Instrument:
                            GEF Focal Area:     Multi-focal area

                            Sector(s):        Other Renewable Energy (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         42.00                Total Bank Financing:        0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                               Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                        14.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                         14.00
                              Foreign Private Commercial Sources (unidentified)                         14.00
                              Total                                                                     42.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           To demonstrate renewable energy based decentralised models of improving energy access in target
                           states of UP & Bihar.
                           C. Project Description
                         The proposed project aims to improve the access to electricity in rural areas in the Bihar and Uttar
                         Pradesh – the two most lagging states in the electrification space that together constitute 60 percent
                         of total access deficit of 311 million in India. The proposed project is envisaged to be located in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Bareilly and Kanauj districts in Uttar Pradesh and Nalanda district in Bihar. The villages include
                         those that are deemed electrified by the grid rollout program RGGVY as well as those that are still
                         un-electrified. Therefore, some of the target households have grid electricity at home and some don’t.
                         However, the supply of electricity is limited, unreliable and almost non-existent during the peak
                         hours of the evenings, resulting in a continued use of kerosene of a similar pattern as the un-
                         electrified households. Some of the households are also using lighting connections from a central
                         diesel generator owned and operated by local entrepreneur. Usually a household is paying Rs. 60-75/
                         month for a single ~30W lighting connection from these diesel generator sets. Thus electricity access
                         would replace the use of costly diesel which apart from leading to financial benefits to the consumer,
                         would also lead to economic benefits due to a) lower diesel subsidy burden on the state b) lower
                         environmental pollution. The women in Bareilly district villages also work on hand embroidery and
                         access to electricity in the evening hours would also enable them to put more hours in their work thus
                         generating more income. Few rural commercial centers also exist within the proposed project areas.
                         Key elements: The proposed project addresses a number of challenges articulated earlier holding
                         back the scale-up of off-grid potential. The principles of the project are to demonstrate large scale
                         pilots of new innovative PPP mode and allow the access to finance for private developers. The key
                         elements of this proposed project are:

                         PPP approach for project execution: The project would be developed through a public-private
                         partnership, where project implementing unit (PIUs) will be set up under the state nodal agencies -
                         Uttar Pradesh New and Renewable Energy Development Agency (UPNEDA) and Bihar Renewable
                         Energy Development Agency (BREDA). These PIUs will play the role of a facilitator. The agency’s
                         role would be limited to setting policy and bidding out pre-identified project sites to private
                         developers and will not be involved with project implementation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Use of Micro-grids to ensure scalability: This project will promote micro-grids (as opposed to
                         standalone solar home systems) supplying directly to consumers. Setting up of micro-grids will also
                         help the developer to service commercial loads as well as rising residential load in the project areas.

                         Technology agnostic: The choice of technology would be left to the private developer. Possible
                         technology options that could be deployed are solar PV and biomass.

                         Cluster based approach: The bids would be invited for the entire cluster of villages in the district with
                         a target market segment of more than 10,000 households as well as a few anchor commercial load
                         centers. However, the private developer (or successful bidder) would develop generation plants in a
                         phased manner starting from one village or hamlet in a cluster and then moving to other villages/
                         hamlets within the same cluster.

                         Affordable tariff: The tariff charged to households would be fixed on a monthly basis and aligned
                         with the affordability envelope of the low income households typical to the targeted hamlets. The
                         monthly amounts payable would vary depending upon the connected load, the comparison metric
                         would be the cost of kerosene, which is the primary alternate fuel being used by the households and
                         serves as an opportunity cost. However, the developer would be allowed to charge any market
                         determined tariff to the commercial/anchor consumers.
                         Use of Viability gap funding (VGF): The private developer would be selected on the basis of a
                         bidding based on Viability Gap Funding (VGF) to cover the below cost recovery tariffs charged to
                         residential consumers. As the MNRE in-principle has agreed to provide 30 percent subsidy to the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         project developer (as per its existing policy, the issue discussed in more detail in institutional
                         arrangements), the VGF would be provided after the subsidy amount.

                         Financial intermediation for single window financing: To enable a better administration of finance
                         and to relieve the nodal agency from the duties of project execution, it has been proposed that the
                         funds (World Bank, MNRE, and Government of Bihar/UP) be housed with a financial institution
                         (FI). This FI would be the disbursement agency for the VGF and would also provide a line of credit
                         to the developer.

                         Flexible load categories: Based on the consumer profile assessment (through pre -feasibility studies)
                         in the project areas, there exists a demand for higher loads. The project developer would therefore
                         provide customized products with two or three different wattage level connections starting from 40W
                         to 120W per household priced differently and the consumer can choose based on their needs and
                         affordability threshold.

                         Measures to ensure sustainability: Collections from households and O&M would be the
                         responsibility of the private developer and they can take various routes to streamline collection
                         operations from engaging a local entrepreneur with a social standing within the area or involving
                         communities to ensure high collection efficiency.
                         The possibility of involving community level institutions could be higher in Bihar, due to the
                         presence of rural livelihood group Jeevika which can be employed to collect the payment and
                         maintain the plant. Among the districts of Bihar that would be chosen for project implementation (in
                         subsequent phases apart from the ones already identified), preference would be given to districts
                         where Jeevika is present.

                         Phased disbursement on achievement of milestone and role of Independent verification consultant:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The VGF would be disbursed in phases based on outcomes including the number of households
                         connected as well as service delivery levels rather than as one-time capital subsidy. The project
                         envisages an important role for an Independent Verification Consultant (IVC) to develop a
                         monitoring system starting with the baseline data, monitoring the progress overtime, and to verify the
                         achievement of milestones. These milestones will be the tool for disbursement of VGF.

                         Bidding based on feasibility study rather than DPRs: No detailed project report (DPR) would be
                         prepared at the bidding stage as the actual technical design of the project (including number of plants
                         to be set up, load capacity of each plant, design specs of mini-grid) would be left to the private
                         developer. Only a feasibility report identifying the estimated demand from domestic consumers,
                         probable anchor/commercial loads and land for setting up of generation plant would be provided
                         along with the bidding documents.

                         Exit strategy (if any): During various stakeholder consultations, a need was identified to have an exit
                         strategy for the private developer, in a scenario when the grid reaches the un-electrified village/
                         hamlet or when the power supply from the grid becomes reliable during the peak hours in semi-
                         electrified villages. The options for the project developer could be to either exit or get the first right
                         of refusal for becoming the input based franchisee.
                         Financing framework: The project would be funded by the developer’s own equity, MNRE’s on-
                         going subsidy scheme as well as GEF grant through VGF. MNRE has an on-going scheme of rural
                         electrification that gives out 30 percent subsidy (on the basis of estimated cost as per approved
                         DPRs) for off-grid projects. The ministry has in-principle agreed to provide this subsidy to the
                         proposed project as well. Thus, the developer will be provided the VGF from Bank’s fund only if
Public Disclosure Copy




                         successful bid asks for capital assistance beyond 30 percent. More discussions with GoI are needed
                         to figure out how to give 30 percent MNRE subsidy as a VGF in a phased manner based on
                         outcomes. In addition, the private developer would also be required to put in a certain amount of
                         money as equity. Finally, the GEF grant may be used as VGF or debt. A part of it may be used as
                         VGF, another portion would be earmarked for debt financing of the projects. The loan terms could be
                         made favorable by lowering interest rates or increasing loan tenors.

                         Component 1: Viability Gap Funding for DDG project in Bihar and UP (US$ 10 million)
                         This component will include investments through VGF and debt facility for setting up of distributed
                         generation and supply projects including generation plants and mini-grids in the identified un-
                         electrified/semi-electrified villages and hamlets in UP and Bihar. The project will disburse against
                         achievement of results. This component would be executed through PPP approach using financial
                         intermediaries.

                         Component 2: Technical Assistance (US$ 2.844 million)
                         Capacity Building
                         •        Funding of Skill building exercises across the value chain of decentralized generation:
                         Government of Bihar and UP have expressed interest in introducing the skill building courses and
                         tool kits at state Industrial Training Institute (ITIs) for training people from the local villages who
                         could be used by the project developer as operations and maintenance staff. Further this component
                         would also be used to conduct training for the UPNEDA and BREDA officials focusing on key
                         technology and financing issues.
                         •        State level PIU set-up and assistance for staffing: Due to the lack of institutional capacity at
                         state nodal agencies, it is proposed that a PIU would be set up within the s tate nodal agencies in
                         Bihar and UP. The PIU would be also be staffed with professional staff hired on contractual basis.
                         The component would fund this PIU assisting in its regular functioning and staffing.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •        Independent Verification Consultant (IVC): The independent verification consultant will be
                         hired for baseline data collection and impact evaluation. This impact evaluation would also be used
                         for release of outcome based VGF to the developer.
                         Consulting Services for Market Development
                         •        Technical assistance for solar based pump-set scheme: A market potential exists for solar
                         based pump sets replacing the diesel based pump sets. However, in order to develop a market for the
                         solar pump-sets, there are a) some key policy and design issues, including greater co-ordination
                         between GoI and the states, use of FIs for providing better loan terms to individual farmers, effective
                         use of existing technology in monitoring etc, have to be resolved and b) more innovative business
                         solutions need to be looked into to counter technology issues. This TA will delve into these issues in
                         detail and propose an action plan.
                         •        Technical assistance for telecom towers as anchor customers: There is a large scope to
                         hybrid solar technology with diesel in running the telecom towers in rural areas. It is proposed a
                         survey will be carried out to understand the market potential for this model.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project activities are being envisaged in two districts of Uttar Pradesh – Bareilly and Kannnauj
                         and one in Bihar – Biharsharif (also known as Nalanda). All these are located in the Gangetic plain
                         and have little forest cover – less than 2 % land area in each. The Lakh Bahosi Bird Sanctuary is
                               located in Kannauj district. It is one of India's larger bird sanctuaries, covering 80 sq .km including a
                               large lake, and also a stretch of the Upper Ganga canal. Rajgir sanctuary is located in Nalanda
                               district. Since the project is proposed to be technologically agnostic, discharge of wash water from
Public Disclosure Copy




                               gasifiers into near by water bodies, if that technology is selected, has the potential to become
                               important consideration. In case of Solar Photo Voltaic based systems, the safe disposal of spent/
                               retired/disused batteries will have to take into account availability/proximity of and access to a safe
                               disposal site. In case of public lands already under some current productive use, there can be
                               concerns with respect to access.
                               E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                               The implementing agencies have no prior experience of working with Bank safeguards policies.
                               Some of the developers of projects may have the experience of working on development of plants
                               with capacity of 5MW or more, in which case, the Environmental Clearance from the state level EIA
                               authority would have been obtained if these were installed after 2006. If a private sector financial
                               intermediary is to be selected, an assessment of the selected institution will determine their capacity
                               to manage safeguards oversight.
                               F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                               Srihari Gopalaswamy (SASDU)
                               Gaurav D. Joshi (SASDI)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                                 Safeguard Policies                                                Triggered?                    Explanation (Optional)
                                 Environmental Assessment OP/                                      Yes
                                 BP 4.01
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       TBD

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                TBD
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   TBD
                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     TBD

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    TBD
                                 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Dec-2013
                               B.




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                             The Terms
                             The         ofstudies
                                  specific             their
                                                   andfor
                                            Reference        timing1 should
                                                          preparation         be specified
                                                                      of a framework       in the environmental
                                                                                                  PAD-stage ISDS:
                                                                                      to manage                 and social
                             issues are being drawn up and it is expected that the Assessment itself will be completed in 2
Public Disclosure Copy




                             months from the date of award of that contract.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:     Name: Ashish Khanna

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name:                                                Date:
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Jyoti Shukla (SM)                              Date: 03-Jun-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
