                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC5256

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Aug-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 21-Aug-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Myanmar                          Project ID:      P146332
                            Project Name:      Myanmar Decentralizing Funding to Schools (P146332)
                            Task Team          James A. Stevens
                            Leader:
                            Estimated                                           Estimated        01-Jul-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASHE                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General education sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for all (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       120.00               Total Bank Financing:            60.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                             Financing Gap:                      0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            60.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                   60.00
                              Total                                                                        120.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The objectives of this project are (1) to improve and expand Myanmar’s existing decentralized
                           funding mechanisms (schools grants and student stipends), and (2) to establish a baseline of reading
                           acquisition skills in lower primary education (grades 1-3).
                           C. Project Description
                           The project would provide on-budget results-based financing to support the implementation of the
                           Government’s school grants and stipends programs, as well as the implementation of professional
                         development programs for township and school officials and periodic early grade reading
                         assessments. A small secondary component will provide capacity building technical assistance to
                         support implementation, monitoring and evaluation of the government’s programs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The IDA credit would top-up Ministry of Education’s Union budgetary resources for these programs.
                         IDA funding would be expected to be disbursed in equal allocations (about $20 million annually)
                         during the government’s 2014, 2015 and 2016 fiscal years. The MoE would be expected to match
                         (but preferably exceed) the IDA allocation with its own budgetary resources during this period. The
                         combination of union budgetary resources and IDA funding for these decentralization programs
                         should allow the government to announce to schools and townships guaranteed funding for these
                         programs during the 3 year program period, beginning with the 2014-15 school year.

                         IDA funding would be limited to a specific Eligible Expenditure Program (EEP) which will be
                         defined using specific budget headings and budget lines within those headings. Maximum annual
                         amounts, matching a share of government’s own funding for these programs, will be agreed with
                         government before the appraisal is finalized. Project funding is currently proposed for the following
                         budget headings and lines:

                         1.      MoE’s recurrent budget allocated to primary schools, middle schools and high schools
                         within each Department of Basic Education to fund disbursements through townships directly to
                         schools; a list of eligible recurrent budget lines that schools can use would be clearly defined and,
                         depending on government agreement, expanded to allow limited expenditure for priorities such as
                         maintenance, feeding programs, hiring contract teachers, etc.,

                         2.      MOE budget headings for stipends (05 transfers) to primary, middle and high school
                         students, disbursed with the to fund direct cash payments to students,

                         3.      MOE budget headings for refresher training at the Department of Education Planning and
                         Training and DBE1, DBE2 and DBE3 to cover the costs of professional development to be
Public Disclosure Copy




                         undertaken at central, regional and township levels, and

                         4.     MoE budget headings for research/survey costs to cover the costs of the early grade learning
                         assessment surveys after the 2013-14 school year.

                         A series of disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs) will be identified, corresponding to intermediate
                         results in the two major government programs being supported. On-budget funding will be released
                         annually against the achievement of these indicators. In addition, the release of the annual
                         installments, following the initial installment in fiscal year 2014, would be contingent on the full
                         disbursement of the previous year’s funding. A timetable for annual review of program results will
                         be agreed with MoE by October 2013. Assignment of the US$60 million funding envelop to the
                         above funding categories remains to be finalized.

                         In addition to providing $60 million in IDA credit to “top up? union budgetary resources, the World
                         Bank plans to mobilize additional financial support in the form of international and national technical
                         assistance to be focused on monitoring and evaluation of the programs and capacity building.
                         Specially, the technical assistance program would (a) advise on system improvements and design
                         new system inputs (such as improved targeting procedures, manuals, reporting formats, etc), (b)
                         assist design and delivery of training programs, (c) monitor and report on the use of decentralized
                         funding, and (d) periodically evaluate the programs, including impact evaluation.
                           The Ministry of Education would be responsible for managing financial accounts, preparing financial
                           and progress reports.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project is expected to support decentralization to townships and schools in all of Myanmar's 330
                           townships.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Borrower's capacity for safeguards policies is limited.

                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Pamornrat Tansanguanwong (EASTS)
                           Satoshi Ishihara (EASTS)
                           James Orehmie Monday (EASTS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The project is classified as category "B". The
                           BP 4.01                                              project may finance physical repairs of school
                                                                                facilities through the government's grants
                                                                                mechanism, but will not finance new
                                                                                construction or expansion of existing schools.
                                                                                The project envisages that there will be no
                                                                                significant environmental impact. Therefore, no
                                                                                environmental assessment is required. However,
                                                                                the project will likely have social impacts,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                including but not limited to those on ethnic
                                                                                minorities. Most social impacts are expected to
                                                                                be positive. A Social Assessment will be
                                                                                carried out during preparation which will
                                                                                address project related social issues facing
                                                                                project beneficiaries in general including ethnic
                                                                                minorities, especially in relation to the
                                                                                Government’s school grants and stipends
                                                                                programs. Measures to ensure that any negative
                                                                                social issues facing project beneficiaries are
                                                                                addressed and that project benefits are shared
                                                                                with them will be integrated into the
                                                                                government’s guidelines or operating manuals
                                                                                for the school grants and stipends programs.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                           Pest Management OP 4.09             No
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
                         BP 4.11
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   The project will be implemented in townships
                                                                 where ethnic minorities are present. A Social
                                                                 Assessment (SA) to be carried out during
                                                                 preparation will include an assessment of
                                                                 general social issues facing ethnic minorities
                                                                 especially in relation to the Government’s
                                                                 school grants and stipends programs. Free,
                                                                 prior and informed consultations will be carried
                                                                 out with key stakeholders including affected
                                                                 ethnic communities and ascertain their broad
                                                                 community support to the government
                                                                 programs. The Bank will also ensure as part of
                                                                 appraisal that the government’s program
                                                                 documents will address the elements of an
                                                                 Ethnic Minority Planning Framework (EMPF).
                                                                 Ideally, the EMPF will be incorporated into
                                                                 government guidelines or manuals. These
                                                                 program documents will be expected to define
                                                                 processes and procedures that will be applied
                                                                 during implementation to ensure that ethnic or
                                                                 minority groups are not excluded or otherwise
                                                                 discriminated against in the allocation of
                                                                 program funding at the township and school
                                                                 levels. Implementation compliance will be
                                                                 monitored over time in selected townships.
                                                                 Language in the government documents will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 developed to address all OP 4.10 criteria.
                                                                 Among other issues, program documents will
                                                                 define how ethnic screening should be carried
                                                                 out, how free, prior and informed consultations
                                                                 should be carried out where ethnic minorities
                                                                 are found to be present, and how their broad
                                                                 community support should be ascertained.
                                                                 Program documents will also describe measures
                                                                 that will strengthen ethnic parents’ participation
                                                                 in project implementation at the school level
                                                                 and ensure they receive project benefits in a
                                                                 culturally appropriate manner. Grievance
                                                                 mechanisms will also be developed.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No
                         4.12
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

                         Projects on International         No
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP TBD
                                 7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Oct-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The Social Assessment and definition of the elements of an Ethnic Minority Planning Framework
                                      (EMPF) to be integrated into the government program documents will be carried out during
                                      September-October 2013.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: James A. Stevens

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name:                                                                                                                      Date:
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Luis Benveniste (SM)                                                                                                 Date: 21-Aug-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
