                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA3761
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-May-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-Sep-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Cambodia                         Project ID:    P143774
                            Project Name:      Cambodia PFM Modernization Project (Sodeth Ly co-TTL) (P143774)
                            Task Team          Leah April
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          15-Mar-2013                      Estimated   01-Oct-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASPT                            Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Central government administration (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (40%),
                                              Administrative and civil service reform (20%), Tax policy and admini stration
                                              (20%), Law reform (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      12.00           Total Bank Financing:                 0.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                       Financing Gap:                        0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                  0.00
                              Cambodia Public Financial Management Partnership                                         12.00
                              Total                                                                                    12.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to enhance public financial management by strengthening: (a)
                           revenue mobilization and (b) the management of public finances focusing on the implementation of
                           the Financial Management Information System (FMIS). Progress againstthe principal objective will


                                                                      Page 1 of 5
                         be measured by the contribution made to the PFMRP’s Key Performance Indicators and Targets set
                         forth under the Stage Two of the PFMRP.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         A.      Project Components

                         To support the government to achieve this objective over the next five year period the project will
                         take a focused approach and support a component for the finalization and implementation of a
                         revenue mobilization strategy and a second component to support improved management of public
                         resources through the acquisition and implementation of an automated financial information
                         management system (FMIS).

                         Component 1: Mobilization of Revenue and SCS Operations Support (US$ 0.5 million)

                         This component has two sub –components. The first Mobilization of Revenue aims to facilitate the
                         preparation of a credible and sequenced revenue mobilization strategy for the RGC. Support
                         provided to the Department of Economic and Public Finance Policy (Policy Department) of the MEF
                         to include the review and refining the Strategy, development of sequenced and prioritized
                         implementation action plans, monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of the action plans.
                         The Budget allocated for this sub- component is US$250,000.

                         The second sub - component, SCS Operations Support, will also support the Steering Committee
                         Secretariat (SCS) of the PFMRP at the Ministry of Economy and Finance tasked with managing the
                         PFMMP and implementation and coordination of the PFMRP. Financing to support staffing,
                         operating costs, and fiduciary obligations of the SCS will be provided to (i) ensure that resources for
                         the project are managed in a strategic, transparent, and effective manner and (ii) support the overall
                         progress and implementation of the project. The Budget allocated for this sub- component is US
                         $250,000.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2: Management of Public Resources and FMIS (US$ 10.5 million)

                         Sub-component A: This component will strengthen the management of public resources by providing
                         funds for the MEF to acquire an automated Financial Management Information System (FMIS). The
                         proposed system will automate (computerize) the financial operations of budget and treasury units
                         and will be built around a core treasury system supporting all budget execution functions starting
                         from commitment to payment stages. Under the proposed treasury centric model, the key
                         departments involving in the budget execution processes planned to be covered by the FMIS include
                         Budget, Financial Affairs, Investment and Cooperation, Local Finance, and the General Department
                         of the National Treasury (GDNT) which includes all 24 provincial treasuries. The centralized
                         accounting and payment systems at the MEF will remain. The component will also further
                         strengthen the management of resources by supporting the Ministry of Economy and Finance, line
                         ministries, and all budget entities to implement the newly developed uniform account code structure
                         and to fulfill the requirements of cash basis IPSAS. The Budget allocated for this sub- component is
                         US$10 M.

                         Sub–component B: Implementation support for the FMIS includes (i) building the capacity of the
                         GDNT and the FMIS Project Management Office (PMO) to oversee and monitor the FMIS
                         implementation (ii) change management activities to support the transition of organizations and staff
                         within the newly automated environment. The Budget allocated for this sub- component is US


                                                                       Page 2 of 5
                         $500,000.

                         B.      Project Financing Lending Instrument
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The PDO reflects a set of activities, described and costed in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD)
                         that support government priorities under the PFMRP as agreed with the RGC totaling US$11.0
                         million financed by the standalone Recipient Executed Trust Fund (RETF) grant under the Public
                         Financial Management Trust Fund (PFMTF), TF 071696 currently contributed by the European
                         Union (EU) and Swedish International Development Agency (SIDA) for the period 2013-2016.
                         Additional financing of approximately EUR 8.0 million is anticipated to be made available by the
                         European Union at the beginning of 2014 to the PFMTF. Once these funds are provided, the project
                         will be restructured to reflect a broader range of activities aligned with the RGC’s PFMRP.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)


                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Satoshi Ishihara (EASTS)
                         Makathy Tep (EASTS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/      No               The project will finance only policy support, TA
                          BP 4.01                                           for PFM strengthening activities. The project will
                                                                            not finance any civil works. The project has been
                                                                            categorized as C.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No               No safeguard policies are triggered.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                No                No safeguard policies are triggered.

                          Pest Management OP 4.09           No                No safeguard policies are triggered.

                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No                No safeguard policies are triggered.
                          BP 4.11
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No                No safeguard policies are triggered.

                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No                No safeguard policies are triggered.
                          4.12
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No                No safeguard policies are triggered.

                          Projects on International        No                 No safeguard policies are triggered.
                          Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                          Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 No safeguard policies are triggered.
                          7.60




                                                                    Page 3 of 5
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                The project will finance only policy support, TA for PFM strengthening activities. The project
                              will not finance any civil works or any other activities that will have environmental implications.
                              Given the nature of the project it also has no impact on social safeguards such as Involuntary
                              Resettlement and Indigenous Peoples. The project has been categorized as C.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                                None foreseen.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                                Not applicable.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                                Not applicable.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                                Not applicable.
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
                             Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             international aspects of the project, including the procedures to
                             be followed, and the recommendations for dealing with the
                             issue, been prepared
                             Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the OP?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies



                                                                         Page 4 of 5
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Leah April
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Mathew A. Verghis (SM)                      Date: 02-Sep-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 5 of 5
