                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                             ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                      Report No.: ISDSA5247

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Jul-2013
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 21-Aug-2013
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:           Solomon Islands                   Project ID:    P146021
                                                        Parent         P089297
                                                        Project ID:
   Project Name:      Additional Financing 2 - Solomon Islands Rural Development Program
                      (P146021)
   Parent Project     Rural Development Program (P089297)
   Name:
   Task Team       Erik Caldwell Johnson
   Leader:
   Estimated       01-Jul-2013                          Estimated   30-Sep-2013
   Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
   Managing Unit: EASNS                                 Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                        Instrument:
   Sector(s):        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%), General public
                     administration sector (50%)
   Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Participation and civic engagement
                     (30%), Rural policies and institutions (30%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:       5.50           Total Bank Financing:                  3.00
   Total Cofinancing:                       Financing Gap:                         0.00
     Financing Source                                                                       Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                       0.00
     International Development Association (IDA)                                              3.00
     AUSTRALIA Australian Agency for International
                                                                                                   2.50
     Development
     Total                                                                                         5.50
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:



                                             Page 1 of 10
Is this a           Yes
Repeater
project?

2. Project Development Objective(s)
   A. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   B. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)


3. Project Description
The AF project consists of four components: (a) Local Infrastructure and Services Delivery (US
$18.29 million); (b) Improved Agricultural Services (US$9.08 million); (c) Rural Business
Development (US$ 1.17 million); and (d) Program Management (US$ 7.43 million).

1.       Component 1 (Local Infrastructure and Services Delivery). The specific objective of this
component is to increase access to and use of infrastructure and services in rural areas through
participatory planning, budgeting and implementation mechanisms at community and provincial
level. The component provides (i) development grants to the provinces for community infrastructure
projects and (ii) capacity-building to key stakeholders, including provincial governments, the private
sector, NGOs and rural communities.

The provincial grants fund the provision of public infrastructure and services through a number of
subprojects each year. Examples of subprojects include small economic infrastructure (such as
feeder roads, jetties, market places or storage infrastructure, spot improvement on roads), upgrades
and rehabilitation of health and education infrastructure, water and sanitation, social facilities,
communication facilities, and training supporting expansion of livelihood opportunities. A negative
list specifies the type of activities that may not be funded. Subprojects are implemented by
community Subproject Implementation Committees (SIC) with technical support by the provincial
government depending on their size and complexity.

Capacity building activities support key stakeholders to plan, budget, implement, and monitor and
evaluate provincial development grants and subprojects. Capacity building activities include
information sessions and communication campaigns, training, incremental operating costs and
equipment of the provincial administration, peer learning, exchange visits and study tours.

2.      Component 2 (Improved Agricultural Services). The specific objective of this component is
to improve access of smallholder households to quality agricultural services to support rural income
growth. The strategy is to build long-term capacity of service providers including the Ministry of
Agriculture and Livestock (MAL), NGOs, churches, and the private sector, and to establish a
mechanism for sustainable financing that matches demand for these services with performance-based
supply. The component provides (i) annual agricultural service grants to provincial governments to
finance the delivery of agriculture and related services to smallholders; and (ii) capacity building of:
(a) MAL at the national level to facilitate and supervise provincial service delivery; (b) provincial
service providers; and (c) rural households.



                                             Page 2 of 10
MAL coordinates the implementation of this Component. Capacity building is managed by MAL as
part of its national human resources development program. Funding is availa ble for MAL at
national level to supervise the performance of agricultural service providers under RDP. Technical
assistance, national and international, is provided in key areas for skill transfer.

3.       Component 3 (Rural Business Development). The specific objective of this component is to
stimulate business to create jobs and market opportunities for farm products in rural areas. It
provides matching grants to private businesses to support the rural outreach programs of the
commercial banks by demonstrating the viability of rural investment. It facilitates access to finance
by small and medium-scale investors for profitable and sustainable private investment in rural areas.
The remainder of funding comes from beneficiaries’ own funds and from commercial loans. Ministry
of Development Planning and Cooperation (MDPAC) coordinates the implementation of the
component, with proposals appraised by commercial banks through their own procedures. The
component provides: (i) matching grants; and (ii) advisory services and training to the small investor
community – on market information, business literacy, financial skills, business plan preparation, etc
– to get investors better equipped to run their businesses.

4.      Component 4 (Program Management) - This component supports project management
including coordination, communication activities, planning and implementation scheduling,
monitoring and evaluation, procurement, financial management, and reporting through a Project
Coordination Unit (PCU) within MDPAC. The Permanent Secretary in MDPAC is the national
Project Coordinator (also Project Director).

At provincial level, project implementation is under the responsibility of the Provincial Secretary
with support from a Provincial Support Unit (PSU). MAL is responsible for the implementation of
Component 2. The PCU, MAL and the provinces are assisted by internationally recruited specialists
who transfer skills with the intention that the mainstreamed project activities would become part of
public expenditure management.

Generally, the design of the four project components in the parent project remains unchanged in the
AF Project. The key changes in the AF Project are:

(a)      Reduced number of sub-projects. The current target for completed community subprojects
will be reduced from 496 to 370 because of the additional time required to execute each cycle of sub-
projects.
(b)      Enhanced Gender Focus. Component 1 will include more targeted training for female
members of SICs and training to engage women more actively in operations and maintenance.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
As the AF project is for addressing financial gaps of the parent project, project locations and salient
physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis remain the same as of the parent project,
detailed below:

The AF project will continue to be implemented in the 8 provinces covered by the parent project
including: Makira, Isabel, Guadalcanal, Central, Choiseul, Malaita, Western and Temotu. Choiseul
and Temotu are small provinces (with a population of approximately 20,000 each) remote from the
capital city, Honiara; while Malaita is the most populated province (population approximately
120,000) and centrally located, and Western province has a population of approximately 60,000.


                                              Page 3 of 10
  The Solomon Islands archipelago consists of a double chain of six major islands and 990 smaller
  islands, atolls and cays. The six major islands are mostly rugged and mountainous and were naturally
  covered with tropical moist forests, large areas of which have been logged. The smallest islands
  range from coralline atolls to bare sandy islets. The major islands are mostly of volcanic origin and
  form part of the Pacific "ring of fire".

   The vegetation comprises grasslands, swamps, lowland rain forest, montane forest and secondary
  vegetation. 85 percent of the country is naturally covered by forests, which are an integral part of the
  daily lives of rural Solomon Islanders. The most fertile soil groups are found on North Guadalcanal
  (now planted with oil palm) and on other agricultural opportunity areas throughout the country which
  were mapped in the 1970s.

   The Solomon Islands marine and coastal ecosystem is part of the world's largest center of diversity -
  the Western Pacific. Coastal zones contain some of the most biologically diverse ecosystems in the
  world.
   5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
  Mark C. Woodward (EASER)
  Ly Thi Dieu Vu (EASVS)

   6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
   Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes
   BP 4.01
   Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         Yes

   Forests OP/BP 4.36                  Yes

   Pest Management OP 4.09             Yes

   Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
   BP 4.11
   Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       Yes

   Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
   4.12
   Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

   Projects on International        No
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
   7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues



                                               Page 4 of 10
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
  Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
    As with the parent project, environmental impacts or issues associated with the majority of
  subproject investments under RDP are not expected to be significant; they are expected to be
  temporary and can be mitigated. An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
  and a Social Impact Assessment were prepared in 2007 and a Pest Management Plan (PMP) was
  prepared in 2010 under the parent project. These safeguard tools will continue to be applied, and
  incorporated into procedures within the Project Implementation Manual, during the
  implementation of the AF Project. A Supplement to the ESMF has been prepared in preparation of
  this additional financing project to provide an update on the instruments currently being utilized
  by the RDP team to manage safeguard risks.

 Similar to the parent project, the vast majority of investments under the AF will be small in scale
 and will involve the rehabilitation or upgrading of existing small-scale infrastructure. Construction
 of new facilities is also expected to be small in scope.

 The potential impact of any subproject will depend on the nature, location and specific
 characteristics of the investment. In most cases, adverse environmental impacts are expected to be
 temporary and limited to the construction phase. They could include temporary disturbance of
 drains or streams, noise and dust during construction, small-scale vegetation loss, and pollution
 from inappropriate construction materials waste disposal.

  Most adverse impacts will be highly localized (construction work site), temporary, and easily
  mitigated through appropriate siting of the subprojects and good construction and operation
  practices. The subproject screening process, undertaken through the use of an Environmental and
  Social Safeguards Form which is included in the PIM, and the use of standard construction
  practices and mitigation measures will ensure adequate mitigation of those risks. The
  Environmental and Social Safeguards Form is also contained in the ESMF Supplement.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
  in the project area:
   There are no long-term impacts anticipated due to the very small scale nature and dispersed
  nature of the planned activities.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.
   As the intent of the Additional Financing is to address financial gaps in the original project the
  question of project alternatives is not relevant.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
   The project's approach to the issues identified in the Environmental Assessment is to fully
  address them through the planning and subproject selection process. Guidelines for environmental
  assessment, including screening for forests and natural habitats issues, of proposed subprojects and
  activities managed by the communities and by the provinces have been developed and they are
  integrated in the planning, selection, appraisal, monitoring and audit at the time of project
  completion through the use of the Environmental and Social Safeguards Form. These Guidelines,
  as described in the project's ESMF, ESMF Supplement and detailed in the PIM, have been applied
  in the parent project. Similarly, such practices will be followed under the AF project.



                                            Page 5 of 10
With regards to Component 2, OP 4.09 was triggered and an Integrated Pest Management Plan
(IPMP) was finalized in 2010 and is being implemented, in particular through the work of the
Pesticide Registration Advisory Committee (PRAC).

 Indigenous Peoples: OP/BP 4.10 has been determined to apply. However, since virtually all of
the beneficiaries of the project are rural Solomon Islanders who are living on their ancestral lands
and are indigenous (as defined by the policy), the project documentation itself constitutes the
Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP). Relevant aspects include:

 (a) Free, prior and informed consultations during preparation: extensive community consultations
were carried out in all Provinces during preparation. Consultations were carried out in a sample of
villages, including by national staff and in local languages, with separate discussions with
vulnerable groups (such as women and youth) also carried out.

  (b) Free, prior and informed consultations during implementation: All activities under the project
are demand-driven and have to follow a rigorous process of identification, selection and
prioritization at village, ward and provincial level. Consultations are systematically carried out as
part of the project design, and decision-making structures at ward level include representatives of
traditional authorities, women, youth and churches. The project has developed a comprehensive
set of communication activities, with the use of various media to increase outreach (local radio
talk-talks, village-based facilitators, NGOs, pamphlets explaining safeguards policies and project
mechanisms, etc.) at all stages. This also includes complaint mechanisms and independent
monitoring of project activities and processes.

 Involuntary Resettlement: This policy is not triggered as the project does not finance any activity
that requires involuntary resettlement, and any “new? land acquisition is done only on a voluntary
basis. At the time of detailed subproject design and appraisal, a “Land Commitment Letter? is
prepared and signed by two members of the landowning family or clan as well the Chair and
Secretary of the Subproject Implementation Committee (SIC). Siting of new infrastructure is
voluntary so that existing assets that might be affected by such acquisition would also be governed
by the voluntary land commitment and the project would not pay compensation. The Land
Commitment Letter is contained in the ESMF Supplement.

During implementation of the parent project, there have been five cases (out of 204 subprojects) of
project termination due largely to disputes over land. These disputes have arisen within families or
clans when one or more member of the family or clan does not agree with the decision of others to
provide the land. In three cases, the dispute took place before detailed project design and in two
cases, the disputes took place after construction began. To strengthen the project’s response to
such circumstances, a subproject “Exit Strategy? was developed in 2012 which requires: (a) a
community meeting to attempt to resolve the dispute; (b) a timeframe with a clear deadline to
reach a resolution; (c) a community meeting to make a final attempt at resolution, and if the issue
is not resolved, to formally agree that the project will be terminated. The Exit Strategy is
contained in the ESMF Supplement.

Physical Cultural Resources: The objective of OP/BP 4.11, Physical Cultural Resources, is to
avoid, or mitigate, adverse impacts on cultural resources from development projects that the World
Bank finances. Cultural property includes monuments, structures, works of art, or sites of
significance, and are defined as sites and structures having archaeological, historical, architectural,
or religious significance, and natural sites with cultural values. This includes cemeteries,

                                           Page 6 of 10
  graveyards and graves.

  The project poses limited risks of damaging cultural property since sub-projects are identified by
  the communities themselves who are most likely aware of their own cultural property in the area
  of operation. The Safeguard Screening, Monitoring and Audit Form, which is included in the PIM,
  includes questions that assist the community in deter mining what to do if cultural property is
  identified. While there have yet to be any “chance find? (when project activities discover
  unanticipated cultural artifacts) events during the parent project, a simple set of procedures have
  been incorporated into the PIM, and provided in the ESMF Supplement, in case such events
  should occur during the construction of subprojects during the period of additional financing.

  Overall capacity of the Ministry of Environment, Conservation, Disaster and Meteorology to carry
  out its functions remains weak; capacity building activities have been included under the project to
  enable MDPAC, DEC and MECDM to ensure that the environmental and social guidelines for the
  project are adequately followed and implemented. The two Environmental Officers contracted
  under the parent project will continue to work in the AF Project.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
    Key stakeholders in the project will be rural Solomon Islanders who are residents of the villages
  in the wards and provinces covered by the project.

    Consultations during the preparation phase: Extensive consultations were carried out in all nine
  Provinces in 2006 and 2007 as part of the preparation of the EA and Social Impact Assessment
  (SIA) prepared for the parent project. The consultations were carried out by national staff
  (including female staff) in local languages, and by pidgin-speaking international staff, and
  included a series of community consultations in a sample of villages. The EA, SIA and the ESMF
  were disclosed in country in 2007.

   Consultations during implementation. Community consultations are an integral part of the
  selection and appraisal of the project activities. Project beneficiaries participate through public
  consultation meetings and discussions of local development priorities, representation in ward
  development committees and provincial development councils, and representation in the
  Subproject Implementation Committees (SICs). Feedback mechanisms and community
  monitoring of project implementation have also been included under RDP.

   No subproject will be selected that does not flow from this planning process. This includes the
  social and environmental information, training and the screening process described in detail in the
  ESMF. Village-based facilitators (Community-Helpers) are trained on the project's environmental
  and social guidelines. Since environmental and social criteria will be fully integrated throughout
  the planning, selection and appraisal process, stakeholder participation and information disclosure
  will be assured at every stage of project implementation.

    A detailed communication strategy has been developed and is being implemented. It uses various
  traditional and modern media to maximize outreach in the specifically challenging geographical
  context of Solomon Islands.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other


                                             Page 7 of 10
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      30-Mar-2007
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   15-May-2007
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Solomon Islands                                                  29-May-2007
  Comments:
 Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      06-Aug-2007
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   06-Aug-2007
"In country" Disclosure
  Solomon Islands                                                  06-Aug-2007
  Comments:
 Pest Management Plan
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      10-Nov-2010
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   17-Jan-2011
"In country" Disclosure
  Solomon Islands                                                  17-Jan-2011
  Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 degradation of critical natural habitats?
 If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
 project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
 Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]


                                           Page 8 of 10
    Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
    in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
    Management Specialist?
   OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
    Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
    Indigenous Peoples?
    If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    Sector Manager review the plan?
    If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
    Development Unit or Sector Manager?
   OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
    Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    and constraints been carried out?
    Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    overcome these constraints?
    Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    does it include provisions for certification system?
   The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    World Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader:       Erik Caldwell Johnson
   Approved By

                                               Page 9 of 10
Sector Manager:   Name: Michel Kerf (SM)         Date: 21-Aug-2013




                                 Page 10 of 10
