                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                   Report No.: ISDSC1276

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Aug-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Jordan                            Project ID:      P127702
                            Project Name:       JO: ODS III - HCFC Phase-out Project (P127702)
                            Task Team           Tracy Hart
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           15-Nov-2012                       Estimated        31-Jan-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      MNSEN                             Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector:             Petrochemicals and fertilizers (90%), Central government administration (10%)
                            Theme:              Environmental policies and institutions (50%), Pollution management and
                                                environmental health (50%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                               Amount
                              Borrower                                                                         0.00
                              Montreal Protocol Investment Fund                                                3.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Total                                                                            3.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective is to support Jordan in its overall efforts to meet its first Montreal
                           Protocol HCFC phase-out obligations of (i) a freeze of HCFC consumption at baseline levels by
                           2013; and (ii) 10% reduction from the baseline level by 2015 through industry conversions to
                           alternative technology which also result in net climate benefits.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed project, consisting of a “sector plan? for HCFC phase-out in air-conditioning
                           manufacturing is to contribute to the estimated 20 ODP tonnes in phase-out needed for Jordan while
                           minimizing the longer-term impact on the climate and ozone layer (i.e. reducing the amount of future
                           equipment requiring HCFC-22 servicing). In addition, the project will reintroduce a standing line of
                           MLF assistance that is dedicated specifically to strengthening the focal point for the Montreal
                         Protocol in Jordan: the national ozone unit in the Ministry of Environment (MoE).

                         Thus, given the similar objectives and scope of the proposed project with those under the ongoing
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Jordan ODS II Project (P049706), it is proposed that new project arrangements build upon the
                         existing infrastructure and capacity established in MoE to deliver the required assistance to
                         beneficiaries and stakeholders. In that sense, the proposed project can be considered to be a
                         continuation of the previous one and will consequently include a combination of investment,
                         technical assistance, and policy and regulatory interventions which will be carried out in tandem to
                         assure sustainable HCFC phase-out while enabling Jordan to manage its overall ODS program.

                         Funding from the MLF for sector plans follows a performance-based, programmatic approach. The
                         advantages of this approach are flexibility given to the country to utilize the funding in the most
                         effective manner and to reprogram funding as needs evolve; the inclusion of a regulatory and policy
                         framework and technical assistance to create an enabling environment; long-term funding
                         commitment by donors that allows the government to secure buy-in for phase-out from an otherwise
                         reluctant private sector; and, the guarantee provided to the MLF of continued phase-out through
                         independent verification audits of HCFC import data. Funding is thus released to the World Bank in
                         tranches upon the country’s achievements of agreed consumption targets.

                         Component 1: Investment in HCFC Consumption Reductions (US$1,923,850)

                         Investments will be made in residential AC manufacturers in Jordan and complement the already
                         approved Petra project. This component therefore includes coordination of conversions of six
                         enterprises: one under UNIDO, three under this project, and two, which are not eligible for MLF
                         financing, will convert on their own in compliance with future Government regulatory actions to ban
                         HCFC-based manufacturing. The conversion entails a change in HCFC-22-based technology to, what
                         is considered by industry as currently the only commercially viable alternative technology on the
                         market, HFC-410A. The three project enterprises will receive funding for new manufacturing
                         equipment and technology and for operating costs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2: Technical Assistance (TA) Activities, Policies and AC Sector Plan Management (US
                         $417,300)

                         To support implementation of investment interventions under the project, assistance will be provided
                         for technical experts who will support beneficiaries to prepare project proposals and equipment
                         specifications, project completion reports, and to complete the conversions (technical support). It will
                         also include support to increase technical capacity of local authorities in order to allow them to
                         monitor and enforce HCFC-related policies for new and existing industrial installations, including
                         customs officers in order to ensure effective contro lof HCFC imports and products containing
                         HCFCs.

                         A demonstration activity that targets partly the servicing sector will also be introduced. This TA
                         activity will provide training to service technicians to employ good practice in servicing HCFC-22
                         air-conditi oning units to avoid excess leakage over time, to retrofit AC units to alternative
                         refrigerants and, to be prepared for handling alternative refrigerants ranging from HFCs to natural
                         refrigerants, in anticipation of evolving technologies worldwide.

                         The projectwill put a special focus on strengthening Jordan’s capacity to implement energy
                         conservation and energy efficiency in the residential air-conditioning sector by reaching out to the
                         MEMR, National Energy Research Center and related agencies to ensure there is complementarity
                         and synchronization of initiatives on EE for the sector. In addition, through the sector plan,
                         additional TA will be pursued to help the sector including non-eligible enterprises improve and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         optimize energy performance of components and the entire system to achieve EERs that meet the
                         country’s new performance requirements for “A? grade products.

                         An import quota system to curb the supply of HCFCs will be established by January 1, 2013 through
                         support to Jordan’s overall HPMP which is managed by UNIDO. Under the proposed project Jordan
                         will receive support to establish a policy structure that ensures HCFC phase-out in its priority sector,
                         residential air-conditioning, is permanent and sustainable, and to promote the transfer and
                         dissemination of suitable substitute technologies. This includes the introduction of a ban on the use
                         of HCFC-22 in manufacturing AC as well as a ban on imports of HCFC-22-based AC units by the
                         end of 2016. The project focal point in MoE will also work with relevant agencies to pursue
                         regulations regarding minimum energy efficiency standards to complement Jordan’s new AC
                         appliance labeling system and the work being undertaken with USAID and other donors. In addition,
                         the NOU will work with agencies to promote the uptake of more efficient air-conditioning and
                         stimulate local manufacturers to compete on EE.

                         The project will provide support to the focal point, the National Ozone Unit (NOU) within MoE so
                         that it may build a dedicated project team responsible for AC sector plan implementation. The staff
                         and consultants in the NOU will manage activities related to the implementation of investments and
                         TA activities, and ensure that MLF and World Bank policies regarding financial management, use of
                         funds and procurement are followed when implementing subprojects.

                         Component 3: Institutional Strengthening (US$441,999)

                         Support will be provided to the Recipient through the NOU in the Ministry of Environment to
                         enhance the capacity of Government agencies to manage and address all ozone protection issues in
                         the country and to interact with the international ozone protection community. This will include
Public Disclosure Copy




                         assistance for coordinating the portfolio of MP projects (with the Bank, UNIDO and GIZ); for
                         awareness raising in industrial sectors and the general public; monitoring and reporting of annual
                         ODS consumption; regular participation in international and regional MP meetings; and facilitating
                         inter-agency coordination and policy and decision-making on ozone-related issues.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the              safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         12.      Project investments under Component 1 will take place in three industrial enterprises
                         manufacturing air conditioning (AC) equipment. Technical assistance and training under Component
                         2 will also benefit two other such enterprises, as well as a sixth facility which is receiving investment
                         under an MLF/ UNIDO project. All project sites have been identified and visited by Bank staff
                         several times. The March 2012 mission reviewed the general standards of environmental
                         management and worker health and safety at the plants to be supported by the project and observed
                         some potentially serious issues of industrial hygiene and worker safety, including apparent lacks of
                         personal protective equipment and inadequate storage of chemicals and hazardous wastes.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         Environmental management in Jordan is the responsibility of the Ministry of Environment (MoE),
                         established under the Environmental Protection Law, No. 1 of 2003. Article 13 of that law stipulates
                         that any organization, company, establishment or authority has to prepare an environmental impact
                           assessment, in accordance with the Environmental Impact Assessment By-Law, no. 37 of 2005,
                           which must be approved by MoE prior to establishment, for any project that falls within Annex 2 or
                           3 of the by-law. Industrial enterprises require an environmental license from MOE prior to starting
Public Disclosure Copy




                           operations. Another by-law, from 2003, regulates ozone depleting substances. MoE is in the process
                           of supplying the Bank with all relevant laws and regulations.

                           Worker health and safety in Jordan are regulated by the Ministry of Labor under the Labor Law (No.
                           8 of 1996), especially Chapters 9 (safety and vocational health) and 10 (Work related injuries and
                           sickness). Under Chapter 9, the owner of a project, plant, etc. must take the appropriate preventive
                           actions and provide his/her workers with the necessary protective equipment to ensure their safety
                           and avoid work-related accidents. The owner must also provide first aid facilities and adequate
                           medical services.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Sanne Agnete Tikjoeb (MNSEN)
                           Amal Hijazi (MNSEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             The project is expected to have a net positive
                           BP 4.01                                             impact on the global environment by reducing
                                                                               the use of HCFC-22, which is an ozone
                                                                               depleting substance (ODS) and also a
                                                                               greenhouse gas, with a global warming potential
                                                                               (GWP) of 1,810. While HCFCs have an impact
                                                                               on the global environment, they have limited
                                                                               adverse local impacts, as these chemicals are
                                                                               stable and not considered toxic or dangerous for
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               human health or the local environment.

                                                                               Under the project, three industrial enterprises
                                                                               now manufacturing AC equipment would be
                                                                               supported to switch refrigerants from HCFC-22
                                                                               to HFC (hydrofluorocarbon)-410A, which is not
                                                                               an ODS. However, HFCs are greenhouse gases
                                                                               - HFC-410A has a GWP of 2,100 CO2 eq.,
                                                                               which is slightly higher than HCFC-22.
                                                                               Nevertheless, because the HFCs can be used in
                                                                               smaller volumes, due to their greater
                                                                               refrigerating capacity, and because the new
                                                                               equipment manufactured will use newer
                                                                               technology, which is more energy efficient, the
                                                                               project would result in a net reduction of global
                                                                               warming impact. Like HCFCs, HFCs are stable
                                                                               and not considered toxic or dangerous for
                                                                               human health or the environment. Nonetheless,
                                                                               HFC-410A is a high-pressure gas which merits
                         extra precaution in transportation, handling and
                         storage, as there remain risks of asphyxiation
                         from higher concentration of the refrigerant
Public Disclosure Copy




                         gases, especially in confined spaces.

                         The project also presents potential negative
                         environmental and social risks, especially with
                         respect to the health and safety of workers in the
                         project-supported plants, technicians servicing
                         equipment produced in those plants, and
                         possibly to the surrounding populations. These
                         risks include: transporting heavy pieces of
                         equipment; installing and testing such
                         equipment; and, charging equipment with
                         highly compressed gases. These risks would
                         occur at both the manufacturing and servicing
                         levels. All HCFCs and HFCs accidentally
                         vented to the atmosphere during such operations
                         would pose threats of ozone depletion and/or
                         global warming.

                         Jordan has a relatively good environmental
                         protection framework with regulation on ozone
                         depleting substances, including HCFCs, and
                         other health and worker safety rules governing
                         industry but additional mitigation measures may
                         be necessary to ensure that enterprises are
                         employing good practice in handling and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         manufacturing. The Recipient (through NOU
                         staff) has begun to prepare an Environmental
                         Management Plan (EMP) following a template
                         acceptable to the Bank. Following disclosure to
                         and consultation with affected groups
                         (participating enterprises, workers and nearby
                         residents), the EMP will be transmitted to the
                         Bank prior to project appraisal.

                         It is expected that the EMP will address the
                         general standards of environmental management
                         and worker health and safety at the plants to be
                         supported by the project, as identified by the
                         March mission (see para. 13 above), as well as
                         specific provisions for the safe transportation,
                         storage and handling of the gases and other
                         materials related to the project investments. In
                         addition, capacity building and training of
                         worker for the safe handling of equipment and
                         materials would be an integral part of the
                         project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         It is anticipated that the project EMP would be
                         modified as needed for the specific conditions in
                         each recipient industrial plant and incorporated
                         in the Sub-Grant Agreement for that firm. Such
                         Sub-Grant Agreements would also require that
                         the recipient firm remain in compliance with all
                         applicable environmental and labor law permits.

                         A potential legacy risk is posed by the CFCs
                         recovered and stored from the ODS II Project,
                         which amount to 3.58 tons. The Government of
                         Jordan will continue to cover the costs of safely
                         storing this recovered CFC (estimated to be
                         $500 a month at the national halon bank)
                         through the institutional strengthening (IS)
                         component of ODS II until a funding source can
                         be identified to cover the costs of transportation
                         and destruction of the unwanted substances in
                         another country with suitable facilities. There is
                         a possibility that this CFC is not disposed of
                         prior to the closure of ODS II. In that case, the
                         IS component in the new proposed project
                         would pick up the cost of safe storage.

                         Regarding social safeguards risks of the project,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the involuntary resettlement policy is not
                         triggered, as the project is not expected to entail
                         any land acquisition. Some limited physical
                         works might occur. They will be mitigated at
                         site level along with the health and safety
                         measures mentioned above. Other social risks of
                         the project relate to the fact that the project will
                         introduce the use of a new technology that may
                         require training of the project affected people
                         (PAP). A remote social risk could be
                         represented by the fact that the project affected
                         people might not want to retrain to adopt the
                         new technology. Therefore, the project will
                         include consultation with the PAP in the three
                         enterprises to make sure that they are fully
                         informed and are aware of the project and that
                         any needed mitigation measures are taken to
                         ensure occupational safety. The EMP will assess
                                                                                                                                 and mitigate any identified social impacts of the
                                                                                                                                 project.
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No                            As the project activities will take place within
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 existing industrial facilities, no impact on
                                                                                                                                 natural habitats is anticipated.
                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No                            For the same reason, no impact on forests is
                                                                                                                                 expected
                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No                            The project does not include the procurement or
                                                                                                                                 use of pesticides.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No                            Project activities will take place within
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         industrial facilities, and thus will have no
                                                                                                                                 impact on cultural resources.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            The project is not located in an area with
                                                                                                                                 indigenous peoples.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            The involuntary resettlement policy is not
                                 4.12                                                                                            triggered as the project is not expected to entail
                                                                                                                                 any land acquisition. Some limited minor
                                                                                                                                 physical works might incur.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project does not depend on the safe
                                                                                                                                 functioning of dams and does not invest in
                                                                                                                                 dams.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             Project activities will have no impact on
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            international waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project is not located in known areas of
                                 7.60                                                                                            territorial dispute.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Sep-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS: The need for
                                      safeguard studies was discussed during the March mission and agreement reached with NOU of
                                      MoE for the latter to prepare an EMP for disclosure and consultation with stakeholders by
                                      November 1, 2012.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Tracy Hart

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (RSA)                                                                                            Date: 11-Oct-2012
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Hoonae Kim (SM)                                                                                                      Date: 14-Sep-2012




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
