                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSC1093

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Jun-2012
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Aug-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            China                             Project ID:       P101525
                            Project Name:       CN Yunnan Honghe Prefecture Urban Transport (P101525)
                            Task Team           Fei Deng
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           03-Sep-2013                       Estimated         11-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      EASCS                             Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Urban Transport (90%), General transportation sector (10%)
                            Theme(s):         City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       300.00                Total Bank Financing:      150.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                              Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                               Amount
                              Borrower                                                                        150.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                           150.00
                              Total                                                                           300.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed project development objective (PDO) is to improve the safety, accessibility, and
                           efficiency of people’s daily trips by optimizing functional road hierarchy, developing public
                           transport, and establishing road safety measures through integrated corridor/area management in
                           Mengzi and Jianshui.
                           C. Project Description
                           Based on the findings from the two project cities, it has been tentatively agreed that the project will
                         include four components in Mengzi City and three components in Jianshui County. Detailed
                         descriptions are provided:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1– Mengzi City (US$100 million):

                         (i) Road Network Re-functioning and Improvement (US$50 million) - This sub-component aims at
                         providing a functional road hierarchy by filling some of the gaps in the existing road network. This
                         goal will be achieved through (a) constructing or upgrading of approximately 9 kilometers of road,
                         (b) optimizing the space allocation for approximately 11 kilometers of road, such as giving priority to
                         non-motorized transport and public transport, improved intersections, as well as enhanced pedestrian
                         facilities, and (c) rationalizing the road network;

                         (ii) Integrated Corridor Management (US$40 million) - This sub-component is focused on integrated
                         public transport corridor improvement on three selected corridors. Based on further assessment of
                         quality and performance of bus services on these corridors, this sub-component will include (a)
                         investment in constructing bus dedicated lanes, (b) installing bus priority signals, (c) constructing/
                         upgrading bus stops, bus depots and terminals, (d) improving pedestrian crossings and other non-
                         motorized facilities to enhance accessibility to public transport and reduce the severance caused by
                         unnecessarily wide roads, especially for the vulnerable groups, (e) optimizing a bus dispatching
                         system and bus route development program; (f) purchasing new clean energy buses.

                         (iii) School Transport Safety Improvement (US$8 million) - This sub-component will develop a safe
                         school transport demonstration program in Mengzi city. The program includes (a) “a model school
                         transport zone? for four primary schools and two middle schools, and (b) “a home to school transport
                         demonstration corridor? that focuses on increasing the accessibility to education between a poor
                         suburban/rural area and a commercial district; and

                         (iv) Institutional Strengthening (US$2 million) - This sub-component will provide institutional
                         development, capacity building, and technical assistance to Mengzi city.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2 – Jianshui County (US$50 million):

                         (i) Core Urban Area Integrated Transport Improvement (US$28 million) - This sub-component will
                         improve safety, mobility, and accessibility by implementing a comprehensive package of measures
                         on selected corridors in the Jianshui core urban area. The measures will include (a) re-allocation of
                         road space for public transport modes, pedestrians, and non-motorized transport and (b) provide
                         priority for public transport to meet people’s travel demands while slowing down the pace of car
                         ownership;

                         (ii) Urban Road Network Improvement (US$20 million) - This sub-component will connect villages
                         in southern Jianshui county to a new logistics park, a new railway station, and a new industrial zone.
                         To meet this goal, a bypass will be constructed t o connect five local roads; and

                         (iii) Institutional Strengthening (US$2 million) - This sub-component will provide consistent
                         institutional development, capacity building, and technical assistance to Jianshui county.

                         The total project cost is US$300 mi llion, with an IBRD loan of US$150 million.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project is in Honghe Hani and Yi Autonomous Prefecture (HAP) in the south of Yunnan
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Province. Project components are located within the urban and peri-urban areas of Mengzi City and
                           Jianshui County. Mengzi City (2,228 square kilometers in area and a population of 241,000
                           inhabitants) is located 289 km to the south of Kunming, the capital of Yunnan Province. Jianshui
                           County (3,789 square kilometers in area and a population of about 500,000 inhabitants) is located
                           approximately 60 km northwest of Mengzi. Apart from approximately 14.4 kilometers of new road
                           construction, project implementation will occur within the built environment. Both the road network
                           and the public transport components will involve a certain amount of land acquisition and demolition
                           to accommodate the construction of roads, two bus depots, and a bus terminal.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The proposed project is the Bank’s first engagement with Honghe Prefecture, Mengzi City, and
                           Jianshui County. Therefore, the clients lack experience with Bank funded projects and are unfamiliar
                           with the Bank’s safeguards policies. However, they have exhibited strong commitment during project
                           identification. A Project Steering Committee (PSC) at the prefecture level (consisting of deputy
                           governors and directors of relevant prefecture government agencies, the mayor of Mengzi and the
                           governor of Jianshui) will guide and supervise the project preparation and implementation. A Project
                           Management Office (PMO), established at the Honghe Prefecture Housing and Urban-Rural
                           Development Bureau, will manage and coordinate with Mengzi and Jianshui governments to prepare
                           and implement the project. The PMO will be expanded to meet the Bank’s requirement for technical
                           works, environmental and social safeguards, financial management, procurement, as well as project
                           management. A Project Execution Office (PEO) at the city or county levels, consisting of the
                           directors of relevant government agencies and professionals, will be responsible for preparing and
                           implementing all the subcomponents related to Mengzi or Jianshui. Their duties include the
                           management of the feasibility study and engineering designs, social and environment safeguard
                           preparation, monitoring and evaluation, as well as financial management and procurement in
Public Disclosure Copy




                           accordance with Bank guidelines.

                           The safeguarded documents such as the Environmental Assessment (EA) and Resettlement Action
                           Plan (RAP) reports will be prepared by the professional institutions with the required qualification
                           and adequate experiences on Bank projects in China. Further, the PMO will undertake a Social
                           Assessment to assist with the design of relevant resettlement activities. To assist with the lack of
                           capacity for Bank safeguard policies, substantial training will be provided to the prefecture PMO and
                           Mengzi/Jianshui PEOs on all relevant safeguards in the early stage of project preparation. The timely
                           interaction between the Bank’s task team and the clients will help improve the clients’ capacity to the
                           acceptable level during project preparation and throughout implementation.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Youxuan Zhu (EASCS)
                           Feng Ji (EASCS)
                           Meixiang Zhou (EASCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes   It is expected that environmental impacts during
                         BP 4.01                              construction are mainly related to the
                                                              construction activities in Mengzi City and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              Jianshui County, e.g. disturbance to local
                                                              communities and local traffic, nuisance of dust,
                                                              noise, vibration and wastewater, disposal of
                                                              spoil. Environmental impacts during operation
                                                              mainly include vehicle noise and emission, road
                                                              safety; disposal of waste from the operation of
                                                              bus depots.

                                                              It is expected that the project will overall
                                                              improve the road safety, and consequently
                                                              reduce traffic congestion in the city/county. The
                                                              adverse impacts are localized, limited and can
                                                              be easily mitigated. The project is proposed as a
                                                              category B project considering the type,
                                                              location, sensitivity, and scale of the project and
                                                              the nature and magnitude of its potential
                                                              environmental impacts.

                                                              All sites that require civil works will be
                                                              identified prior to appraisal. An Environmental
                                                              Management Plan (EMP) will be prepared by
                                                              appraisal based on relevant IFC Environment,
                                                              Health and Safety Guidelines and local laws/
                                                              regulations. The EMP will include, but not
                                                              necessarily limited to, the following aspects:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              (a) For new bus depots and terminals, design
                                                              specifications for construction contractors will
                                                              be developed and form part of bidding
                                                              documents. The specifications would address
                                                              issues including solid and wastewater
                                                              management system, source and transportation
                                                              of construction materials especially when
                                                              ground leveling is needed, disturbance to local
                                                              businesses and agricultural activities.
                                                              (b) For re-routing road sections and re-
                                                              allocation of road space, environmental
                                                              specifications (Environmental Codes of
                                                              Practice) for construction contractors will be
                                                              developed and included in bidding documents.
                                                              The specifications would include requirements
                                                              for notification of public civil works, restoring
                                                              local businesses during construction, on-site
                                                              traffic safety management, and mitigation of
                                                              other construction related nuisances.
                                                              (c) For the 5.3 km bypass, mitigation measures
                                                              will be developed for both general impacts from
                                                              construction and site-specific environmental
                                                              impacts. Special considerations will be given to
                                                              the connectivity of rural communities and
                                                              potential disturbance to irrigation systems.
                                                              (d) Measures for the maintenance of the bus
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No    The project is mainly in the urban and peri-
                                                                 urban area of Mengzi and Jianshui as well as
                                                                 other local areas already disturbed by
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 established human activities. The project will
                                                                 not convert, degrade, or restore any natural
                                                                 habitats or critical natural habitats. Hence, this
                                                                 policy is not triggered.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    The project will not finance activities that would
                                                                 involve significant conversion or degradation of
                                                                 critical forest areas or related critical natural
                                                                 habitats as defined under the policy. Hence, this
                                                                 policy is not triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The project will not lead to the purchase or use
                                                                 of any pesticides. This policy is not triggered.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   The project activities have been carefully
                         BP 4.11                                 selected to avoid negative impacts on any
                                                                 physical cultural resources (PCRs). Based on
                                                                 the available information, no PCRs have been
                                                                 identified to be likely affected by the project.
                                                                 However, given that some project activities will
                                                                 be in the vicinity of the Mengzi City’s
                                                                 downtown area and Jianshui County’s historic
                                                                 Old City, further survey must be conducted to
                                                                 confirm if the PCRs policy is triggered. The EA
                                                                 will further screen the likelihood of impacts on
                                                                 PCRs, such as household graves, or other
                                                                 objects of historical, aesthetical, and cultural
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 value. If necessary, the EA will include a PCR
                                                                 Management Plan. Regardless, chance-find
                                                                 procedures will be included in the EMP and
                                                                 construction contracts. The indirect impacts
                                                                 from workers and local people due to increased
                                                                 mobility will also be addressed.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     TBD   Although both Mengzi and Jianshui Cities are
                                                                 located in Honghe Hani and Yi Autonomous
                                                                 Prefecture with a minority population
                                                                 accounting for 58 percent of local residents,
                                                                 most of the indigenous peoples have assimilated
                                                                 to urban and peri-urban life. Since most of
                                                                 proposed components are located within the
                                                                 built environments of Mengzi City and Jianshui
                                                                 County, no ethnic minority communities are
                                                                 likely to be affected. However, final
                                                                 determination whether OP4.10 is triggered will
                                                                 be made based on social assessment to be
                                                                                                                                 carried out along with the project feasibility
                                                                                                                                 study.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 4.12                                                                                            prepared for both Mengzi and Jianshui cities
                                                                                                                                 prior to appraisal.

                                                                                                                                 The RAP will take into account the information
                                                                                                                                 collected through social assessment in the two
                                                                                                                                 cities based on separate consultations held with
                                                                                                                                 men and women and include gender-sensitive
                                                                                                                                 compensation measures.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            This project does not involve traditional dams.

                                 Projects on International        No                                                             This project is not located within international
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             This project is not located in or near disputed
                                 7.60                                                                                            areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 12-Dec-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      During next preparation mission (tentatively scheduled in September 2012), the first draft EA
                                      report prepared by the EA institute will be reviewed by the Bank team.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Fei Deng
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 23-Aug-2013
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Mark R. Lundell (SM)                                                                                                 Date: 26-Aug-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
