                                                                     INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                              CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC312
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Dec-2011

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        Mali                                    Project ID:                       P127328
                              Project Name:                   Mali Social Protection and Employment Project (SPEP) (P127328)
                              Task Team Leader:               Setareh Razmara
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 14-Sep-2012                                   Estimated Board Date:             11-Feb-2013
                              Managing Unit:                  AFTSP                                   Lending Instrument:               Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                         Other social services (100%)
                              Theme:                          Social safety nets (40%), Other social protection and risk management (30%), Vulnerability assessment and
                                                              monitoring (30%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                        Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                          0.00
                                   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                                30.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                      30.00
                              Environmental Category:         B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              B. Project Objectives

                              13. This Project aims to establish a sustainable social safety net system and scale up programs that increase income and consumption of the
                              poor and vulnerable households through cash transfers and short term employment.

                              C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                              The project will be implemented as a Specific Investment Loan (SIL) for a period of five years. The operation will comprise the following three
                              components: i) a cash transfer program accompanied with measures to contribute to an improvement in human capital in both rural and urban
                              areas; (ii) a labor intensive Public Works program (PW) in both rural and urban areas, which could be combined with life skills; and (iii) institutional
                              support to set up key elements of a SSN system, build capacities and manage the operation (e.g. management information system, targeting and
                              payment systems, monitoring and evaluation, management support, etc.).

                              Total IDA allocation for the proposed Mali Social Protection and Employment Project is currently US$30 million. Based on preliminary estimations,
                              this amount could provide income support to about 200,000 poorest individuals (cash transfers to about 17,000 Households and short term
                              employment to about 44,000 individuals). This represents about 8% of the food insecure population in the country. However, since over 3 million
                              people are currently food insecure in Mali, given the scope of the operation and the weak institutional capacities, to ensure that the amount is large
                              enough in order to make a visible impact on the ground there is need to increase the IDA allocation to at least US$60 million. This increase would
                              enable the project to benefit about 500,000 poorest people (or about 17% of the food insecure).

                              Component 1: Cash transfer program

                              The objective of this component is to provide targeted Cash Transfers (CT) to increase food consumption of the poorest households in both rural
                              and urban areas. This component will provide small regular cash transfers to women in households exposed to chronic food insecurity. The
                              proposed operation will support a single targeting mechanism to build a unified registry of beneficiaries which will assist government to identify the
                              targeted groups for the social safety net as well as other social and assistance programs in rural and urban areas. The targeting mechanisms
                              would be poverty based and would comprise three elements: (i) a geographical mechanism to identify and select districts and villages; (ii),
                              community targeting to identify extremely poor and food insecure households in selected villages; and (iii) a proxy means test to verify and
                              minimize inclusion and exclusion errors.

                              The proposed CT program will be accompanied with measures to support targeted poor and food insecure households by increasing their income
                              and investing in their human capital. The CT program will be implemented as a permanent program and will operate throughout the year. To
                              achieve the objective of investing in human capital this component will provide regular cash transfers to households exposed to chronic food
                              insecurity, and provide sensitization workshops to selected households for the adoption of essential family practices in health, sanitation, family
                              planning, and nutrition or income generation scheme. Also among essential family practices we could consider parental stimulation measures.
                              Currently two NGOs (Agha Khan and Plan Mali) are piloting this approach as part of the Early Childhood Development project in Mali and will have
                              a scalable model within the next 12 months. Since nutrition and stimulation interventions are highly complementary, there is need to integrate
                              social safety net programs and early childhood development interventions to increase human capital and productivity in the long-term. The next
                              preparation mission will investigate the extent to which such integration, which will be innovative in Mali, could be facilitated through this project.
                         The actual cash transfer, which will be a single flat benefit, will be made for a period of 36 months. Households will then be recertified for program
                         continuation or will be referred to other interventions. However, since recertification might add administrative complications, further investigation is
                         needed during the operation’s preparation to assess its feasibility. The flat benefit design and size will also be determined during/by preparation
                         mission. Moreover, since Mali has already some experience with Cash transfers (Bourse Maman of UNICEF and Cash transfers of OXFAM,
                         lessons from these experiences will be taken into consideration for this project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2: Labor intensive public work program

                         The objective of this component is to mitigate short term impacts caus ed by shocks to poor and vulnerable households through the creation of a
                         predictable source of income during the lean season in rural areas and spread over the year in urban areas. At the same time, as a secondary
                         objective, the PW seeks to enhance the communities’ access to social and economic infrastructure. These projects will be identified in consultation
                         with the communities. Other multiplier benefits are increased income and related demand in local markets, increased household asset
                         development, savings and investment. The beneficiary households will be selected through the single targeting mechanism set up to identify all
                         program beneficiary households. Selected households with adult able to work will be offered to participate in the labor-intensive public works
                         programs. For instance the PW could provide the households with a total number of working days (45) per year, with a limit of 15 days per month
                         during the three months of implementation of PW activities every year in both rural (during lean season) and urban areas (spread over the year).).
                         This component will build on lessons learned from the existing experience of PW in Mali. In order to maximize the number of households that can
                         benefit from the transfers, the ratio of labor cost will be set at a minimum of 60% of the total costs.

                         The creation of assets at local level will be used as a catalyst for the economic development of the communities and development of human capital
                         of the recipients. Three types of investments will contribute to these objectives:
                         -          Rural works will include land development and irrigation schemes, rural roads, minor dams, water-supply schemes, afforestation of
                         woodlots, soil and water conservation, environmental protection works, etc. This component will benefit vulnerable groups, communities, or
                         community-based organizations. The cash injection (wages) into the local economies in combination with the productive use of the infrastructure
                         will create important multiplier effects for the targeted groups and the society as a whole.
                         -          Urban works in Bamako and possibly in another secondary city. Different type of works will be undertaken (urban road construction and
                         drainage, paving, management of green areas, etc), planned, designed and developed under the control of the municipalities targeted by the
                         project. They will be implemented by the local populations through their organizations, and with the technical support of local operators.
                         -          A capacity building and institutional component to improve the technical and managerial skills of those in charge of local investments.
                         This will be necessary to address the needs of community-based organizations and SME (management and technical training for local
                         organizations, contractors and engineering consultants, skills upgrading for the workforce) and local government (contract management and
                         supervision).
                         This component will also include some non-cognitive skills module to reinforce basic life skills and workforce readiness behaviors provided by the
                         overall experience of participating in the public works activities. The proposed design is to add one day of training in non-cognitive skills during
                         each week of work and which will be paid at the same wage as a working day. The training, provided by NGOs, will include modules on basic
                         work-related behaviors, attitudes in the workplace, and simple concepts of punctuality, professionalism, respect, and teamwork. The training could
                         also include sessions on budgeting and managing money. To ensure the relevance of the training, and based on international experience, the
                         successful programs should deliver at least 75 hours of life-skills to participants. The preparation mission will investigate implementation
                         modalities, the potential integration (overlap) of CT and PW in the same areas, differences between PW in urban and rural areas, possible
                         collaboration with other partners, as well as details of potential providers of life skills and length of the training.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 3: System Set Up and Institutional Building

                         This component will include the following:

                         •         Establishment of a well-performing SSN system: Technical assistance supported by this component will include the development of legal
                         instruments, policies, manuals, procedures, ICT solutions, and training modules in view of: (i) designing registry, (ii) designing and implementing
                         basic MIS to monitor project implementation and the progress of the safety net programs, which includes enrolment, payment, compliance and
                         grievance modules; (iii) designing an efficient and cost-effective targeting system (potentially unified targeting method); (iv) develop monitoring and
                         evaluation procedures/schemes to regularly assess efficiency, effectiveness, and impact of safety net programs;; and (v) designing accompanying
                         measures to CT and PW for life skills..

                         •          Monitoring and Evaluation: The proposed operation provides opportunities to use various evaluations (including impact evaluation)
                         strategically to build an effective Social Protection system. A range of innovative interventions are proposed for the upcoming operation (e.g., CT,
                         sensitization workshop, productive activities, cash for work, life skills, etc). Since these activities are new in Mali, impact evaluation could help
                         identify which modalities of these interventions are the most effective, so that they can be scaled up. Therefore, in respect to accompanying
                         measures we will use a two-phase approach: a first phase where we will try out a range of innovative options (e.g. the first two years), and a
                         second phase where resources are channeled to those accompanying modalities that have proved successful. Therefore, given most of these the
                         innovative character of the intervention in Mali, it is necessary to carry out a set of assessments and evaluations to track project progress, calibrate
                         its processes, follow-up on beneficiary perception and feedback, and measure outcomes and results. With these objectives, the proposed project
                         will finance the following activities: (i) a rigorous impact evaluation of the combined and independent safety net interventions; (ii) regular process
                         evaluations, (iii) beneficiary assessments; and (iv) social and technical audits.

                         •          Project Management: The objective of this sub-component is to support the Government in carrying out the required operational reform
                         to effectively implement the social safety net programs (CT and PW). The proposed operation will provide financial and technical assistance to
                         implement activities including: (i) program management including procurement, financial management, safeguards studies and implementation of
                         mitigation measures, supervision and human resource management, (ii) capacity building through training and technical assistance; (iii) use of ICT,
                         and (iv) development of communication instruments including IEC.

                         Tentative budget (in US$ million)

                         Components and sources of financing                Current IDA Budget                Proposed IDA Budget

                         - Cash Transfer program                              15.00                                      30.00
                           - Public Works                                                      10.00                                     22.00

                           -System Set up and Institutional building 5.00                                          8.00

                           TOTAL BUDGET (US$mill)                                 30.00                60.00

                            D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The Project may be implemented in the regions of Sikasso, Segou, Mopti, Koulikoro. This remains however to be determined during project
                           preparation.

                            E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

                           Project implementation arrangements have not been clearly defined yet. However, whatever implementation set up is chosen, it is unlikely that the
                           implementing agency will have a proven track record of monitoring safeguard policies. Capacity may need to be strengthened for ensuring
                           compliance with provisions of the ESMF and the RPF; such support will be financed by the project.

                            F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

                           Zarafshan H. Khawaja (AFTCS)
                           Maman-Sani Issa (AFTEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

                            Safeguard Policies Triggered                    Yes           No       TBD                                     Explanation
                            Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01              ✖                                 The policy is triggered due to potential negative impacts that may
                                                                                                               occur as a result of activities to be implemented under component 2
                                                                                                               which may include construction or rehabilitation of small community
                                                                                                               roads, construction of or rehabilitation of other community assets
                                                                                                               such as water reservoirs, cleaning of drainage canals, and
                                                                                                               rehabilitation of other infrastructures. The ESMF will identify all
                                                                                                               possible risks and propose: (i) a screening procedure; (ii) effective
                                                                                                               mitigation measures to be required of all stakeholders; and (iii) an
                                                                                                               exclusion-list to selecting sub-projects that involve involuntary
                                                                                                               resettlement, pesticides supply, or affect natural habitats, forests or
                                                                                                               physical cultural resources. Environmental and Social Management
                                                                                                               Plans will be prepared for each subproject, as necessary, and
                                                                                                               implemented during its implementation.

                                                                                                               Components 1 and 3 are not expected to cause any environmental
                                                                                                               risks. However, the project could lead to social risks if exclusion and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                               inclusion errors in targeting occur for beneficiaries of the cash
                                                                                                               transfer components, which could cause tension regarding the
                                                                                                               selection of beneficiaries. To prevent this risk, a participatory
                                                                                                               approach will be proposed in the ESMF and implemented for all
                                                                                                               community-based activities that induce selection based on eligibility
                                                                                                               criteria.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                   ✖
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                         ✖       Component 2 could include afforestation of woodlots activities. This
                                                                                                               may triggers OP 4.36 (Forests). To be determined during the
                                                                                                               preparation mission in January 2012.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09                                                    ✖       Component 2 could include rural/agricultural activities that will
                                                                                                               require the use of pesticides or pest management. This will trigger
                                                                                                               OP 4.09. To be determined during the preparation mission in
                                                                                                               January 2012.
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                        ✖
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                 ✖
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12              ✖                                 To address the potential risk of Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP
                                                                                                               4.12) under Component 2, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
                                                                                                               will be developed to address any potential land acquisition/
                                                                                                               involuntary resettlement and/or restrictions of access to resources or
                                                                                                               livelihoods. Resettlement Action Plans will be prepared as
                                                                                                               necessary during project implementation.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                                  ✖       Component 2 could involve construction of minor dams. This may
                                                                                                               triggers OP 4.37. To be determined during the preparation mission
                                                                                                               in January 2012.
                            Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                                  ✖       If Component 2 involves construction of dams on any international
                            7.50                                                                               water ways, it will need to trigger OP 7.50 and prepare a riparian
                            Safeguard Policies Triggered                                      Yes           No           TBD                                             Explanation
                                                                                                                                    notification. To be determined during the preparation mission in
                                                                                                                                    January 2012.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                                            ✖
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                           A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 11-Jun-2012
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
                              should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                Studies should start shortly after the January 2012 preparation mission.

                         IV. APPROVALS
                            Signed and submitted by:
                            Task Team Leader:                                Name: Josiane M. S. Luchmun                                                                           Date: 21-Dec-2011
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                 Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                     Date: 06-Jan-2012
                            Comments:
                            Sector Manager:                                  Name: Azedine Ouerghi (SM)                                                                            Date: 30-Dec-2011
                            Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                             form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
