                                              INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC3259

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-Sep-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-Sep-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            South Eastern Europe and                     P145048
                                                                              Project ID:
                                                Balkans
                            Project Name:       West Balkans Drina River Basin Management (P145048)
                            Task Team       Guy J. Alaerts
                            Leader:
                            Estimated                                          Estimated        10-Nov-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: ECSAR                               Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            GEF Focal Area:     International waters

                            Sector(s):        General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Other environment and natural resources management (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:          7.00                Total Bank Financing:         0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           2.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                            5.00
                              Total                                                                        7.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           30.   The objective of the Project is to assist the countries of Bosnia-Herzegovina, Serbia and
                           Montenegro to achieve improved planning and implementation for integrated, cooperative
                           management of the trans-boundary Drina River basin.
                           C. Project Description
                         The following activities are envisaged under the project:

                         Component 1: Multi-state Cooperation on International Drina Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sub-component 1A: Development of an agreed Strategic Action Program (SAP) mainstreaming
                         transboundary IWRM and climate change adaptation in national planning. This component would
                         provide more effective planning tools to the riparian countries for enhanced decision making in
                         integrated DRB management, to identify trade-offs, and to put in place appropriate policies and
                         reforms, applying IWRM principles and developing climate-change adaptation. Towards this, the
                         project will support:

                         (i)       Preparation of a Drina Basin Strategic Action Program (SAP)—comprising three “national?
                         chapters and a “roof? report—as part of, and complement to a Drina River Basin Management Plan,
                         that would identify a prioritized list of short-, medium- and long-term measures and a pipeline of
                         investments for integrated, sustainable management of DRB which would also help leverage
                         additional donor support for the implementation of the investments. This SAP will build on the
                         output from the WBIF-funded Priority Investment Study (2014-2015). The SAP will be compatible
                         with the Sava and Danube River Basin Management Plans. (BiH, Serbia, Montenegro, Regional)
                         (ii)      Establishment and operation of a suitable, jointly endorsed hydrological simulation model
                         combined with a climate change impact module. The model would notably support capacity for
                         modeling various hydropower development, flood and drought, and land use scenarios. The
                         hydraulic model would include reservoir operation optimization, environmental flow, and sediment
                         transport control. The hydraulic model would provide knowledge about the present as well as future
                         water uses, considering not only the nexus between hydropower generation and environmental
                         protection but also the potential for flood mitigation measures along the Drina and its main
                         tributaries. The model would require purchase of incremental equipment (automated flow /level
                         gauges) for low- and high-flow conditions, flow rate – level rating curve determination, and
                         calibration. The model would be a commercially available and updatable one-dimensional package
                         which would be compatible with similar models applied in the region and by the International Sava
Public Disclosure Copy




                         River Commission. The three countries and the International Sava River Commission would receive
                         facilities and training to operate the model; protocols for standardization, and for regular updating
                         and maintenance will be agreed. (BiH, Serbia, Montenegro, Regional)
                         (iii)     Support for a water resources and basin study to define the basin and water resources
                         parameters to inform regional strategies for energy and hydropower development and rationalization.
                         The study will propose measures and constraints that will allow to determine the levels of
                         sustainability and realism of various hydropower proposals, including compensatory measures and
                         design adaptations to address trade-offs and negative externalities. The study will specifically take
                         into account the need for IWRM-based decision-making, and the need to define operational guidance
                         for climate change adaptation. (BiH, Serbia, Montenegro, Regional)
                         (iv)      Analysis of the water resources and basin system, to allow specification of parameters and
                         protocols to inform the design and concession arrangements for reservoirs and hydropower facilities
                         across the basin. (BiH, Serbia, Montenegro, Regional)
                         (v)       Develop protocols to improve data compatibility among the three countries, within the seat
                         of the Hydrometeorological Standing Committee of the International Sava River Commission.

                         Sub-component 1B: Institutional Development and Capacity Building. This component will support
                         the establishment of regional- and national-level institutions for joint management of the DRB and
                         for enhanced capacity for action on transboundary concerns and to develop climate change adaptive
                         management frameworks, at bilateral, trilateral and International Sava River Commission levels.
                         (i)      Establishment of a Project-based Drina Task Force responsible for daily management of
                         regional activities leading towards the preparation of an integrated Drina River Basin Management
                         Plan and prioritization of investment projects under the SAP (see Sub-Component 1A) in close
Public Disclosure Copy




                         cooperation with the International Sava River Commission. (BiH, Serbia, Montenegro, Regional)
                         (ii)     Establish a Project-based Drina Steering Committee, comprised of higher-level officials
                         from all three riparian countries to maintain the ongoing dialogue for cooperation and commitment
                         among the three countries at the political level. The Steering Committee would also oversee the
                         work of the Task Force and project. The International Sava River Commission would be Observer.
                         Over time, the Steering Committee would become associated closer with the International Sava River
                         Commission. The Government of Montenegro would be encouraged to become a full member of the
                         International Sava River Commission. (Regional)
                         (iii)    At national level, inter-ministerial committees would be set up, and capacity developed, to
                         facilitate the development of better integrated sectoral plans to balance conflicting water uses and
                         that would feed into the regional-level strategy. (BiH, Serbia, Montenegro)
                         (iv)     Help prepare appropriate national and local policy and regulatory reforms to conform with
                         the international Drina water management. (BiH, Serbia, Montenegro)

                         Component 2: Support for Flood and Drought Management and Community Participation. This
                         component would support the following:
                         (i)      Enhanced Flood Forecasting and Early Warning System at regional scale to complement the
                         existing ones in the riparian countries; this would include (a) preparation of a Flood and Drought
                         Preparedness Strategy; and (b) capacity building for implementation of flood and drought resilience
                         measures. (BiH, Serbia, Montenegro, Regional)
                         (ii)     Small Grants and Awareness Program. Replicating the excellent experience in the GEF
                         Neretva-Trebisnjica Management Project, the Project will set up a Small Grants Program to (co-)
                         finance small, local initiatives by community organizations, schools, academics, private companies
                         and other entities that have meritorious proposals to support the objective of the project. Grants will
                         range between US$10,000-20,000, will be completed within 1 year, and will be called three times
                         over the life of the Project. The Manual of the Neretva-Trebisnjica Management Project will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                         adapted for this work. (BiH, Serbia, Montenegro). The project will also fund a broad public
                         awareness program to inform the population in the basin of the objectives and activities under the
                         proposed project and its rationale and potential benefits, and to engage the basin communities into
                         more active partnership. The Sub-component will finance (i) information activities by the respective
                         governments as well as under the leadership of the International Sava River Commission; (ii) a sixth-
                         monthly publication ?Our Drina?; and (iii) provide incremental funds for school and community
                         initiatives.

                         Component 3: Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation. A Regional Project
                         Management Team (PMT) would be established for overall coordination of the project at the regional
                         level. The PMT will be accountable to a high-level Inter-state Steering Committee, in which the
                         International Sava River Commission will be Observer. The project will support Project
                         Implementation Teams (PIT) in each of the three countries who will be responsible for the day-to-
                         day implementation of project activities at the national level. The PITs will develop and maintain a
                         project website and participate in relevant GEF IW:Learn events.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented at the national level in all three riparian countries as it aims to
                         strengthen the capacity of the governments (including both entities of BiH) for sustainable
                           cooperative management of the transboundary Drina basin. On-the-groundsmall investments by local
                           communities will be undertaken in each country under the Small Grants Program but only within the
                           Drina basin territory.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           All three countries have sufficient capacity to address project safeguards resulting from the
                           application of the safeguard policies. There are several Bank-financed operations ongoing in the
                           three countries and implementation of the safeguard measures under those projects has familiarized
                           the governments with these safeguard requirements as well as built capacity for implementation of
                           the relevant safeguard measures. During project preparation, the Bank team’s safeguard specialists
                           will review and assess the implementation capacity of all three countries and make recommendations
                           for improvement as necessary.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Jorge E. Villegas (ECSSO)
                           Esma Kreso (ECSEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             No major adverse environmental impacts are
                           BP 4.01                                            anticipated under the project.
                                                                              For Component 1, a Strategic and
                                                                              Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA)
                                                                              will be prepared during project implementation,
                                                                              as part of, or in preparation for, the SAP.
                                                                              Among other things, the SESA would include
                                                                              an initial assessment of the long list of proposed
                                                                              investments which will be included in the SAP,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              with the objective of highlighting any with
                                                                              potential negative environmental and/or social
                                                                              impacts, so severe and unavoidable that the
                                                                              proposed investment should be dropped from
                                                                              consideration, as well as those which could
                                                                              continue to be considered (shortlisted) but with
                                                                              substantial mitigation requirements. The Terms
                                                                              of Reference for the SESA will be developed
                                                                              and disclosed prior to Appraisal of the Project.
                                                                              Some limited environmental impacts may be
                                                                              associated with the small investments under the
                                                                              grant program under Component 2. These grant-
                                                                              funded activities will be screened to ensure that
                                                                              they will not cause adverse environmental
                                                                              impacts. The screening procedures will be
                                                                              outlined in the Environmental and Social
                                                                              Management Framework (ESMF) which will be
                                                                              prepared through public consultations, and
                                                                              subsequently disclosed, following OP/BP 4.01
                                                                 on Environmental Assessment for a Category B
                                                                 project. The screening procedures will take into
                                                                 account the environmental requirements of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 legislation in force at the necessary national
                                                                 level and the World Bank. As such, the
                                                                 procedures will ensure that no activities
                                                                 requiring a full Environmental Impact
                                                                 Assessment (corresponding to a World Bank
                                                                 Category A) or entailing the acquisition of land
                                                                 or land-affixed assets are financed under this
                                                                 project. In addition, the procedures will identify
                                                                 sample projects with moderate environmental
                                                                 impacts, for which an Environmental
                                                                 Management Plan (EMP) will be prepared,
                                                                 disclosed, implemented and monitored.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes   The policy is triggered primarily to highlight the
                                                                 existence of important natural habitats within
                                                                 the project area and therefore need for the SESA
                                                                 and ESMF to focus adequate attention on this
                                                                 aspect. Triggering of this policy does not imply
                                                                 the need for preparation of any separate SG
                                                                 instruments
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes   The policy is triggered primarily to highlight the
                                                                 existence of forests within the project area and
                                                                 therefore need for the SESA and ESMF to focus
                                                                 adequate attention on this aspect. Triggering of
                                                                 this policy does not imply the need for
                                                                 preparation of any separate SG instruments
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No    The project will not fund any activities that may
                                                                 result in displacement of indigenous people or
                                                                 affect their livelihood.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No    The project will not fund any activities that may
                         4.12                                    result in land acquisition, involuntary re-
                                                                 settlement, or affect the livelihoods of the
                                                                 population. Under component 2, sub-projects
                                                                 financed through the provision of grants will be
                                                                 screened to ensure they will notresult in the
                                                                 involuntary resettlement or livelihood
                                                                 displacement of any third parties.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No
                                 Projects on International        TBD                                                            Project Team will seek views of LEGEN
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             No interventions will be undertaken in disputed
                                 7.60                                                                                            areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Sep-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      April – June 2014
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Guy J. Alaerts

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name:                                                                                                                      Date:
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Dina Umali-Deininger (SM)                                                                                            Date: 13-Sep-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
