                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSA1236
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Oct-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Kenya                              Project ID:   P105269
                            Project Name:      Judicial Performance Improvement (P105269)
                            Task Team          Nightingale Rukuba-Ngaiza
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          24-Sep-2012                        Estimated   15-Nov-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTP2                              Lending     Technical Assistance Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector:            Law and justice (70%), General public administration sector (10%), Information
                                               technology (20%)
                            Theme:             Judicial and other dispute resolution mechanisms (67%), Other accountability/
                                               anti-corruption (33%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                               Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                              0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              International Development Association (IDA)                                   120.00
                              Financing Gap                                                                   0.00
                              Total                                                                         120.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective is to strengthen the capacity of the judiciary to provide its
                           services in the project areas, in a more effective, transparent and accountable manner.
                            3. Project Description
                           The proposed project comprises four components. The details under each component are
                           summarized below, with details presented in Annex 2, including a Project Activities and Sequencing
                           in Table 2.

                           Component 1: Court Administration and Case Management (Cost Estimate: US$ 40 million). This


                                                                        Page 1 of 7
                         component has two key sub-components. The Court Administration sub-component aims at
                         improving the organizational structure, functions, and culture of the Judiciary for optimum
                         performance and accountability. The Case Management sub-component aims at promoting access to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and the expeditious delivery of judicial services, and will assist the Judiciary in reducing case delays
                         and hence the effective delivery of justice. Major ICT infrastructure and systems for the development
                         of a Court Management Information System will be advanced under this component with the general
                         aim of developing systems on a scale necessary to achieve the transformational improvements in
                         services and outcomes that the Judiciary aspires. The automation of court management, for example,
                         aids systemization and allows information about case processing and court procedures to be more
                         transparent to users, both of which support improved accountability. JPIP will finance the Court
                         Management Information System for 68 courts, comprising the Bank-financed court constructions
                         (10) and rehabilitations (30), as well as 28 existing courts that do not need major rehabilitation.

                         i)       Court Administration sub-component 1.1: The activities to be supported under this sub-
                         component will include: (a) an organization review of the Judiciary that takes into account the
                         structure, capacity, and roles of Judiciary staff; (b) development and implementation of an Integrated
                         Performance Management and Accountability System; (c) change management efforts to help
                         transition Judiciary staff to the institution’s new vision, culture, structure, and processes; (d) data
                         collection and analysis, including the publication of regular court user surveys results (for the first
                         time in Kenya) as a key transparency and accountability tool; (e) support to CUCs, including
                         implementation of their court improvement plans; (f) development and implementation of an anti-
                         corruption strategy for the Judiciary; (g) support for court services’ innovation, research and testing;
                         (h) capacity building for the Judiciary’s directorates, the JSC, the National Council on the
                         Administration of Justice, and the National Council of Law Reporting of Kenya (NCLR); and (i)
                         support the extension of GoK’s Integrated Financial Management Information System (IFMIS) to
                         court stations in project areas.

                         ii)      Case Management sub-component 1.2: This subcomponent will support initiatives that will
                         have an impact for court users in the courtrooms and registries. It will: (a) support the design,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         installation and commissioning of ICT hardware and connectivity infrastructure for court stations,
                         and provide relevant staff training; (b) implement a Case Management Information System that
                         offers audio/visual recording of court proceedings, electronic case tracking and management, an
                         Integrated Justice Information Portal, the electronic display of case listings, SMS notifications of
                         court case events, video conferencing facilities for courts, versatile reporting tools/business
                         intelligence, and a sentencing information system and other legal knowledge processing databases
                         for the use of magistrates and judges; (c) provide container data centres to centralize all data
                         belonging to the Judiciary; (d) establish and sustain Customer Care Desk operations and Court
                         Counsel services, including transparency tools to allow users to better understand court processes in
                         project area court stations; and (e) support the establishment of court-annexed mediation. The aim of
                         this range of activities is to foster the development of competencies and ICT-enabled systems that
                         permit more effective use of court time and greater reliance on court-annexed mediation and
                         information systems as a means for reducing the proportion of cases that need to go to trial or appeal.

                         Expected key results include: (a) a reduction in the average time it takes to dispose of cases in courts
                         adopting the case management system; (b) the use of IPMAS for assessing staff performance; (c)
                         reduction in the backlog of cases, and (d) improved user satisfaction with the delivery of court
                         services in project courts.

                         Component 2: Judiciary Training and Staff Development (Cost Estimate: US$ 16 million). This

                                                                       Page 2 of 7
                         component aims at strengthening the administrative and training capacity of the JTI. It will also
                         support the delivery of training in support of the Judiciary’s transformation agenda and its expanding
                         workforce. In particular, the component will: (a) strengthen the capacity of the JTI to carry out its
Public Disclosure Copy




                         education and training mandate and conduct impact evaluation of selected training programs; (b)
                         provide a structure for defining the critical competencies of Judiciary officers and for their on-going
                         training toward those competencies; (c) establish a Legal Research Resource Centre concerned with
                         developing online training and legal information services for judges, magistrates and Judiciary staff;
                         and (d) support the capacity building efforts for the legal personnel at the Office of the Attorney
                         General, especially in areas that support the performance of the Judiciary, e.g. on representation
                         roles, drafting, negotiation, project financing, etc.

                         Expected key results include: (a) the increased number of Judiciary staff who are satisfied with the
                         knowledge and skills acquired from training; and (b) improved impact of training on personnel
                         trained (to be assessed through impact evaluation of two programs).

                         Component 3: Court Infrastructure: (Cost Estimate: US$ 47 million): The Judiciary plans to
                         construct 30 new High Court buildings, rehabilitate 90 magistrate courts and build over 200
                         magistrate courts across the country. GoK has allocated US$ 26.4m to finance this infrastructure for
                         FY2012/13, with higher allocations projected for subsequent years. The Bank’s financial
                         contribution covers the six-year project period and will support the construction of 8 High Court
                         buildings (27 per cent), the refurbishment of 30 magistrates courts (33 percent), the construction of 2
                         magistrate courts (about one percent) and the supply of 20 to 30 demountables or temporary courts,
                         prioritized from the indicative lists and in accordance with the agreed criteria (see Error! Reference
                         source not found.). The focus on refurbishing courthouses will provide an early capacity to
                         accommodate Kenya’s rapidly growing number of serving magistrates and the need to extend
                         services to areas that are presently under-serviced. The project’s funding will be directed to courts
                         that are most likely to produce early and significant improvements in services and improved physical
                         access to courts in those localities that are far from public transport.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Expected key results include: (a) reduction in the average distance to courts as a result of
                         constructing new courts; (b) the number of new courts constructed to improve access to courts; and
                         (c) the number of existing courts renovated to improve quality and access to judicial services.

                         Component 4: Project Management (Cost Estimate: US$ 9 million): This component is to assist the
                         Judiciary in managing and coordinating project activities, including environmental and social
                         impacts of the project. It will also build the capacity of Judiciary personnel in procurement,
                         managing financial resources, and monitoring and evaluation. Specifically, the component will: (a)
                         support the function of a Project Management Unit (PMU); (b) finance an Integrated Fiduciary Agent
                         (IFA) responsible for the financial management and procurement functions of the project; (c) support
                         the collection of data to facilitate impact evaluation, and (d) implement environmental and social
                         safeguard requirements.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         This is a national project located in Kenya and will focus on the development of the country's judicial
                         system and processes. Geographical and physical access to justice will be addressed through the
                         construction of new courts in selected counties, the refurbishment of existing ones, and provision of
                         temporary demountable courts. The major environmental and social problems witnessed in the region
                         are those in connection with construction and rehabilitation of the courts. The JPIP project was


                                                                      Page 3 of 7
                         developed in close consultation with the Government and other stakeholders to support the judiciary.
                         This proposed project is expected to have overall positive environmental and social impacts.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Gibwa A. Kajubi (AFTCS)
                         Alexandra C. Bezeredi (AFTSG)
                         Jane A. N. Kibbassa (AFTN3)

                         6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              Applicable because the project will support the
                         BP 4.01                                             construction of new courts and rehabilitation of
                                                                             existing courts, investments which are likely to
                                                                             have site-specific environmental and
                                                                             social impacts.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No               Not applicable because the project will not
                                                                             support investments which will destroy natural
                                                                             habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No               Not applicable because the project will not
                                                                             support construction of courts in natural forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09             No               Not applicable because there are not activities
                                                                             supported by the project that will use pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/     Yes              Applicable because the project could impact
                         BP 4.11                                             physical cultural resources in the project areas
                                                                             and hence the need to identify them, assess the
                                                                             potential impacts and explore mitigation options.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No               Not applicable because the project will not
                                                                             construct courts in areas inhabited by the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             indigenous peoples.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      Yes              Applicable because court construction/
                         4.12                                                rehabilitation may involve use land owned by the
                                                                             Judiciary resulting in loss of assets or access to
                                                                             assets of users of the land or loss of income
                                                                             sources or means of livelihoods. A RPF has been
                                                                             developed and when the policy is triggered
                                                                             specific RAPs will be prepared and compensation
                                                                             (by the Government) made prior to the works.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No               Not applicable because the project will not
                                                                             support dams or investments downstream any
                                                                             existing dam.
                         Projects on International           No               Not applicable because the project will not
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                support investments that withdraw from, or
                                                                             pollute international waterways.
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  Not applicable because the project will not
                         7.60                                                support investments in disputed areas.




                                                                     Page 4 of 7
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential l arge scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The Judicial Performance Improvement Project is classified as EA Category B meaning that the
                              project will not be involved in activities that could have unprecedented adverse environmental and
                              social impacts. However, considering the activities that would be funded by the project, three
                              World Bank safeguard policies are triggered by the project: (i) Environmental Assessment (OP/BP
                              4.01); and (ii) Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) and (iii) physical cultural resources (OP/BP
                              4.11) which may result from new court construction and rehabilitation. The required safeguard
                              instruments namely the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and
                              Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) have been prepared and disclosed in-country on September
                              20, 2012 and at World Bank Info Shop on September 21, 2012. Environmental and Social
                              Management Plans (ESMPs) have also been prepared for two specific court stations (Kitui and
                              Kangema) that will be ‘first movers’ for rehabilitation by JPIP. These ESMPs were also disclosed
                              both in country and a t the infoshop on October 11, 2012.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                               The project is not expected to have any long-term impacts in the project area.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                               No significant adverse impacts anticipated.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                               A suitable legal framework for the management of the environment exists in Kenya: the National
                              Environment Management and Coordination Act (1999) (EMCA). The EMCA provides that the
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Minister of Environment and Natural Resources appoint local committees chaired by the
                              Provincial Commissioners and District Commissioners, which decide on management of the
                              environment within their respective provinces or districts. These local committees will be
                              involved in the implementation of the plans.

                             The Project Management Unit (PMU) in the judiciary will have in place a review process to
                             ensure screening of all new constructions and rehabilitation of courts for their potential
                             environmental and social impacts. To this end, project applications will include an environmental
                             screening form showing the estimated impact category of the project (court construction or
                             rehabilitation of the court). The decision of the EA category will be based on the environmental
                             and social checklist contained in the environmental and social management framework. The
                             outcome of the screening and scoping exercise will be sent to the World Bank for concurrence.
                             After the field appraisals are done in conjunction with communities, potential impacts will be
                             identified and a simple or at most a limited environmental review will be conducted.

                              The safeguards officer attached to the PMU will be responsible and accountable for all
                             environmental and social concerns during project implementation. In addition, review and
                             clearances of Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs), Environmental and Social
                             Management Plans (ESMPs) and Resettlement Action Plans, if applicable, will be handled by the
                             Kenya Environmental Protection Agencies before transmittal to the World Bank for approval.


                                                                       Page 5 of 7
                           Furthermore, the capacity of safeguards officers charged with implementing safeguards
                           instruments, and CSO/NGOs will be built through training and awareness creation on a range of
                           environmental and social development issues such as screening, preparation and implementation
Public Disclosure Copy




                           of site specific ESMPs, monitoring and reporting. Additional guidance and support would be
                           provided by the safeguards experts in the World Bank team.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             To ensure the minimization or elimination any negative impacts, the GoK has prepared an
                           Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy
                           Framework (RPF). Both documents were disclosed in country and at the InfoShop on September
                           21, 2012. In addition, Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMP) for the first two
                           magistrate courts proposed to be rehabilitated, i.e. the Kangema and Kitui magistrate courts were
                           disclosed in country and at the World Bank infoshop on October 11, 2012.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         11-Oct-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                     11-Oct-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      11-Oct-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         20-Sep-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                     20-Sep-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      21-Sep-2012
                         Technical Assistance Project
                         For a TA project which will finance the preparation of a specific safeguards instrument, please
                         indicate type of document disclosed, if any.
                         To ensure the minimization or elimination any negative impacts, the GoK has prepared an
                         Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework
                         (RPF). Both documents were disclosed in country on September 20, 2012 and at the InfoShop on
                         September 21, 2012. In addition, Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMP) for the first
                         two magistrate courts proposed to be rehabilitated, i.e. the Kangema and Kitui magistrate courts
                         were finalized in country and at the World Bank infoshop on October 11, 2012, respectively.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         Not applicable
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
                         ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment


                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Nightingale Rukuba-Ngaiza
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:         Name: J. Humberto Lopez (SM)                        Date: 15-Oct-2012




                                                                        Page 7 of 7
