                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA4029
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-May-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Apr-2013, 16-May-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                              Project ID:    P129431
                            Project Name:      Anhui Xuancheng Infrastructure for Industry Relocation (P129431)
                            Task Team          Suhail J. S. Jme'An
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          02-Apr-2013                        Estimated   20-Jun-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASCS                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Urban Transport (75%), General water, sanitation and flood protection sector
                                              (25%)
                            Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (34%), City-wide
                                              Infrastructure and Service Delivery (33%), Urban Economic De velopment
                                              (33%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     343.64           Total Bank Financing:                  150.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                       Financing Gap:                           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   193.64
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                      150.00
                              Total                                                                                      343.64
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project aims to contribute to the economic, social and environmental sustainability of the project
                           area in the Xuancheng Economic and Technological Development Zone.



                                                                       Page 1 of 13
                         3. Project Description
                         The project would support the development of infrastructure in the project area, as well as a
                         comprehensive program of technical assistance for institutional development and capacity building,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         through three components described below.

                         (i)      Component 1: Roads and Bridges with Underground Storm-water Drainage Networks,
                         Water Supply Networks, and Sewerage Networks (with a base cost of RMB1,412.03 million; US
                         $224.13 million). This component supports the construction of selected urban roads in the Project
                         Area, along with bus stations/stops, landscaping, and associated sub-surface infrastructure services,
                         including storm water drainage, water supply and sewage networks.

                         (ii) Component 2: Wastewater Conveyance, Treatment and Discharge (with a base cost of
                         RMB92.81 million; US$14.73 million). This component supports: (a) construction of conveyance
                         sewers to the wastewater treatment plant, construction of treated effluent discharge pipes from the
                         wastewater treatment plant, and construction of treated effluent outfall into the river; (b) construction
                         of a wastewater treatment plant in the Project Area, with a minimum working capacity of 25,000 m3
                         per day; and (c) provision of support for the operation and maintenance of sub-surface infrastructure
                         services in the Project Area.

                         (iii) Component 3: Institutional Development and Capacity Building (RMB31.50 million; US$5.00
                         million). Supporting the overall development of Xuancheng Municipality and Xuancheng Economic
                         and Technological Development Zone (XETDZ) Managing Committee to coordinate and manage
                         implementation of the Project, including the provision of technical assistance focused on the
                         following areas: (a) Project management and implementation; (b) Management capacity building; (c)
                         Development of information systems (which include, inter alia, an intelligent investment promotion
                         system, a labor market information system, and an XETDZ internal monitoring and evaluation
                         system; (d) Branding and investment promotion for XETDZ; (e) Real time environmental
                         monitoring; and (f) Development of a collaborative platform for local economic development
Public Disclosure Copy




                         In addition to building the systems, appropriate skills training, based on the needs of firms/XETDZ,
                         will be provided to the displaced people who fall in the employment age bracket. The XETDZ
                         Internal Monitoring and Evaluation System will monitor key aspects of the zone, including economic
                         growth, industrial value added, social development such as employment generation, urban
                         development (education, health, etc.), tax revenue, and environmental impact, etc. The Real Time
                         Environmental Monitoring System will ensure that the zone is environmentally sound. Management
                         capacity building will provide targeted training and consulting services to management, so that the
                         zone is fully integrated with future urban development, and the zone itself can generate some
                         clustering effect to the best extent possible. Through these TA activities, the project is intended to
                         help cope with the current challenges that the zones are facing.

                         In addition to the project components, XETDZ would finance – using own funds - the following
                         related, parallel activities: (a) clear water mains and a pumping station; (b) centralized gas supply and
                         distribution networks; (c) environmental sanitation; (d) Changqiao River improvement; (e)
                         landscaping under high-voltage transmission lines; and (f) subsequent development and sales of land
                         plots to investors/industries. These investments are considered “linked? activities to the Bank-
                         financed project.




                                                                       Page 2 of 13
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The city of Xuancheng is geographically situated at the nearest point in Wanjiang to the Yangtze
Public Disclosure Copy




                         River Delta (YRD). The city shares its borders with the coastal provinces of Jiangsu and Zhejiang. It
                         also has the shortest travel distance from Wanjiang to Shanghai. XETDZ is the primary vehicle for
                         the city of Xuancheng to carry out the industrial relocation efforts. Phase 2 of XETDZ will cover
                         approximately 25 square-kilometers and is to be completed by 2017 to 2018. The Bank loan would
                         finance infrastructure development inthe 20.2 square-kilometers within Phase 2.

                         The Phase 2 area is located in the northwest of Xuancheng city and separated from the city’s urban
                         area by a major road Hefei-Hangzhou Expressway (runs in an approximate north-south direction),
                         which meets Xuan-Nantong-Tong Expressway (runs in a west-east direction) in the project area’s
                         northeast corner. There are two existing major roads crossing the area, namely Baocheng Road (i.e.
                         G318) and Huancheng Road (part of the city’s outer ring road). The land use in the project area
                         includes uncultivated land, farmland, tea gardens, and a few residential lands.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Zhefu Liu (EASCS)
                         Ning Yang (EASCS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes              The project involves a series of interventions
                          BP 4.01                                            and investments that range in scope and scale of
                                                                             various infrastructure components. Although the
                                                                             infrastructure components of the project are fairly
                                                                             straightforward to implement, the entire land use
                                                                             plan of the project area is changing and its
                                                                             impacts are irreversible and potentially
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             significant. Considering this change in land use
                                                                             and potential impacts of the industrial zone, the
                                                                             project is a Category A. The project requires a
                                                                             number of safeguard tools to properly minimize
                                                                             and mitigate any and all potentially adverse
                                                                             environmental and social impacts generated by
                                                                             specific project investments. A full Environment
                                                                             Assessment (EA) was carried out which includes:
                                                                             Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) and
                                                                             Environment Management Plan (EMP) as well as
                                                                             stakeholder consultations.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No               The project area has been subject to long-term
                                                                             and intensive human activities and does not meet
                                                                             the definition of natural habitats by OP/BP 4.04.
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No               The Project would not finance any activity that
                                                                             may involve a major change or degradation of the
                                                                             important forest area or related major natural
                                                                             habitat as defined in the Policy.



                                                                     Page 3 of 13
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No              The Project will not require the purchase or
                                                                         additional application of pesticides. No action is
                                                                         required according to this policy.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No              No physical or cultural resources have been
                         BP 4.11                                         identified in the project site. In the event that any
                                                                         such items are uncovered during construction of
                                                                         project supported civil works, contractors and
                                                                         construction workers would be required to follow
                                                                         chance finds procedures, as specified in the
                                                                         Environment Management Plan (EMP) for the
                                                                         overall project.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No              No Indigenous Peoples communities are located
                                                                         in the project area.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes             OP/BP 4.12 is triggered and will be applied to
                         4.12                                            the whole of Phase 2. Land acquisition and
                                                                         resettlement for the development of Phase 2 fall
                                                                         under three types. The first type relates to
                                                                         activities that were carried out prior to project
                                                                         identification. All land acquisition and
                                                                         resettlement activities in 2010 and 2011 have
                                                                         been considered in the due diligence process
                                                                         carried out by the Bank, and found to be
                                                                         consistent with Bank policy objectives. The
                                                                         second type relates to land acquisition and
                                                                         resettlement activities directly related to the
                                                                         project and linked activities. The first two types
                                                                         of land acquisition and resettlement are covered
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         by a comprehensive RAP. The third type relates
                                                                         to land acquisition and resettlement resulting
                                                                         from future development and sale of land plots to
                                                                         industries/developers. During the project
                                                                         preparation, the exact location and a sequencing
                                                                         plan for the future development and sale of the
                                                                         land plots to industries/developers were not
                                                                         known. Therefore, a Resettlement Policy
                                                                         Framework (RPF) was developed.
                                                                         Furthermore, it is likely that the development and
                                                                         sales of some of the plots will take place in the
                                                                         future several years beyond the Loan Closing date
                                                                         of the Bank project. All land acquisition and
                                                                         resettlement activities associated with plots that
                                                                         are developed, committed for sale and/or sold
                                                                         prior to the Loan closing date for the project will
                                                                         be carried out in accordance with the RPF. For
                                                                         the plots that are developed, committed and/or
                                                                         sold after the Loan Closing date for the project,



                                                                 Page 4 of 13
                                                                               the client has agreed that any land acquisition and
                                                                               resettlement activities will be undertaken in a
                                                                               manner consistent with the provisions set out in
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               the RPF.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No               There are no dams in the project area.

                            Projects on International        No                 The project will not involve activities on
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                               international waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 The project is not located in Disputed Areas.
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                The Bank environmental safeguards policy OP/BP4.01 for Environmental Assessment is
                              triggered. The Project is classified as Category A as per OP4.01 given the nature and scale of
                              project activities and anticipated environmental and social impacts. A full EA was carried out.
                              The EA documents include an Environment Impact Assessment (EIA), a stand-alone Environment
                              Management Plan (EMP), an EA Executive Summary, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), and a
                              Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). These documents have been prepared on the basis of
                              Chinese legal and policy framework for environmental protection, master plans and environmental
                              and Bank safeguard policies as well as applicable World Bank Group Environment, Health and
                              Safety Guidelines.

                             The project is anticipated to have significant future benefits by boosting regional economic
                             development, creating employment opportunities and improving environmental management
Public Disclosure Copy




                             capacity. Although the infrastructure components of the project are fairly straightforward to
                             implement, the entire land use plan of the project area and its impacts are irreversible and
                             potentially significant. Due to the nature and scale of construction and operational activities, the
                             project has the potential to cause environmental and social impacts, which have been thoroughly
                             assessed and can be adequately avoided, minimized and/or mitigated through measures developed
                             either in the project design, the EIA, EMP, RAP and RPF. Key environmental issues addressed
                             include: (a) impacts related to soil erosion, vegetation clearance, disturbances due to earthworks
                             and river rehabilitation construction activities; (b) other construction impacts and social
                             disturbance associated with wastewater, noise, dust and solid wastes; (c) operational impacts such
                             as noise, dust, air emissions, wastewater discharge, waste management associated with road
                             transportation, wastewater treatment and solid wastes facilities; (d) operational risks associated
                             with wastewater treatment plant, gas supply networks and stations.

                             The EA encompasses all infrastructure development in XEDTZ Phase 2, including Bank and non-
                             Bank financed activities. A due diligence of Phase 1 of XETDZ industrial development, existing
                             industries in the project area, and the existing landfill and water treatment plant serving the zone
                             are included in the EA as well. In total the due diligence review encompassed several activities
                             that included corridor landscaping, road sections, a gas station, a high-voltage power line, and a
                             water treatment plant. It is confirmed that the previous development is in compliance with
                             domestic regulations and consistent with Bank policy objectives, and no major outstanding issues

                                                                       Page 5 of 13
                         were identified.

                         The EIA includes an assessment of cumulative impacts based on an existing Strategic
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment (SEA) for Phase 2 of XETDZ infrastructure and industrial
                         development; and the due diligence study of the development of Phase 1 of XEDTZ. The
                         cumulative impact assessment evaluated the carrying capacity, land use change, urban planning,
                         long term environmental and social impacts associated with the planned XETDZ development.
                         This innovative step-wise assessment approach represents good practice in China for reviewing
                         impacts of existing and proposed development. Infrastructure development supported by this
                         project is facilitating an sustainable land use planning of the area. The cumulative impact
                         assessment concluded that negative impacts can be effectively mitigated to support sustainable
                         long term development of the area.

                         Additionally, the EA includes a comprehensive legal framework review and an environmental and
                         social baselines study. Baseline surveys have noted that the primary agriculture area associated
                         with the project is located in the northwest rural area of Xuancheng Municipality. Simple and low
                         scale agricultural methods are utilized to produce mainly grain, cotton and rapeseeds at low
                         profits. Surveys revealed that many agricultural lands have been abandoned likely due to lower
                         profits for agriculture production compared with other economic activities. Furthermore, the
                         assessment includes a policy study on environmental issues associated with industry relocation
                         and decommissioning from original sites. This study concludes that the environmental risks of
                         industrial location to this site manageable given the type of industries, existing domestic
                         regulations and proposed XEDTZ phase 2 industry screening criteria.

                         A review of ecological resources in the area of influence was also conducted as part of the EA.
                         There are no natural habitats within the project area as defined by Bank policy. The Jingtingshan
                         Scenic Area is located to the northeast of the project site. The scenic area does not meet OP4.04
                         definition of critical natural habitats, and the project is unlikely to impact the area. Thus, the
                         OP4.04 Natural Habitats is not triggered. No cultural relics or other physical cultural resources
Public Disclosure Copy




                         with high cultural value were identified in the Phase 2 area. According to survey done at
                         preliminary design stage the project will not impact tombs in the area.. Thus OP4.11 Physical
                         Cultural Resources is not triggered. In the event that any such items are uncovered during
                         construction of project supported civil works, contractors and construction workers would be
                         required to follow chance finds procedures, as specified in the Environment Management Plan
                         (EMP) for the overall project.

                         Key construction impacts identified include potential soil erosion due to earthworks and sediments
                         disposal from river rehabilitation. Spoils and sediments will be totally reused to fill low lying land
                         in XEDTZ phase 2 to achieve material balance. The dredged sediments will be placed in
                         temporary storage yard, which is provided with embankment and sedimentation tank. After natural
                         drying, the sediments will be used for refilling. In total, there will be 13 spoil disposal sites.
                         Disposal sites take into account social and environmental considerations. These sites have been
                         placed at an adequate distance from sensitive receptors such as residential areas. A comprehensive
                         EMP and soil erosion control plan have been developed to mitigate the potential impacts of
                         excavation and disposal operations. The disposal sites will be rehabilitated in a timely manner and
                         appropriate mitigation measures in accordance with project safeguard documents.

                         Key operational impacts identified are associated with: wastewater treatment plant (WWTP); solid
                         waste management; and breakage of natural gas and/or wastewater pipelines.

                                                                    Page 6 of 13
                         a)        The Changqiao WWTP, as per design specifications will comply with Class 1-A standards
                         (most stringent standard) as specified in the Pollutant Discharge Standards of Municipal
                         Wastewater Treatment Plant and applicable World Bank Group Environmental, and Health and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Safety Guidelines. The impact to receiving water bodies, primarily the Zhouhan River and Qingyi
                         Qing River, will be minimal, and the downstream water environment function will not be
                         compromised. Furthermore, to mitigate adverse impacts of potential groundwater contamination
                         operational management strategies such as use of anti-corrosion and anti-seepage sewerage
                         facilities have been factored into infrastructure design.

                         b)      Solid wastes from the wastewater treatment plant in operation are mainly sludge,
                         screenings and removed grits. The sludge is to be taken to the sanitary landfill for disposal as
                         recommended for the near-term. The sludge from the WWTP will be sent to the Xuancheng
                         Municipal Solid Waste Landfill for disposal with municipal solid wastes. The landfill is provided
                         with impermeable liner to prevent leakage of leachate. Leachate drainage, collection and treatment
                         systems are also available. Sludge generated from the proposed project facilities will be dewatered
                         to contain acceptable moisture limits (less than 60%) to comply with landfill regulations. Given
                         the measures put in place to reduce and safely dispose of solid waste in the EMP, potential
                         environmental impacts will be significantly mitigated.

                         c)      Breakage of natural gas pipelines that may result in fire or explosion and breakage of
                         wastewater pipelines and WWTP operation failure that may result in pollution of surface or
                         groundwater. Emergency response plan has been incorporated into EIA and EMP, including day-
                         to-day survey and maintenance of pipelines. In the wastewater treatment plant, accidental
                         container will be built and redundant equipment will be in place to address these risks.
                         Contingency strategies and response plans have been developed as part of the EMP in the event of
                         accidental sewage discharge.

                         The Bank policy on Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) is triggered and will be applied to the
                         whole of Phase 2. Land acquisition and resettlement activities for the development are classified
Public Disclosure Copy




                         into 3 types.
                         The first type encompasses activities that were carried out prior to project identification. All land
                         acquisition and resettlement activities in 2010 and 2011 have been considered in the due diligence
                         process carried out by the Bank, and found to be consistent with Bank policy objectives. These
                         activities included: demolition 1,564 houses, land acquisition of 1,500 hectares, and resettlement
                         of 2,919 household.

                         The second type encapsulates land acquisition and resettlement activities directly related to the
                         project and linked activities. The project will affect five villages in three residential communities
                         in Phase 2 of XETDZ and will require the permanent acquisition of 170.5 hectares of land and
                         demolition of 68,749 square meters of structures affecting a total of 556 households (2,053
                         persons) and five enterprises. In addition to land acquisition and resettlement in the proposed
                         project areas, two complementary government-funded activities were identified that require the
                         acquisition of land either temporarily or permanently. Landscaping under the High Voltage
                         Transmission Lines project will require the permanent acquisition of 102 hectares of collective
                         land. Changqiao River Improvement project will require temporary usage of 5 7 hectares of
                         collective land during project implementation. The first and second types of land acquisition and
                         resettlement are covered by a comprehensive RAP.

                         The third type relates to land acquisition and resettlement resulting from future development and

                                                                    Page 7 of 13
                         sale of land plots to industries/developers that could affect an additional estimated 2,500
                         households (7,800 people). During the project preparation, the exact location and sequencing plan
                         for the future development and sale of the land plots to industries/developers were not known.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Therefore, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was developed.

                         Furthermore, it is likely that the development and sales of some of the plots will take place in the
                         future several years beyond the Loan Closing date of the Bank project. All land acquisition and
                         resettlement activities associated with plots that are developed, committed for sale and/or sold
                         prior to the Loan closing date for the project will be carried out in accordance with the RPF. For
                         the plots that are developed, committed and/or sold after the Loan Closing date for the project, the
                         client has agreed that any land acquisition and resettlement activities will be undertaken in a
                         manner consistent with the provisions set out in the RPF.

                         Development of the entire Phase 2 is anticipated to potentially impact 3,063 households with a
                         population of 9,800. The table below provides a summary of the number of entities affected by
                         land acquisition and property demolition.

                         Entities Affected in the Project Area and in Phase 2 XETDZ


                         Impact           Project Area                       Phase 2
                                      Number           Area (m2)              Number        Area (m2)
                         --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                         Land Acquisition
                         - Households            395 1,705,333                  3,063        20,253,333
                         Demolition
                         - Households            161        38,049              3,063         551,400
                         - Enterprises             5       30,700                  5         30,700
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The current RAP prepared by the project entity provides details regarding resettlement policy and
                         regulations to be followed, compensation rates, budget for mitigation measures to restore incomes
                         where necessary and institutional and monitoring arrangements. An independent consultant will be
                         contracted to monitor resettlement and provide bi-annual progress reports as well as ensure that
                         compensation meets adequate replacement costs.

                         Due diligence evaluation of government-funded resettlement activities in Year 2010 and 2011 in
                         Phase 2 that took place prior to project identification was conducted and found to be consistent
                         with Bank policy objectives and were carried out in accordance with Chinese land law, Anhui
                         provincial land administrative management regulation and local regulation.

                         XETDZ will continue to monitor the prior and ongoing resettlement activities of 2010 and 2011 to
                         ensure that it is consistent with the Bank policy objectives and that it meets Chinese requirements.
                         The monitoring will include the methods used to determine the sufficiency of the compensation
                         provided, including the number of people surveyed, data on successful resettlement compensation
                         and basic information on how people have restored or are restoring their livelihood and well as
                         correctives actions if any to be taken.

                         As part of due diligence work a socio-economic impact survey was carried out, which concluded
                         that there are no Ethnic Minority communities in the affected villages of the project area. This

                                                                           Page 8 of 13
                           finding is also confirmed in conclusions of the RAP. Therefore, the Bank Policy on Indigenous
                           Peoples OP/BP 4.10 was not triggered.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The project will develop an innovative approach to safeguard management by establishing a
                           Safeguards Compliance and Information Management System (SCIMS). SCIMS is intended to
                           identify stakeholder needs and provide a matrix of bridging the needs of local community
                           members and citizens of Xuancheng with industrial enterprises relocating to XEDTZ. Capacity
                           building and vocational training programs will be developed in collaboration with local colleges
                           and universities to provide impacted stakeholders with skills that enables them to benefit from the
                           presence of the XEDTZ in the region.

                           A gender impact analysis was conducted for project funded Phase 2 as well as previously
                           completed phase 1 (funded through government sources). Concerns raised by stakeholders during
                           this analysis included: i) potential employment within industrial zone enterprises; ii) availability of
                           private career development programs; iii) women’s education programs; iv) provision of family
                           living improvements in relocated sites; v) provision of education and health care facilities; and vi)
                           inclusion of community members in decision making of entitlements to resettlement schemes.
                           These concerns raised by women through consultations have been incorporated into RAP and
                           specific funds will be allocated to support women career development and continued engagement
                           in economic activities.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             Activities funded by this project will contribute to the conversion of the area from agricultural
                           land to an industrial and urban center. The land use in XETXZ 2 will be dominated by category 1
                           and 2 industries with residential and public areas. Category 1 industrial areas are classified as
                           industries that will not cause pollution to residential and public facilities. Category 2 industries are
                           those who produce minor pollution. Given the classification of land use and industries in the
                           project site, the presence of heavy polluting industries (e.g. chemical, refineries, pulping, etc.) will
Public Disclosure Copy




                           not be permissible. Nonetheless, the impacts of this change are irreversible and potentially
                           significant. Given the potential environment and social impacts of this conversion, thorough
                           analysis and simulations were conducted to optimize economic development in the region while
                           taking into account of environmental and social considerations.

                           The EA carried out a comprehensive assessment of cumulative impacts which included previous
                           development (Phase 1 of XETDZ) as well as the proposed Phase 2 development based on the
                           existing Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) for Phase 2 of the XETDZ infrastructure and
                           industrial development. Phase 3 lacks sufficient policy and technical information for a meaningful
                           assessment and is therefore not included in the cumulative impact assessment. As part of the
                           cumulative assessment, environmental monitoring of surface and groundwater, river sediments,
                           air, noise and soil was conducted. The results indicate that environmental quality of the project
                           area is in good standing and in compliance with relevant quality standards of China. A review of
                           resources in the area including land, water, electricity and natural gas revealed abundant supply.
                           Extensive road networks in the region were also surveyed. The evaluation of the cumulative
                           assessment deemed current and future activities in the project area associated with the
                           development of the XEDTZ will not reach beyond the limits of the area’s environmental carrying
                           capacity.

                           Project design provided innovative solutions for environmental, land, energy efficiency, energy-


                                                                       Page 9 of 13
                           efficient transport and community building performance to mitigate against potential adverse
                           environmental and social impacts. A range of cumulative impacts mitigation measures covering
                           surface and groundwater, air emissions, noise impacts, and solid waste impacts were reviewed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The cumulative impact assessment included suggestions on how to control industries to be
                           developed in the XEDTZ 2, which have been carefully defined in the EIA and the EMP of the
                           Project. Further, a rigorous screening criterion for admission of industrial enterprises is in
                           development to ensure high-polluting industries cannot be developed in XETDZ. Therefore, the
                           cumulative impacts of development have been taken into account for in the development of
                           XETDZ 2 to ensure environmental sustainability and economic development of the region.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            Many alternatives were considered during project preparation. Detailed scoping of component
                           activities were vetted within the EIA preparation as well as feasibility studies for specific
                           investments. A review of investment options were analyzed based on technical, economic,
                           environmental and social factors.

                          The project will contribute to creating an engine for regional economic development and create
                          considerable employment opportunities for people of Anhui province. Project supported
                          infrastructure will contribute to development of XETDZ in an holistic manner that incorporates
                          international best practices as well as innovative measures for institutional, capacity building as
                          well as the built environment. It will facilitate environmental management and sharing of
                          resources and facilities, centralized pollution management, and waste recycling. It will support the
                          development of compact and efficient land use, while effectively mitigating the impact of
                          industrial development on the surrounding environment. The project seeks to optimize economic,
                          environmental and social considerations in infrastructure development of the XETDZ.

                          A comprehensive analysis of “with/without project? scenarios was conducted. “Without the
                          project? scenario would imply an increase in environmental pollution caused by inefficient waste
Public Disclosure Copy




                          and emission discharges as well as the presence of disaggregated enterprises. Ineffective land use
                          planning, zoning and access to services and infrastructures would lead to difficulties in attracting
                          industries and generating economic interests in the region. Further it would not provide
                          meaningful economic opportunities for citizens of Xuancheng, whose livelihood would be
                          impacted by inadequate planning of an economic zone in their city. Improper planning could also
                          lead to increased displacement and inadequate compensation for land.

                          For the two interchanges, alternatives were proposed for analysis and comparison in terms of
                          capital investment, difficulty of construction, construction technology, and environmental impacts.
                          The selected alternative results in less earth excavation, soil erosion, and disturbance to existing
                          expressway traffic.

                           The scale and location of the wastewater treatment plant, the location of its discharge outlet,
                           effluent standards, process and sludge disposal were studied taking into account demand analysis,
                           environmental carrying capacity, technical, and economic considerations. The environmentally
                           optimal options were selected.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            As part of project preparation, the following safeguards-related instruments have been or are
                           being developed:

                                                                    Page 10 of 13
                          a.       An Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) for the project was prepared by the Anhui
                          Academy of Environmental Sciences (Class A licensed institute) with guidance from Bank task
                          team. The EIA thoroughly addressed the potential environmental and social impacts envisaged for
Public Disclosure Copy




                          the project. The preparation of EIA documents followed the relevant national laws/regulations and
                          guidelines, as well as Bank’s safeguards policies and applicable environmental health and safety
                          (EHS) guidelines.

                          b.        An Environment Management Plan (EMP) was prepared based on the findings of the
                          EIA. The EMP outlined measures to avoid, minimize and mitigate potential environmental and
                          social impacts; as well as a budget for implementation EMP activities. It outlines the roles and
                          responsibilities of pertinent organizations and institutions. The EMP incorporates plans for
                          training, monitoring and evaluation, and budget estimates. It includes sets of Environmental Codes
                          of Practice (ECOPs) for contractors, which will be incorporated into bidding documents and
                          contracts to ensure effective implementation. The EMP also includes comprehensive mitigation
                          measures and a capacity building plans for local environmental authority to address cumulative
                          impacts associated with infrastructure and industrial developments.

                          c.      A RAP and RPF have been prepared to address land acquisition, compensation and
                          resettlement according to Bank safeguards policies and Chinese requirements. An independent
                          monitoring institute will be contracted bi-annually to review resettlement progress. An institute
                          was contracted to provide guidance on social safeguards, documentation and establishment of
                          resettlement office. As a result, implementation staffs are familiar with Bank requirements and
                          mainstreaming gender development in project implementation.

                          The XEDTZ Management Committee (MC) will take the overall responsibility for management
                          and coordination of the project implementation. The PMO has a readily established Project
                          Management Office with staff on board to coordinate preparation and manage project
                          implementation. The XEDTZ Construction Investment Company (CIC), a subsidiary agency of
                          XEDTZ MC, will be responsible for the preparation and implementation of the project. The CIC
Public Disclosure Copy




                          will carry out day-to-day safeguards implementation and compliance, as well as the monitoring
                          and reporting tasks under the project.

                          The MC and CIC staff will be given adequate training on safeguards management as needed
                          during the project preparation and implementation. In addition, an independent environmental
                          management consultant will be recruited to conduct independent monitoring on performance of
                          both the contractors and the supervision engineers in terms of EMP implementation. The
                          consultant will also provide environmental training to the contractors, environmental supervision
                          engineers and the MC and CIC staff before and during construction, and assist MC and CIC to
                          prepare semi-annual environmental monitoring reports to the Bank.

                           As a result of project preparation, along with experience with other World Bank-supported
                           projects, the Government agencies responsible for this project are becoming increasingly familiar
                           with the World Bank’s environmental and social safeguard policies. Additional safeguards training
                           for staff and relevant stakeholders will be planned periodically throughout project implementation.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The project stakeholders are the local communities, the residents of Xuancheng city and potential
                           enterprises. Stakeholders affected by physical relocation from project site will be compensated in


                                                                    Page 11 of 13
                           accordance with Bank’s OP/BP policy on Involuntary resettlement.

                           During project preparation, public consultations were undertaken in the form of questionnaires,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           focus group discussions and public meetings in accordance with OP4.01 for the preparation of the
                           EA documents. Questionnaire surveys and public meetings were carried out to consult affected
                           people, institutions, enterprises and other stakeholders. Public concerns expressed during
                           consultations have been addressed either in the project design, in the EMP or the RAP/RPF.
                           Information disclosure on EA preparation was carried out through public bulletins, local
                           newspapers and the internet. On November 29, 2012, the draft full EIA document was disclosed
                           on the website of XEDTZ and in the local newspaper (announcement in Xuancheng Daily) --
                           means accessible to the general public – and on January 18, 2013 to the Bank’s InfoShop.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      31-Dec-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   22-Apr-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      22-Apr-2013
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            29-Nov-2012
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      20-Dec-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   15-May-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            03-Apr-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments: Resettlement Action Plan was disclosed on April 3, 2013; and Resettlement Policy
                                         Framework was disclosed on April 23, 2013
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement




                                                                   Page 12 of 13
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Suhail J. S. Jme'An
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                               Date: 16-May-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Paul Procee (SM)                                  Date: 16-May-2013




                                                                       Page 13 of 13
