                                                                     INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                              APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA448
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-May-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                               Country:                         Jordan                                  Project ID:                      P127861
                               Project Name:                    JO-Badia Ecosystem and Livelihoods (P127861)
                               Task Team Leader:                Banu Setlur
                               Estimated Appraisal Date: 08-May-2012                                    Estimated Board Date:            04-Oct-2012
                               Managing Unit:                   MNSSD                                   Lending Instrument:              Specific Investment Loan
                               Focal Area:                      Multi-focal area
                               Sector:                          General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%), Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (50%)
                               Theme:                           Biodiversity (45%), Rural non-farm income generation (45%), Climate change (10%)
                               Financing (In USD Million)
                                     Financing Source                                                                                                       Amount
                                     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                        20.75
                                     Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                                                          3.33
                                     Total                                                                                                                     24.08
                               Environmental Category:          B - Partial Assessment
                               Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Global Environmental Objective(s)

                              The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to support sustainable livelihoods and enhance ecosystem services through participatory approaches
                              in selected areas of the Jordan Badia.

                              3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                              The BELP will contribute to restoring the Badia through a dual approach of sustainable rangeland rehabilitation and promotion of alternative
                              income generating activities for target communities in the north and south Badia. In order to support the livelihoods of local communities, the
                              project will promote a people-centered sustainable natural resource base development approach. The BELP also carries an innovative value in
                              terms of approaches and specific activities, which if proven successful would pave the way to replication and scaling-up across broader areas of
                              the Badia. This integrated approach would allow Badia communities to improve their livelihoods while reinforcing their capacity to manage and
                              sustainably use the ecosystem services that are available to them. The project will comprise three components:

                              i.             Community-Centered Ecotourism in the Northern Badia
                              ii.            Livelihoods Support through Sustainable Rangeland Management in the Southern Badia
                              iii.           Management and Monitoring and Evaluation

                              The project implementation period is four years, 2013-2017. Paragraphs below provide a brief description of project components. Please refer to
                              Annex 2 of the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) for a detailed project description.

                              Component 1: Community-Centered Ecotourism in the Northern Badia (GEF: US$1.53 million): The project will establish ecotourism into the
                              northeast Badia. A 250km ecotourism corridor connecting the Royal Society for Conservation of Nature (RSCN)-managed Al Azraq and Shaumari
                              reserves as a starting point to the Burqu’ Protected Area. The corridor will be developed around a concept of “low volume, high value? community-
                              centered ecotourism and provide income opportunities to the Ar Ruwaished and nearby communities. The component would also provide targeted
                              information and training to foster their understanding of ecotourism and their engagement in it. The design of the corridor will also include a
                              revenue sharing mechanism with communities. The component will be implemented by RSCN and will support the following two sub-components:

                              Sub-component 1.1: Establishment of an Al Azraq/Shaumari-Burqu’ ecotourism corridor
                              Sub-component 1.2: Community engagement

                              Main beneficiaries: Ar Ruwaished communities

                              Component 2: Livelihoods Support through Sustainable Rangeland Management in the Southern Badia (GEF: US$1.47 million): Pursuing a
                              people-centered sustainable natural resource base development approach, the BELP will pilot activities which, if proven successful, would pave
                              the way for replication and scaling-up across broader areas of the Badia. To help sustain and support the livelihoods of local communities, the
                              project will pilot the establishment of two community-based rangeland restoration reserves, establishment of small-scale, strategically sited water
                              harvesting structures to supply herds, and capacity building for alternative livelihood activities with associated training. The target communities are
                              being fully engaged and consulted on the design elements of this component, including on the proposed rangeland restoration areas -- on siting,
                                                                                                                                                                           Page 1 of 7
                         restoration biomass, and area management. This component will be implemented by the project Implementing Agency National Center for
                         Agriculture Research and Extension (NCARE), in collaboration with the Hashemite Fund for the Development of the Jordan Badia (HFDJB), which
                         will be responsible for the community mobilization and alternative livelihoods aspects by working with selected cooperatives. The component will
                         support the following three sub-components:

                         Sub-component 2.1: Water harvesting
                         Sub-component 2.2: Rangeland rehabilitation
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sub-component 2.3: Maintaining and enhancing livelihoods in pilot communities

                         Main beneficiaries: Al Husseinieh and Al Jafr communities

                         Component 3: Project Ma nagement and Monitoring and Evaluation (GEF: US$0.33 million): A Project Management Unit (PMU), comprising a
                         project manager, M&E specialist and fiduciary staff, capable of directing and supporting project implementation, will be established in NCARE. The
                         PMU will receive guidance from a high level Steering Committee (SC) and will be technically supported by a Technical Working Group (TWG),
                         comprising the project manager and focal points from the two executing contractors, RSCN and HFDJB, and from MOPIC (Ministry of Planning
                         and International Cooperation). The TWG will also ensure communication and collaboration between all entities. Please refer to Annex 3 of the
                         PAD for detailed information on project implementation arrangements.

                         Main beneficiaries: NCARE staff

                         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         The project will focus on three poverty pockets in the southern and northern Badia. In the south, Al Jafr and Al Husseinieh, sub-districts within the
                         Ma‘an Governorate will be targeted; while in the north, ecotourism activities will be implemented along a corridor which will begin in Al Azraq (south
                         east of Amman, Zarqa Governorate) and will end in the Burqu‘ Protected Area (PA) in the east (Mafraq Governorate), targeting the Ar Ruwaished
                         communities.

                         Primary beneficiaries

                         The people living in the Badia are the main custodians of the Badia ecosystem and also the main resource users. Restoration and preservation of
                         the Badia needs to go hand in hand with improvements in peoples’ livelihoods. The primary beneficiaries of the project are poor communities in Ar
                         Ruwaished (northern Badia), Al Jafr and Al Husseinieh (southern Badia) poverty pockets who depend on the Badia’s natural resources for their
                         livelihoods. Individuals, cooperatives and community organizations will benefit from: (i) learning about and implementing a more sustainable
                         management approach to the natural resources upon which their livelihoods are dependant; (ii) a variety of income generating activities related to
                         ecotourism and rangeland management, (iii) skills, capacity building and grant resources for micro business development, (iv) improved area of
                         rangeland on which to feed their herds, (v) small water harvesting ponds for animal use (hafirs) and water cisterns for human consumption.

                         Ar Ruwaished is a sub-district in the Mafraq Governorate, stretching over an area of 21,000 km2 with a population of 5,700 (806 families),
                         organized in 10 communities. Ninety four percent of the population lives in Ar-Ruwaished town and the adjacent Manshiet Al-Ghayath, with the rest
                         of the population living in small and widely distributed communities. Some of these communities face a high rate of abandonment due to lack of
                         income sources. The poverty rate in Ar Ruwaished is 65 percent, the second highest in the country. The main livelihood in Ar Ruwaished is animal
                         herding, (about 84,000 heads) with some commercial and government employment in Ar Ruwaished town; 50 percent of the households receive
Public Disclosure Copy




                         national aid. The unemployment rate is 25 percent compared to a national rate of 12.9 percent. There is one charity association in the sub-district,
                         which offers a kindergarten, a revolving credit fund and basic assistance to households when funds are available; and 6 cooperatives.

                         The main ecosystem in Ar Ruwaished is the Marrab, and the bioclimatic type is considered to be arid Mediterranean, cool variety. The average
                         annual rainfall is around 70 mm, falling mainly from November to March; day temperatures (annual mean = 19ºC; mean maximum = 37.1ºC) and
                         evaporation rate (c. 2100mm) is considerably high. Vegetation and animal life is not abundant; nevertheless, many small animals adapted to the
                         desert conditions are found, such as several insect, reptile and rodent species. Resident birds include up to seven breeding lark species,
                         Trumpeter Finch, Desert Wheatear and a number of migratory species which make their stopover in spring and autumn. During winter a number of
                         migratory bird species, including the Imperial Eagle and Common Crane, stay in the area for a few months. Medium-sized and large animals are
                         generally rare or absent due to hunting, disturbance and lack of food. It has a low vegetation cover (≤ 10%) which is widely dispersed. The
                         dominant natural vegetation often belongs to the chenopod family such as Anabasis articulata, Anabasis syriaca, Hammada eigii Halothamnus
                         acutfolius, Salsola inermis and other non-chenopods such as Gymnarrhena micrantha, Herniaria hirsuta, Poa bulbosa and Crocus cancellatus
                         subsp. Haussknechtii. In wadi beds other vegetation elements occur such as Artemisia herba-alba, Astragalus spinosus, Achilea fragrantissima,
                         Trigonella stellata and Coichicum tunicatuin.

                         Al Husseinieh is a sub-district in Ma'an Governorate, located 47 km north of the governorate's center. Its population is about 10,000 people,
                         concentrated in two main communities: Al Husseinieh (70 percent) and Al Hashemiah (30 percent). The sub-district suffers from a high poverty
                         incidence where the unemployment rate is 24.3 percent and the poverty rate stands at 28.5 percent. The local population works mainly in the
                         public sector, small businesses, and in animal breeding, while agriculture has been largely abandoned due to recent droughts; 25 percent
                         ofhouseholds receive national aid. Al Hussienieh has 6 charity associations, 12 cooperatives (8 agricultural, 3 multi-sectoral and 1 focusing on
                         women), which support a total of 649 families.

                         Al Jafr is a sub-district in Ma'an Governorate, located 55 km east the city of Ma'an. Its population is about 10,000 people, concentrated in three
                         main communities: Al Jafr, Al Mudawra and a nomadic community travelling in the eastern parts of the sub-district and settled mostly in Bayer. The
                         unemployment rate is 26.1 and the poverty rate is 32.8 percent. The region is characterized by desert climate; recent droughts have severely
                         impacted herding, one of Al Jafr’s main income sources. Other income sources include the government and armed forces as well as small scale
                         agriculture; 39 percent of households depend on national aid. The sub-district has 9 cooperatives, which support a total of 439 families from the
                         agricultural sector.

                         Both Al Jafr and Al Hussuinieh belong to the so-called Sahara-Arabian type, which is flat except for a few hills or small mountains, the result of
                         volcanic eruptions. Altitude ranges between 500-700 m, and the mean annual rainfall ranges from 50-200mm, with mean annual minimum
                         temperatures ranging from 2-15ºC. Soil is mostly poor, either clay, hammada, saline, sandy or calcareous. Vegetation is dominated by small
                         shrubs and small annuals in the wadi beds. Nonrenewable water resources are found in the Al Jafr basin, for which the annual safe yield is 18
                                                                                                                                                                    Page 2 of 7
                         million m3. Floral species such as Phragmites communis., Juncus maritimus and Nerium oleandor, and faunal wetland species such as Rana
                         ridibunda, Hyla arborea, Lutra lutra. Tilapia spp., Natrix tessellata, Barbus spp., Aphanius spp., Gara rufa, Claris lazera and many reptiles are
                         known to populate these areas.

                         The total number of expected primary beneficiaries from the project at large is 4,500.

                         Secondary beneficiaries
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project secondary beneficiaries are National Center for Agriculture Research and Extension (NCARE) staff, expected to benefit from capacity
                         building activities in the areas of financial management, accounting and procurement, and gain additional technical experience in rangeland
                         management, community mobilization, M&E and project management. NCARE is also expected to benefit from improved knowledge and technical
                         capacity from the feasibility and other technical studies regarding the siting of water harvesting systems such as hafirs. In addition, the Ministry of
                         Agriculture (MOA) will benefit from additional experience in the implementation of the new approach toward non-fenced community-managed
                         rangeland reserves, which it intends to continue and implement in the future.

                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                         Carolyn Winter (MNSSO)
                         Viviane Wei Chen Clement (MNSEN)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                            Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01              Yes             The project will finance a few small scale physical investments related to
                                                                                          ecotourism and rangeland management which are expected to have minor
                                                                                          negative environmental impacts. The client has prepared an Environmental and
                                                                                          Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and a Management Plan (ESMP) that outlines
                                                                                          mitigation measures to be followed during project implementation. The project will
                                                                                          prepare an Ecotourism Development Plan (ETDP) during the first year that will
                                                                                          include environmental consideration and identify the location and types of potential
                                                                                          ecotourism-related interventions for component 1. Additionally, the proposed small
                                                                                          10-room ecolodge will incorporate good environmental practices in its design, and
                                                                                          a separate EMP will be prepared and included in the contractor’s bidding
                                                                                          documents before construction of the ecologe. It should be noted that all project
                                                                                          interventions will take place on state-owned lands.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                      Yes             OP 4.04 on Natural Habitats is triggered and any potential adverse impacts will be
                                                                                          addressed through mitigation measures defined within the scope of the ESMP, as
                                                                                          well as the ETDP and EMP, prepared for the project (as a result of the triggering of
                                                                                          OP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment for this category B project). The ETDP will
                                                                                          be approved by the Bank and endorsed by the project Steering Committee.

                                                                                          As per the project design in the north Badia, the existing Shaumari reserve and
                                                                                          Azrak reserve and wetland managed by RSCN will serve as starting point for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                          ecotourism corridor, and the corridor will extend to the proposed Burqu reserve in
                                                                                          the east Badia—however, the project will not invest in these reserves. With
                                                                                          regards to siting of ecotourism related activities along the corridor (e.g. camel and
                                                                                          hiking trails, campsites, ecolodge, etc.), the ETDP will include a baseline
                                                                                          ecological study and define areas for ecotourism interventions taking into account
                                                                                          environmental considerations. The ETDP will determine the conservation value of
                                                                                          the area and the relative importance of different habitats or parts of the site and
                                                                                          individual species. It will also explore the relative sensitivity/value of different
                                                                                          ecotourism areas in terms of nature conservation, landscape, archaeology and
                                                                                          cultural interests. Based on the results of the ETDP, in the event any ‘core
                                                                                          conservation or wilderness area’ is identified (ecologically valuable areas), the
                                                                                          project will exclude this area and include only those areas suitable for tourism and
                                                                                          as informed by the ETDP.

                                                                                          Communities (Ar Ruwaished and other smaller villages close to Burqu’ as well as
                                                                                          some along the corridor) will be provided with awareness raising on the potential
                                                                                          fragility of the local environmental resources, and the project will continue through
                                                                                          its lifespan to actively engage with the communities.

                                                                                          Once under implementation, project progress reports will include information
                                                                                          related to status of compliance with all safeguard policies.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                               No
                         Pest Management OP 4.09                          No




                                                                                                                                                                     Page 3 of 7
                               Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11        Yes              OP 4.11 on Physical Cultural Resources is triggered and the policy will be covered
                                                                                              within the scope of the ETDP and EMP, as well as ESMP prepared for the project
                                                                                              (as a result of the triggering of OP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment for this
                                                                                              category B project). The ESMP for the project will be applicable to interventions in
                                                                                              the north and south Badia. The project is not expected to impact any known
                                                                                              physical cultural resources. General interest area for the location of the hafirs will
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              be determined in collaboration with communities and also taking into account
                                                                                              results from a geological/hydrological/topographic study. Similar strategy will be
                                                                                              adopted for location of the cisterns. However if any chance finds are encountered
                                                                                              during implementation, the government’s national procedures will be applicable
                                                                                              and the national procedures for archaeological chance finds will be followed during
                                                                                              implementation.

                                                                                              Once under implementation, project progress reports will include information
                                                                                              related to status of compliance with all safeguard policies.
                               Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                 No
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12           Yes              Following considerable discussion with a wide variety of informed government,
                                                                                              NGO, and independent stakeholder groups, and with information gathered from a
                                                                                              Social Assessment, it has been decided that safeguard policy OP 4.12 on
                                                                                              involuntary resettlement is triggered. Although the project activities will be
                                                                                              undertaken on state land, communities freely traverse these areas and use them
                                                                                              for animal grazing for short periods of the year.

                                                                                              The project will not implement any activity that relates to restriction of access to
                                                                                              resources, without communication and buy-in from the communities. For example,
                                                                                              for constructing the hafirs (water ponds for animals), communities will identify the
                                                                                              general location of where they would like them to be situated, and then as an
                                                                                              overlay to that, the project will undertake a technical assessment (hydrological/
                                                                                              geological survey) to identify the exact location within the general vicinity identified
                                                                                              by the communities. Similar arrangements for the rangeland reserves.
                                                                                              Furthermore, the project design is such that the community members will be given
                                                                                              employment opportunities for planting in the reserves, managing them and also
                                                                                              monitoring the reserves. The project will have formal agreement between
                                                                                              community representatives and the government.

                                                                                              In response to triggering the policy, the client has prepared a Process Framework
                                                                                              (PF) in consultation with the communities. The PF addresses impacts related to
                                                                                              livelihoods arising from possible restriction of access. A robust three tier Grievance
                                                                                              Redress Mechanism (developed with the communities) is in place to ensure that
                                                                                              communities have the means whereby to seek redress related to the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Once under implementation, project progress reports will include information
                                                                                              related to status of compliance with all safeguard policies.
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                     No
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP     No
                               7.50
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60         No


                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                  In accordance with the nature of the proposed investments, the project has been confirmed as environmental category B and the Safeguard
                                 Policies on Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01), Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12), Natural Habitats (OP 4.04) and Physical Cultural
                                 Resources (OP 4.11) are triggered. These policies will be taken into account within the scope of implementation of the ESMP (as well as ETDP
                                 and EMP), and will follow national procedures for chance-finds. During implementation, the client will be expected to report back on compliance
                                 with the safeguard policies in the progress reports. It should also be noted that all project interventions will take place on state-owned land.

                                 The environmental and social impacts of the proposed project activities are expected to be positive, as the BELP is designed to support the
                                 social, environmental, and economic needs of the targeted beneficiaries and ecosystem. A widespread and deep consultation process with the
                                 target communities supports this conclusion: the communities expressed enthusiasm and support for the project and reported that they did not
                                 believe there would be negative outcomes of the project for participating communities. Project interventions are intended to expand the
                                 development of ecotourism and pilot new approaches to rangeland management, with a view to sustainably harnessing the services provided
                                 by the Badia ecosystem for the benefit of community livelihoods. Specifically, project activities would, by supporting introduction of ecotourism
                                 and by helping restoration of parts of the Badia, increase the contribution of biodiversity to community livelihoods and strengthen the flow of
                                 ecosystem services in the Badia to production sectors. As such, the project activities should have the effects of: (i) engaging the target
                                 communities in the more sustainable management of the natural resources that they are economically dependent upon; (ii) providing
                                 community members with skills and support needed to pursue alternative livelihood opportunities; and (iii) providing the target communities with
                                 improved access to support measures (water harvesting, fodder production, animal husbandry, etc.), which will maintain or improve a core

                                                                                                                                                                          Page 4 of 7
                           economic activity whilst rangeland restoration activities are underway.

                           From an environmental safeguards standpoint, it is expected that any potential negative environmental impacts will be minor, temporary and
                           site-specific in nature, and can be mitigated by implementation of the ESMP and common sense good practice measures. With regard to
                           ecotourism-related activities and rangeland management activities, some impacts that could require the implementation of mitigation actions
                           include :(i) Impacts on air quality and noise from the construction of the ecolodge and of the hafirs; (ii) Impacts on air quality and noise from the
                           operation of the ecolodge; (iii) Occupational Health and Safety risks from the construction of the ecolodge and hafirs; (iv) Impacts on soils from
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the construction and operation of the ecolodge; (v) Production and disposal of solid wastes generated by the construction of the ecolodge,
                           campsites and hafirs; (v) Production and disposal of sewage wastes generated by the ecolodge and campsites; (vi) Impacts of transport of
                           tourists along the corridor and in the Burqu’ nature reserve; (vii) Hydrological functioning of watersheds for the construction of the hafirs; (viii)
                           Water quality in the drinking water cisterns; and (ix) Risk of further overgrazing and degradation of vegetation cover and of the rangeland in
                           general.

                           For component 1 on ecotourism to be implemented by RSCN, as per project design, the existing Shaumari reserve and Azrak reserve and
                           wetland managed by RSCN will serve as starting point for the ecotourism corridor, and the corridor wi ll extend to the proposed Burqu reserve
                           in the east Badia—however, the project will not invest in these reserves. With regards to citing of ecotourism related activities along the corridor
                           (e.g. camel and hiking trails, campsites, ecolodge, etc.), an Ecotourism Development Plan (ETDP) will be developed during the first year of the
                           project by RSCN that will include a baseline ecological study that will define areas for ecotourism interventions taking into account
                           environmental considerations. The ETDP will determine the conservation value of the area and the relative importance of different habitats or
                           parts of the site and individual species. It will also explore the relative sensitivity/value of different ecotourism areas in terms of nature
                           conservation, landscape, archaeology and cultural interests. Based on the results of the study, in the event any “core conservation or
                           wilderness area? is identified (ecologically valuable areas), the project will exclude this area and include only those areas that are suitable for
                           tourism and as informed by the ETDP. This ETDP will need to be submitted to the Bank for approval, and then to the project Steering
                           Committee for endorsement. In addition to the ETDP, RSCN will undertake an EMP specific to the proposed 10-12 room ecolodge that will also
                           need to be approved by the Bank before construction, and will be included in the contractor’s bidding documents.

                           Furthermore, this component will ensure that communities living in Ar Ruwaished and other smaller villages close to Burqu’ as well as some
                           along the corridor are consulted with and will be engaged in the planning and development of any ecotourism activities. Attention will be paid to
                           increasing the awareness of the population about the potential fragility of the local environmental resources, and the project will continue
                           through its lifespan to actively engage with the communities.

                           For component 2, general interest area for the location of the two hafirs for animal watering in the south Badia will be determined in
                           collaboration with communities and also taking into account results from a geological/hydrological/topographic study before construction, based
                           on parameters such as peak flow, possible quantity and quality of raw water, soil analysis and types and locations of other locally available
                           construction materials, etc. Following a similar approach, 25 small cisterns and manufactured tank structures will be provided for potable water.
                           The cisterns will be built following design and construction criteria that will ensure water quality maintenance for the benefitting households as
                           per practices currently successfully implemented in the country. In addition and as relevant, guidance for design will be taken from, “Rainwater
                           Cisterns: Traditional Technologies for Dry Areas; ICARDA, 2009?.

                           From a social safeguards perspective, it is possible that some of the activities (water harvesting, rangeland restoration areas, fodder production
                           areas) may have some, albeit very marginal and limited, impacts on community members’ access to some animal grazing areas. It should be
                           noted, though, that the two proposed rangeland restoration areas (one 1,000 hectares and one 2,000 hectares) will be very small relative to the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Badia rangeland accessed by the communities, and that these will be sited in areas where there are no settlements. The affected land areas
                           are designated as state-owned land, but the state has allowed open access to these areas and the communities cross and utilize these areas
                           for grazing their herds, generally for two, two week periods each year. The “rangeland rehabilitation reserves? will, however, restrict grazing
                           access for an initial 2 year period as the rangeland is restored. The project design, which has been based on broad based and early
                           consultations with the target communities which have showed strong support for the project, should minimize the potential for disputes.
                           Disputes will also be minimized by the fact that the communities themselves will agree on the areas to be set aside for restoration and will
                           manage the a reas. The fact that the state has indicated it will support improved community management of these areas by granting
                           communities more authority over the management of those areas has also helped garner strong local support. Furthermore, because reserve
                           restoration work will also provide employment opportunities for youth from the target communities, community support has been further
                           assured. In the case of the hafirs, very strong support was expressed by communities, mainly because the hafirs will reduce the costs herders
                           currently incur in having water transported out to the Badia grazing areas.

                           Although full community engagement is integral to the project design and to its implementation, there is some, albeit very small, potential for
                           community members to hold differing views about the utilization of the state land and rights of access. Given this, and in an abundance of
                           caution, the project has triggered the World Bank Policy on Involuntary Resettlement, OP 4.12 and prepared a socio-economic assessment that
                           has informed the Process Framework (PF).
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                            No potential indirect or long terms impacts are expected.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                            Not applicable.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                            and implement the measures described.
                             To address environmental safeguard issues, the client has prepared an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) for the project,
                           complemented by an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) and a Process Framework (PF). The ESIA reviews the
                           environmental and social aspects of the project according to both the client’s legal framework and to World Bank rules and procedures. It
                           identifies measures to be taken and describes the procedure to be implemented to ensure that potential risks to the environment are
                           adequately assessed and managed.

                           In terms of the institutional arrangements for the ESMP, NCARE has strong technical capacity and previous experience with implementing
                           Bank/GEF projects, and it is expected that the PMU will be able to ensure safeguard compliance. If found necessary, additional training will be
                                                                                                                                                                     Page 5 of 7
                           provided at the PMU level (M&E specialist on Bank safeguard policies and on the requirements for monitoring and reporting). Community level
                           training will include environmental awareness and good practices in the areas of rangeland rehabilitation as well as ecotourism related
                           interventions.

                           In terms of implementation of the ESMP, the designated M&E staff within the PMU will be responsible for monitoring progress and evaluating
                           project performance, including the implementation of safeguard policies and compliance with the ESMP. The PMU will include a section on this
                           as part of the progress reports to be submitted to the Technical Working Group (TWG), the Steering Committee and the Bank. RSCN and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           HFDJB will provide inputs and review draft reports as required through the TWG. The ESMP will be included in the Project Implementation
                           Manual that will be used to guide the day-to-day implementation of the project.

                           The client has, in response to the Socio-Economic Assessment and to issues raised during community consultations, prepared a Process
                           Framework (PF) to guide the response to any potential social or socio-economic impacts. Importantly, the borrower is in agreement that a
                           comprehensive Grievance Redress Mechanism will be put in place to ensure that issues arising are identified early on and are addressed
                           preemptively and mitigated through remediation. This is a tiered Grievance Redress Mechanism, the design of which has been directly
                           informed by the broad based consultations held with the target communities during project design and preparation. This Grievance Redress
                           Mechanism design complies with what community members say will be an accessible and responsive system. It will operate through the life of
                           the project.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                            on potentially affected people.
                            A wide range of stakeholders will be involved in the project, many of whom have already helped to shape the project design. They will
                           participate during implementation in different ways: as lead agencies responsible for providing a leadership role and oversight of components;
                           others will play a role as project partners; and community cooperatives and organizations will also be involved in the project delivery.

                           A series of broad based consultations with the target communities have been undertaken during the preparation of the SEA and ESIA.
                           Separate consultations were held with community leaders and representatives, with women, and with youth to provide adequate opportunities
                           for all community groups to provide input in fora that met cultural norms and practices. On the basis of the consultations, which directly
                           informed the SEA, a Process Framework was prepared. Both the ESIA and the PF include separate annexes on community consultations.

                           The ESIA and the SEA/PF have been disclosed prior to appraisal both in-country and at the Bank’s Infoshop. Also, the executive summary of
                           both reports were translated into Arabic and submitted to the Bank’s Infoshop for disclosure (on May 2, 2012) on and in-country (April 30, 2012)
                           at the offices of NCARE, RSCN and HFDJB and on the organization’s website.

                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                    30-Apr-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                                30-Apr-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                 02-May-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                           Directors
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                    30-Apr-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                                24-Apr-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                 02-May-2012
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                         disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                           Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                     Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [    ]

                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                           If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) natural   Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [    ]
                           habitats, does the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                           Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts on               Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [    ]
                           cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                           If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the             Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [    ]
                           plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                           Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?                     Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [    ]


                                                                                                                                                                Page 6 of 7
                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language      Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for   Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?              Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard    Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same        Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Task Team Leader:                    Banu Setlur
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:     Name: Nina Bhatt (RSA)                                                   Date: 09-May-2012
                            Sector Manager:                      Name Hoonae Kim (SM)                                                     Date: 08-May-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                                               Page 7 of 7
