                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA1376
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Mar-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 25-Mar-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           West Bank and Gaza                Project ID:    P127163
                            Project Name:      GZ-Second Municipal Development Project (P127163)
                            Task Team          Soraya Goga
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          26-Mar-2013                       Estimated   23-May-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     MNSUR                             Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector:            Sub-national government administration (93%), Public administration- Energy
                                               and mining (7%)
                            Theme:             Urban services and housing for the poor (42%), Municipal finance (42%),
                                               Municipal governance and institution building (16%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     65.00                       Total Bank Financing:        0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                                  Financing Gap:              55.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      0.00
                              Special Financing                                                            10.00

                              Total                                                                         10.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a     Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           The objective of the project is to improve municipal management practices for better service delivery
                           and municipal transparency.
                            3. Project Description
                           The Project will be implemented through 4 Components. These include (i) Component 1: Municipal


                                                                       Page 1 of 7
                         Grants for Capital Investments allocates performance-based grants to municipalities for capital
                         investments or operating expenditures through a transfer formula; (ii) Component 2: Support to
                         Municipal Innovations and Efficiency facilitates learning and innovation to promote municipal
Public Disclosure Copy




                         development; (iii) Component 3: Technical Assistance for Municipalities and the Municipal
                         Development and Lending Fund (MDLF) supports municipalities to graduate to a higher
                         performance category, and supports the implementing entity to build its capacity; (iv) Component 4:
                         Project Implementation Support and Management Costs finances project management. Social
                         Accountability and gender inclusion will be mainstreamed across all Components.

                         Component 1: Municipal Grants for Capital Investments: This Component will allocate
                         performance-based grants for capital investment service provision, per mandate of municipalities
                         defined in the Local Councils Law No. 1 of 1997, for sectors described as eligible in the Operations
                         Manual as well as for operating expenditures for Municipalities in Gaza. The allocation amount
                         would be determined through a transfer formula consisting of performance (50%), population (30%)
                         and need (20%). To determine performance, municipalities would be ranked from A through E,
                         based on 16 good governance indicators. Proxy indicators for municipal infrastructure, poverty rates
                         and a flat rate allocation to municipalities are used to calculate ‘need’. Municipalities will then
                         propose priority sub-projects, based on a consultative planning process, for the grant. The priority
                         projects will be financed and implemented with assistance from the MDLF. Public disclosure of
                         subproject information will enhance social accountability between municipalities and citizens. This
                         Component would be implemented in two funding allocations, each spanning 18 months.
                         The Component will finance the costs of goods, works and services.

                         Component 2: Support to Municipal Innovation:
                         This Component finances goods, works and consultants services for capacity building and capital
                         investments in innovations that support MoLG and PA policies including:

                         (a)      Strengthening Newly Amalgamated Municipalities will support amalgamated municipalities
                         in financing small scale social infrastructure and demand driven municipal capacity building
Public Disclosure Copy




                         packages that allow the amalgamated municipalities to reach the service levels of existing
                         municipalities. The list of proposed investments and capacity building packages are listed in Annex
                         2. This sub-Component will finance goods, works and consultants services.
                         (b)      Piloting Innovations to improve municipal responsiveness and efficiency will support three
                         main areas including:
                         (i)      E-governance: Will pilot the introduction of e-governance initiatives in 4 selected
                         municipalities for more citizen-responsive service provision. Thus promoting social accountability.
                         The initiative will promote knowledge sharing; enhance awareness and accountability in service
                         delivery (specifically e-licensing, e-participation and e-payment) and revenue generation. This is a
                         demand driven sub-Component where selection of municipal proposals would be based on p re-
                         defined criteria. The activity will finance goods, software and consultant services.
                         (ii)     Renewable Energy will assist municipalities in piloting sub-projects on renewable energy
                         with a focus on solar energy for public buildings.
                         (iii)    Support to Local Economic Development initiatives within municipalities will develop a
                         municipal approach to LED and pilot such an approach in 4 selected municipalities.

                         Component 3: Technical Assistance for Municipalities and the MDLF:

                         Technical Assistance for Municipalities would support municipalities in improving their performance
                         to graduate to a higher performance category within which they are currently classified through a

                                                                     Page 2 of 7
                         series of technical assistance packages. The Component would finance goods, works and consultants
                         services. This sub-Component would be implemented in two funding allocations, spanning 18
                         months each.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (a)        Technical Assistance packages include:
                         (i)      Support for Improved Financial Management. Technical assistance packages will include
                         support for the roll out of Financial Policies and Procedures Manual; Fixed Assets Valuation and
                         Registration; Budgeting Guidelines; promotion of Municipal External Audits; and a Revenue
                         Enhancement Program that would include an Integrated Financial Management System and a
                         Revenue Public Awareness Campaign.
                         (ii)     Support for Improved Planning Capacity primarily through Strategic Development and
                         Investment Plans. Technical assistance packages would include the roll out of Phase 1-3 of SDIPs to
                         all municipalities that do not have SDIPs; roll out of Phase 4 & 5 of SDIPs to municipalities with
                         Phase 1-3 SDIPs and Update of Municipal SDIPs.
                         (iii)    Support for Improved Social Accountability: This activity would assist municipalities in
                         establishing Citizen Service Centers (piloted under MDP 1) and also in developing and rolling out
                         Citizen Guidelines for Service Delivery. The establishment and use of such centers enhances
                         transparency and responsiveness towards citizens, as well as enable citizens to participate and
                         monitor municipal performance. The development and implementation of Citizen Guidelines would
                         guide citizens on their roles and responsibilities vis a vis municipal services.
                         (iv)      Support for improving Operations and Maintenance would assist municipalities in
                         improving their operations and maintenance for roads and public buildings.

                         (b)     Technical Assistance for the MDLF will strengthen the MDLF’s capacity to implement the
                         MDP, ensuring that it continues to use innovative approaches that build on international best
                         practices. It will provide support for human resource development and institution building based on
                         the MDLF’s Medium Term Strategic Plan (currently under development) and its Human Resources
                         Development Plan. The sub-Component would finance goods and consultants services.

                         Component 4: Project Implementation Support and Management Costs: will support Project
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Implementation including MDLF management fee, monitoring and evaluation, outreach and
                         communication, local technical consultants for the engineering supervision of Component 1 Sub-
                         project implementation and social accountability awareness measures. The Component would
                         finance goods and consultants services.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         134 municipalities in the West bank and Gaza.

                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Hana Salah (MNSSO)
                         Zeyad Abu-Hassanein (MNSWA)

                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes              OP 4.01 is triggered and requires an
                          BP 4.01                                            environmental assessment for activities that
                                                                             involve infrastructure construction. The
                                                                             development and rehabilitation of municipal
                                                                             infrastructure includes roads, rehabilitation of


                                                                     Page 3 of 7
                                                                         water wells, water networks, and wastewater and
                                                                         sanitation facilities, parks, and others. Negative
                                                                         environmental impacts, associated with municipal
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         subprojects, are expected to be minor during the
                                                                         construction phase. These impacts will be
                                                                         mitigated by the MDLF through EMP
                                                                         implementation and the project is classified as
                                                                         category "B". Furthermore, the size of funds
                                                                         available to municipalities under this program
                                                                         limit the scope of the subprojects, and hence
                                                                         larger scale subprojects which require a full-
                                                                         fledged EIA (category A) will be excluded
                                                                         (negative list) in the sub-project screening
                                                                         process and will not be feasible due to the
                                                                         ceilings of funds available under the project. An
                                                                         Environmental and Social Management
                                                                         Framework has been prepared by MDLF since all
                                                                         sub-projects are not fully known a priori. The
                                                                         ESMF contains provisions for screening of sub-
                                                                         projects and acceptance/rejection criteria,
                                                                         negative lists. MDLF will monitor compliance on
                                                                         EMP provisions of different municipalities during
                                                                         implementation.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes             OP 4.09 is triggered, a few municipalities,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         particularly in Gaza support subprojects which
                                                                         may require financing to purchase of some
                                                                         chemicals for pest control, primarily mosquitoes.
                                                                         A pest management plan which is based on
                                                                         lessons learned under the MDP 1 has been
                                                                         updated for this project to ensure compliance with
                                                                         OP 4.09 policy on chemical purchased for pest
                                                                         management and proper storage and handling
                                                                         during project implementation.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No              The project will contain a “chance find clause?
                         BP 4.11                                         in its bidding documents which will be described
                                                                         in the ESMF/EMP. Any sub project activity that
                                                                         might trigger cultural heritage operational polices
                                                                         will be excluded.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No             Any subprojects that could trigger the
                         4.12                                            involuntary resettlement policy (OP 4.12) will be



                                                                 Page 4 of 7
                                                                                excluded, and a respective negative list is part of
                                                                                the Operational Manual. The project will thus not
                                                                                fund municipal sub-projects that involve direct
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                economic and social impacts through: (a) the
                                                                                temporary or permanent involuntary taking of
                                                                                land resulting in relocation or loss of shelter,
                                                                                loss of assets or access to assets, or loss of
                                                                                income sources or means of livelihood, whether
                                                                                or not the affected persons must move to another
                                                                                location; or (b) involuntary restriction of access to
                                                                                legally designated parks and protected areas
                                                                                resulting in adverse impacts on the livelihoods of
                                                                                the displaced persons in relocation of individuals,
                                                                                households or loss of shelter, loss of income or
                                                                                other livelihood means for individuals or
                                                                                community members, loss of assets or access to
                                                                                assets.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International           No               Water and wastewater rehabilitation sub-
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                projects are of limited scope and minor
                                                                                extensions to existing networks. No new water
                                                                                wells are allowed under the project and the
                                                                                impacts of the activities are minor and easily
                                                                                mitigated by EMP implementation. No significant
                                                                                impacts are expected to the shared groundwater
                                                                                aquifers in West Bank and Gaza.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               This project excludes any sub-projects that trigger any Bank policies except for OP 4.01 and OP
                              4.09. The OP 4.09 is triggered since a few municipalities, especially in Gaza, are expected to
                              purchase chemicals intended for pest control, primarily mosquitoes. An abbreviated pest
                              management plan has been included in the ESMF prepared by MDLF which included provisions
                              on allowed chemicals and safe handling and disposal of pesticides. Projects of large scale impacts
                              (of category A) are excluded from funding and the financing ceiling of the projects excludes this
                              type of projects by the fact of limited funds allocated to a single municipality. A provision of
                              chance finds is included to cater for the case of any archaeological finds especially in the road
                              rehabilitation projects. The expected environmental impacts are limited and temporary during the
                              construction phase and easily mitigated by implementation of site specific ESMP that will be
                              prepared by the municipalities and monitored by MDLF.




                                                                        Page 5 of 7
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             N/A
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             The borrower has prepared an ESMF which includes the provisions of project screening and
                           preparation of specific ESMP to mitigate the negative impacts during construction. For social
                           safeguards for MDP2, an emphasis has been made in implementing procedures for: (1) social
                           safeguards monitoring during sub-project implementation, particularly those involving
                           construction; (2) voluntary land donations; and (3) a complaints handling mechanism. The MDP2
                           Operations Manual (OM) provides specific guidance on these procedures. MDLF is staffed with
                           environmental and social specialists, supported by a full task force of site engineers who have
                           good experience following up the implementation of ESMP during the predecessor project, MDP.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             During project identification and preparation, consultations were conducted with beneficiary
                           municipalities in West Bank and Gaza.MDLF documented in the ESMF the consultation process
                           that took place and the municipalities, local communities and NGOs that took part of the
                           consultations.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      25-Mar-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   25-Mar-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           West Bank and Gaza                                               24-Mar-2013
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      25-Mar-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   25-Mar-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           West Bank and Gaza                                               24-Mar-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                                                                   Page 6 of 7
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                             If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a              Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                             in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                             Management Specialist?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Soraya Goga
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Franck Bousquet (SM)                         Date: 25-Mar-2013




                                                                       Page 7 of 7
