                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSC710

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 30-Aug-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           India                            Project ID:       P130339
                            Project Name:      India Second Kerala State Transport Project (P130339)
                            Task Team          Simon David Ellis
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          00-undefined-0000                Estimated         14-Mar-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASDT                            Lending           Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector:            Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (100%)
                            Theme:             Infrastructure services for private sector development (90%), Injuries and non-
                                               communicable diseases (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      409.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                         141.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Gap                                                                   0.00
                              Total                                                                         550.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project's principal development objectives are to improve traffic flow and road safety on Kerala
                           state's core road network, and to strengthen the institutional and financial capacity of Kerala's key
                           transport sector agencies.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed project will have four components building on the work already undertaken in the first
                           KSTP project as follows:

                           Component A: Road Network Upgrading (US$320 million):
                         This component will include the upgrading 360 kms of strategically important State Highways to
                         complete network connectivity in the state. The existing intermediate lane roads will be upgraded to
                         a full two lane standard including a paved shoulder of 1.5 m on either side. The civil works would
Public Disclosure Copy




                         include road widening and strengthening of pavement, improving bridges and cross drainage
                         structures and enhancing road safety and traffic management measures. The works are proposed to
                         be implemented through a range of contracting options from traditional FIDIC based input contracts
                         to EPC contracts and annuity contracts. The roads will all include long term (performance based)
                         maintenance contracts suitably appended with the construction period. The component will also
                         include supervision and quality control services, environmental management and preconstruction
                         activities such as resettlement and utility shifting.

                         Component B: Periodic Maintenance Component (US$200 million):
                         This component will include the periodic maintenance of 1,000 kms of core state highways through a
                         combination of traditional input based contracts and long term (area wide) performance based
                         contracts. Supervision, technical audit, and design advisory services will also form part of this
                         component.

                         Component C: Road Safety Component (US$20 million):
                         This component will support the strengthening of the road safety management systems in Kerala by
                         building on existing initiatives with the aim to reduce crash fatalities on project roads. The following
                         sub-components will be financed:
                         i.       Capacity Building for the Road Safety Cell: Technical Assistance to strengthen the capacity
                         of the Road Safety Cell under the PWD to undertake network based road safety analysis, including
                         training on the use of the International Road safety Assessment Program (iRAP) tools.
                         ii.      Capacity Building for the Road Safety Authority: Technical Assistance to strengthen the
                         capacity of Kerala Road Safety Authority to deliver the institutional management functions of a lead
                         road safety agency, in particular those related to funding and resource allocation, monitoring and
                         evaluation, legislation, promotion and coordination.
                         iii.     Safe Corridor Pilot: Multi sectoral interventions on a high risk corridor with robust
Public Disclosure Copy




                         monitoring and evaluation system with the aim at reducing the number of fatalities and subsequent
                         roll out of the approach throughout the state.

                         Component D: Institutional Strengthening Component (US$10 million)
                         This component will principally support the implementation of initiatives started under the first
                         project and initiatives underway within the PWD. The following sub-components would be financed:
                         i.       Implementation of the recently finalized PWD Manual with a particular focus on quality
                         assurance mechanisms; preparation of DPRs; and social/environmental management.
                         ii.      Development of a single web-based system to address project management issues; file
                         tracking; complaints handling; road asset management; and FM systems.
                         iii.     Developing systematic approaches to the execution of maintenance from routine
                         maintenance to longer term performance based maintenance contracts.
                         iv.      Supporting the state in mobilizing private sector finance through PPPs and market
                         borrowing.

                         It is expected that the key implementation requirements as set out in the PWD manual will form the
                         basis of a memorandum of development policy between the PWD and World Bank. These key areas
                         of implementation would then be mandated by a Government Circular from the Finance Department.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the               safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Social: The proposed project builds upon the lessons learnt from KSTP I where slow progress in land
Public Disclosure Copy




                         acquisition and other resettlement activities led to major delays and cost over-runs of the project. It is
                         unlikely that proposed KSTP II for upgrading 360 kms, will face the same land acquisition
                         constraints. The project is at advanced stage of preparedness. A total of about 120.4 ha is required
                         (excluding land for Perumbilavu – Pattambi, new road) of which about 95 percent of the required
                         land for the project roads is under the possession of PWD in accordance with the R&R policy agreed
                         upon for KSPT I. The remaining 5 percent comprises 200 parcels of land spread intermittently along
                         the alignment of the project roads that will be acquired by end of June 2012. One new road
                         (Perumbilavu – Pattambi) has been added that may require approximately 6 ha of land acquisition
                         and result in involuntary resettlement of people and relocation of community properties. In 2003,
                         Social Assessments and resettlement action plan were prepared along with the safeguard documents
                         required for previous project. However, ground realities may have changed over the years. It is
                         proposed to update the documents to reflect the current situation, include impact with modification in
                         alignments at few locations, adverse impact along new road, and other issues. The project will not
                         adversely affect Tribal people. Therefore, OP 4.10 is not applicable.

                         Environment: The proposed project will be implemented in different parts of Kerala and across
                         several districts that are primarily in the North and central parts of the State. There are two road links
                         - Kasaragodu–Kanjangad and Pilathara–Pappinassery – that have short stretches that are in the close
                         proximity to Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ) areas. As per Indian legal requirements, these road
                         links will require CRZ clearances. During construction, extra care is required in these stretches as a
                         part of implementing safeguard management. There is expected to be no permanent, irreversible
                         impact in these stretches.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The PWD has demonstrated its ability to learn from lessons from similar projects to enhance policy
Public Disclosure Copy




                         environment and capacity to manage safeguard efficiently. These include:

                         a.       Policy development – Experience of implementation of R&R Policy for KSTP I provided a
                         favorable environment to steadily move towards adoption of enhanced entitlements for individual
                         Fast Track Projects thus leading to the final sector specific R&R Policy of 2011 (15.11.2011) which
                         is quite similar to Bank’s Operational Policy 4.12. Some of the important features includes (i)
                         participation of the project affected people, (ii) information dissemination of the proposed project,
                         (iii) promotes negotiation with the PAPs for direct purchase of land, (iv) social assessment to cover
                         census and adverse impacts. The issue of cut-off date of 3 years prior to Notification of Section 4 of
                         Land Acquisition Act is retained to align with the National R&R Policy 2007 that needs to be
                         addressed in the context of proposed project.

                         b.       Procedural improvement - Kerala PWD incorporated a section in the Manual on social
                         impact assessment and social safeguard management ensuring that the social concerns of the projects
                         are addressed in regular programs. A key lesson from KSTP I has been to adopt the practice of
                         negotiated settlement for any land acquisition at district level. The District Level Purchase
                         Committees (DLPCs) were set up under KSTP I for direct purchase of land through negotiation with
                         the Project affected people. This has become a permanent committee in the District Administration to
                         settle land acquisition for public purpose.
                           c.       Institutional capacity - At the outset of the Project implementation, the GOK lacked
                           institutional capacity to undertake management of the social safeguard activities involved in the
                           project. Steps were taken by appointment of a social scientist with the Project management Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                           (PMT) and Non-government Organization at division level to facilitate the implementation of
                           Resettlement Action Plan. Experiences with NGOs were not favorable and sociologists were
                           appointed at each Project implementation unit. With mainstreaming social safeguard management in
                           the overall work of PWD, the need to create a separate unit was recognized and Social and
                           Environmental Unit in PWD was set up. The curriculum on training of PWD Engineers has expanded
                           to include “social impact assessment and management? that is provided by Kerala Highway Research
                           Institute.

                           d.       Monitoring and Evaluation- Existing monitoring system by the Sociologists in the Project
                           Management Team (PMT) and at the Divisions has worked effectively. Monthly reviews at division/
                           field level and at KSTP/PMT level was built into the project management system.

                           e.        Environmental capacity: The Project Management Team (PMT) was established under first
                           KSTP project and will continue to design, coordinate and implement this project. Through the
                           preparation and implementation of the first project, the borrower was exposed to and is fully familiar
                           with the World Bank safeguard policies, procedures and the requirements. The implementation
                           pertaining to environmental safeguards was good under the first project. The borrower has
                           consistently demonstrated their commitment to implement the sound environmental safeguards
                           practices. In the context of the preparation of this project, there is a need to gainfully use the
                           expertise garnered and synthesize the learning from the various studies and implementation
                           experience in finalizing the environmental assessments, coordinating with the bid / contract
                           document preparation and planning overall implementation. The PMT also played an important role
                           in facilitating the establishment of the Environmental and Social Management Unit in the PWD. The
                           services of this Unit will also be utilized in implementing this project.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Mridula Singh (SASDS)
                           Vaideeswaran Sankaran (SASDT)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes
                           BP 4.01
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                           Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/     TBD
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      Yes
                           4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 11-Oct-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      All safeguard related studies were undertaken as part of the first KSTP project. These studies are
                                      currently being updated through a client appointed consultant. It is estimated that the updates to
                                      these studies will be available by August 2012. These include resettlement action plans, social
                                      assessments, environmental impact assessments and environmental management plans (EMPs).
                                      EMPs will be integrated with the bid / contract documents so that there is due cognizance / action
                                      of the contractor of environmental issues during implementation.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Simon David Ellis

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Sanjay Srivastava (RSA)                                                                                              Date: 31-Aug-2012
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Karla Gonzalez Carvajal (SM)                                                                                         Date: 05-Sep-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
