                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA916
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Sep-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                              Project ID:   P125496
                            Project Name:      Integrated Modern Agriculture Development Project (P125496)
                            Task Team          Rabih H. Karaky
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          19-Sep-2012                        Estimated   28-May-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASCS                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector:            Irrigation and drainage (60%), Crops (25%), Forestry (5%), Agricultural
                                               extension and research (5%), Agro-industry, marketing, and t rade (5%)
                            Theme:             Rural services and infrastructure (30%), Climate change (20%), Water resource
                                               management (20%), Other rural development (20%), Rural policies and
                                               institutions (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                               Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                       0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        200.00
                              Local Govts. (Prov., District, City) of Borrowing Country                     93.20
                              Sub-borrower(s)                                                               19.90
                              Total                                                                        313.10
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           Develop sustainable and climate resilient agricultural production systems in selected areas of Gansu,
                           Hunan, Jiangxi, and Liaoning provinces; Xinjiang Autonomous region; and Chonqging municipality.
                           This will be achieved by investing in (i) irrigated agriculture infrastructure improvement, (ii)
                           enhanced climate smart agricultural practices, and (iii) institutional strengthening and capacity
                           building
                            3. Project Description


                                                                       Page 1 of 10
                         The Integrated Modern Agricultural Development Project (IMAD) would finance investments in 34
                         counties/prefectures/cities in the six participating provinces/regions/municipalities. An approach that
                         balances infrastructure improvement with the promotion of climate smart agriculture practices and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the strengthening of the involved institutions and their sustainability is contemplated. Interventions
                         would be tailored to the local conditions and will be determined in consultation with line bureau
                         staff, technical institutions, farmer groups, local private sector representatives and local government.
                         Project areas are selected based on specified criteria such as clustered arable land with adequate
                         water resources but with infrastructure and technology gaps, vulnerability to climate shocks,
                         potential for agricultural modernization with demonstrative impacts, access to markets, etc. The total
                         cost is estimated at about $313 million, comprising an IBRD loan of US$200 million and counterpart
                         funding of $113 million. Counterpart funds comprise allocations from the six provinces/regions/
                         municipalities and farmers contribution. The GOC will pass on the Bank loan, as grants, to the
                         provinces. The project would have four components.

                         Component A: Irrigated Agriculture Infrastructure Improvement

                         This component seeks to improve farmland infrastructure and the reliability and efficiency of
                         irrigation and drainage systems. It aims at stimulating irrigated agriculture and water productivity by
                         improving water use efficiency and the adoption of water savings irrigation. Activities financed
                         under this component include: (a) improvement of irrigation and drainage infrastructure (dredging
                         and cleaning of irrigation canals and drainage channels, canal lining, improving canal structures,
                         pumping stations, irrigation wells and small water storage systems); (b) development of high-
                         efficiency irrigation systems, including low pressure pipeline water delivery systems, sprinkler,
                         micro, and drip irrigation systems; (c) water monitoring, measurement, and management, including
                         construction and installation of water measurement structures and facilities for the improved
                         irrigation and drainage systems, monitoring of the annual amount of groundwater pumped for
                         irrigation within the project area in the three northern provinces, preparation and implementation of
                         groundwater management plans for six counties in the northern provinces, and piloting crop evapo-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         transpiration (ET) monitoring in three selected counties; and (d) rehabilitation of farm access roads
                         and on-farm rural power transmission lines.

                         Component B: Enhanced Climate-Smart Agricultural Practices

                         This component will build on the improved irrigation infrastructure and water delivery activities in
                         Component A to improve the productivity of irrigated agriculture, increase farmers’ incomes, and
                         reduce their vulnerability to adverse climatic events. Activities financed under this component will
                         include:

                         (a) Soil conservation and land management practices such as: (i) land leveling, improved tillage
                         practices, use of crop residues and mulching; (ii) improved soil fertility management (soil testing,
                         precise/formula fertilizer application, organic fertilizers); (iii) development of multi-purpose agro-
                         ecological activities (e.g. shelter belts, greenbelts, and windbreaks); and (iv) improved access to
                         agricultural machinery.

                         (b) Adaptation oriented agronomic techniques through: (i) integrated pest management; (ii) green and
                         non-polluted production systems; (iii) farm-based demonstrations of improved varieties and
                         technologies, rice intensification techniques, and green/plastic houses; (iv) applied research on
                         technical and policy-related to adaptation to climate change in agriculture).


                                                                       Page 2 of 10
                         Component C: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component seeks to improve the capacity of farmers, farmer organizations, and institutions at
                         various levels for conducting and promoting sustainable and climate resilient agriculture. Activities
                         under this component will include: (a) development and transfer of technical knowledge through
                         training and study tours; (b) awareness building/education and communication on climate smart
                         agriculture to the wider range of stakeholders; (c) establishing and strengthening of water users
                         associations for better operation and maintenance of on-farm irrigation infrastructure and better water
                         management for climate change resilience, and (d) promotion and support to farmer cooperatives
                         (FCs) and farmer associations (FAs) to enhance collective action for services delivery, access to
                         markets, and farmers based adaptation to climate change; (e) project management capacity building
                         for PMO staff at central, provincial, and county levels including provision of office equipment,
                         training materials, and vehicles.

                         This component would also finance technical assistance and relevant equipment to provide farmers,
                         farmer groups, and project institutions with specialist and multidisciplinary expertise (Mobile Expert
                         Teams) on various features of climate resilient agriculture (e.g. integrated and better water resources
                         management, mitigation and adaptation to climate change in agriculture, environmental, social and
                         economic aspects, evapotranspiration (ET) monitoring, environmental monitoring, and decision
                         support tools).

                         Component D: Project Management Support

                         The purpose of this component is to provide support for project implementing agencies at each level
                         to manage, implement, supervise and monitor project activities and progress. Activities to be
                         financed under this component include: (a) projects surveys, design, and construction supervision;
                         (b) project management including management information systems, and establishment of an
                         effective monitoring and evaluation system to monitor physical, financial, outcomes, and impacts
Public Disclosure Copy




                         indicators, and the recruitment of any related consultancies.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project covers the following 34 counties/districts in five provinces and Chongqing Municipality.
                         Hunan Province: Jinshi, Ningxiang, Hengdong, Datonghu, Junshan, and Zixing.
                         Jiangxi Province: Jinxian, Anfu, Gaoan, Xingguo, Yushui, and Jinxi.
                         Gansu Province: Dunhuang, Gaotai, Yongdun, Lintao, Wushan, and Lintai.
                         Liaoning Province: Zhangwu, Changtu, Sujiadun, Xiaodong, Linyuan, and Lianshan.
                         Xinjiang Autonomous Region: Qitai, Fukang,Yanzhe, and Bohu.
                         Chongqing municipality: Nanchuan, Fuling, Tongnan, Dazhu, Yongchuan, and Kaixian.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Zong-Cheng Lin (EASCS)
                         Ximing Zhang (EASCS)
                         Feng Ji (EASCS)
                         Meixiang Zhou (EASCS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)


                                                                      Page 3 of 10
                         Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes             The impacts of the proposed project on the
                         BP 4.01                                         environment are expected to be overall positive as
                                                                         the project, by design, puts strong emphasis on
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         the development of sustainable and climate
                                                                         resilient agricultural production systems.
                                                                         Negative impacts are mainly related to small
                                                                         scale construction activities which are limited to
                                                                         the rehabilitation and improvement of irrigated
                                                                         agriculture infrastructure (refer to Section II).
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No              The project will not affect any protected areas,
                                                                         known natural habitats, or established or
                                                                         proposed critical natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No              The project will not finance activities that would
                                                                         involve significant conversion or degradation of
                                                                         critical forest areas or related critical natural
                                                                         habitats as defined under the policy.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes             The project will include promotion of integrated
                                                                         pest management and production systems that
                                                                         meet green and non-polluted certification
                                                                         standards. No procurement of chemical pesticides
                                                                         is envisaged. The improved irrigation facilities
                                                                         and diversification of crop systems may induce
                                                                         some pesticides use. But the environmental and
                                                                         health risks are minor.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No              The project will not adversely affect sites with
                         BP 4.11                                         archeological, paleontological, historical,
                                                                         religious, or unique natural values. Chance finds
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         during construction might occur and relevant
                                                                         clauses are included in all construction contracts.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes             Among the six proposed project provinces, there
                                                                         are some ethnic minorities in the 4 proposed
                                                                         project counties of Xinjiang Autonomous Region.
                                                                         These ethnic minorities include Uygur, Kazak,
                                                                         Hui, and Mongolian. Most of them fall within the
                                                                         definition of Indigenous Peoples as per OP4.10.
                                                                         In addition, there are a small number of ethnic
                                                                         minority people - Mongolian who live scattered
                                                                         in the project area of Lingyuan City in Liaoning
                                                                         Province.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes             The project will hardly have negative impacts on
                         4.12                                            land acquisition and resettlement in any of the six
                                                                         project provinces according to the current plan for
                                                                         land use. Civil works are planned only for canal
                                                                         dredging and on-farm work on their original
                                                                         bases without new land requirement beyond
                                                                         project village, and will be undertaken in the crop


                                                                 Page 4 of 10
                                                                   idle seasons so as to avoid impact of temporary
                                                                   land occupation on crops as much as possible.
                                                                   However, there might be some minor
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   readjustment or changes of land use for some
                                                                   irrigation facility rehabilitation connecting with
                                                                   upstream facilities. In case there might be any
                                                                   temporary or permanent involuntary taking of the
                                                                   land during project implementation, a
                                                                   Resettlement Policy Framework has been
                                                                   prepared. In Fukang city of Xinjiang, a new
                                                                   Baiyanghe reservoir is currently under
                                                                   construction and is planned to be completed in
                                                                   2012. This is a medium sized reservoir with a
                                                                   total capacity of 12 million m3 of water to irrigate
                                                                   over 10,000 ha of land. Though beyond the
                                                                   project area, the Baiyanghe reservoir constitutes
                                                                   one of the water sources for irrigation in the
                                                                   project area in Fukang City. In view of this
                                                                   connection, due diligence has been conducted for
                                                                   this linked project, and a due diligence report has
                                                                   been prepared.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   Yes             Although the Project does not finance
                                                                   construction of dams, the irrigation systems
                                                                   financed by the Project would draw water directly
                                                                   from reservoirs formed by a number of existing
                                                                   dams and a dam under construction (DUC), and
                                                                   they could not function if the dams were failed. In
                                                                   the meantime, a number of upstream existing
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   dams also provide flood protection to the water
                                                                   diversion works being constructed under the
                                                                   Project; failure of these dams could cause
                                                                   extensive damage to or failure of the new Bank-
                                                                   funded structures.

                                                                   Based on the requirements of the OP4.37, the
                                                                   project provinces Jiangxi, Hunan, Gansu and
                                                                   Chongqing hired one or more independent dam
                                                                   specialists to (a) inspect and evaluate the safety
                                                                   status of the existing dam, their appurtenances,
                                                                   and their performance history;
                                                                   (b) review and evaluate the owner's operation
                                                                   and maintenance procedures; and (c) provide
                                                                   written reports of findings and recommendations
                                                                   for any remedial work or safety-related measures
                                                                   necessary to upgrade the existing dams to an
                                                                   acceptable safety standard. For Xinjiang and
                                                                   Liaoning Provinces, the Bank dam safety expert



                                                           Page 5 of 10
                                                                               will work together with the client to ensure the
                                                                               project is in compliance with the OP4.37. The
                                                                               PMOs at all levels would also assign special staff
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               to assist the Bank team to ensure the project is
                                                                               implemented in line with the OP4.37.
                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential l arge scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               Based on the social and environmental screening at PCN stage and confirmed through further
                              project safeguard instrument preparation. Four safeguards policies triggered are: OP4.01
                              Environmental Assessment, Pest Management (OP4.09), Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37), and
                              OP4.10 Indigenous people.

                             Environmental Assessment (OP4.01). Environmental impacts of the proposed project are overall
                             positive. Project activities, which have been selected based on the agreed selection criteria, are in
                             compliance with relevant water resources management plans. The project would generate real
                             water saving in project areas each year through the improvement of irrigation and drainage
                             infrastructure, and through the development of high-efficiency irrigation systems. In addition, the
                             project, by its design, promotes enhanced climate-smart agricultural practices. It will bring
                             multiple environmental benefits, such as soil conservation, reuse of crop resides, reduction of the
                             use of pesticides and fertilizers through balanced fertilization application and integrated pest
Public Disclosure Copy




                             management. Negative impacts are mainly related to small scale construction activities which are
                             limited to the rehabilitation and improvement of irrigated agriculture infrastructure. These impacts
                             (e.g. noise, wastewater, waste, and disturbance to local communities) will be temporary, limited
                             and local in nature.

                             Pest Management (OP4.09). The project will include promotion of integrated pest management
                             and production systems that meet green and non-polluted certification standards. No procurement
                             of chemical pesticides is envisaged. The improved irrigation facilities and diversification of crop
                             systems may induce some pesticides use. But the environmental and health risks are minor.

                             Dam Safety (OP 4.37). The project financed irrigation systems will draw water directly from
                             reservoirs formed by 44 dams, including 43 existing dams and one dam under construction (DUC).
                             Jiangxi, Hunan, Gansu and Chongqing Provinces/Municipality, will hire one or more independent
                             dam specialists to assist the Provincial PMOs, under the terms of references agreed by the World
                             Bank, to ensure the project is in compliance with the OP4.37. For Xinjiang and Liaoning
                             Provinces, the Bank dam safety expert will work together with the client to review the dam safety
                             status and ensure the project is in compliance with the OP4.37. The client will prepare Dam Safety
                             Action Plan following the recommendation of the dam safety experts. The PMOs at all levels
                             would also assign special staff to assist the Bank team to ensure the project is implemented in line
                             with the OP4.37.

                                                                       Page 6 of 10
                           Social safeguards

                           The project activities in Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region and Liaoning Province would take
Public Disclosure Copy




                           place in some areas populated with ethnic minorities (such as Yanqi, Bohu and Fukang counties in
                           Xinjiang as well as Lingyuan and Zhangwu counties in Liaoning), mostly Uygur, Kazak and
                           Mongol who were identified to fall in the definition of Indigenous Peoples (IP) as per OP4.10; and
                           hence the IP policy is applicable to this project. A Social Assessment (SA) was carried out to
                           intensify free, prior and informed consultation among the ethnic minority communities; and based
                           on their interests and enthusiasm to the project activities, the Ethnic Minority Development Plan
                           (EMDP) was developed to steer project design and implementation for equitable opportunities for
                           participation of the ethnic minority communities and adequate benefits to be shared with them as
                           compatible to their local cultures.

                           During project preparation, it was proved that this project would not envisage land acquisition and
                           resettlement in all the six participating provinces. Most of the project activities on infrastructure
                           construction would rehabilitate the existing facilities on their original bases, and the rest new
                           facilities would be established on the village level and the land was used for them on a voluntary
                           basis. All the facilities belonged to village communities, and no land ownership and the related
                           property rights change hands. However, because th e project irrigation construction may
                           sometimes connect to upstream facilities, civil work conducted beyond the village internal level
                           could not be completely ruled out. A resettlement policy framework (RPF) was hence prepared for
                           the six project provinces. This safeguard instrument was prepared just in case any land might be
                           taken involuntarily from certain project villages. In addition, linkage possibility with ongoing or
                           previous activities was also assessed. In Xinjiang project area, Baiyanghe reservoir in Fukang
                           County was under construction and was seen as linked to this project. A due diligence review of
                           land acquisition for the reservoir was prepared and confirmed that the involuntary resettlement
                           was in line with relevant Chinese laws and regulations as well as the Bank policy OP/BP4.12
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                           in the project area:
                             The proposed project supports sustainable and climate resilient agricultural production systems.
                           It is envisioned that in the future these production systems will be replicated in more areas.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             Environmental Assessment. The client has engaged an experienced consultant to prepare an EMP
                           for the project in accordance with the Bank’s requirements for OP.4.01 and Chinese EA
                           regulations. The EMP specified mitigation measures, monitoring plan, institutional arrangement
                           and capacity building activities. As part of the EMP, Environmental Code of Practices (ECOPs)
                           for a typology of construction activities have been developed, including measures for
                           rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage infrastructure; water-saving irrigation; rehabilitation and
                           electrification of pumping stations and existing tube wells; and farm and field access roads. Those
                           measures will be entered into bidding documents and civil works contracts.

                           Pest Management. Based on the survey and public consultation with local farmers and farmers’
                           cooperatives, a Pest Management Plan has been developed for each province addressing pest


                                                                     Page 7 of 10
                          management issues. The PMP incorporates the existing good pest management practices from the
                          project provinces and proposes a number of activities such as: (i) promoting IPM to reduce the use
                          of toxic pesticides, e.g. improvement of pest forecasting, use of bait lamps, crops rotation, pest
Public Disclosure Copy




                          resistant varieties, and balanced fertilization. Pesticides will be reduced due to green certification
                          for 1,570ha of green production farmland and 17,745ha of non-polluted production farmland; (ii)
                          training and capacity building for local farmers and governmental agencies; (iii) introduce and
                          promote biological and botanical pesticides; (iv) strengthening monitoring; and (v) reinforcing
                          regulatory aspects. Implementation of the PMP will be undertaken by the County PMOs, and
                          farmer communities, with assistance of consultants, County Plant Protection Stations and County
                          Agricultural Technology Extension Services Stations.

                          Social: The Central PMO has hired professional consultants to conduct social assessment and
                          prepare the ethnic minority development plans (EMDP) for Xinjiang and Liaoning project sites, as
                          well as the resettlement policy framework(RPFs) for six project provinces to handle ethnic
                          minority development, and future land taking if any. The task team will provide training and
                          guidance throughout the project cycle. The EMDP, RPFs and due diligence report were reviewed
                          by the World Bank team and deemed acceptable, and in line with the World Bank social
                          safeguards policy.

                          The RPFs set detailed principles and procedures as well as other crucial requirements for handling
                          involuntary resettlement. In the case of involuntary taking of land, the RPF will guide the project
                          component design and implementation with Resettlement Action Plan (RAP/abbreviated RAP),
                          and mandatory compensation for land acquisition and livelihood restoration are required during
                          project future implementation. The EMDP emphasizes participation and consultation with local
                          ethnic minority peoples, and sets key principles and measures to ensure ethnic people’s
                          development and benefits from the project in their culturally acceptable ways. Based on detailed
                          SA studies and extensive consultation among the Uygur, Kazak and Mongol ethnic minority
                          communities in the project areas in Xinjiang and Uygur Autonomous Region and Liaoning
                          Province, the EMDP sets forth a Participatory Framework for these ethnic minority groups’
Public Disclosure Copy




                          continuous consultation and participation in project implementation. In the meantime, closely
                          combined with project activity design and fulfillment, it also makes a further detailed Action Plan
                          for each of the ethnic minority communities’ irrigation infrastructure development and
                          participatory capacity building. Implementation of these safeguards instruments will be monitored
                          periodically, internally and externally, during the implementation stage of the Project.

                           The PMO (SOCAD) has rich experiences in implementing World Bank-supported projects and has
                           successfully handled ethnic minority development, land acquisition under World Bank projects
                           without receiving any complaints in the past. The PMO will assign a dedicated staff to coordinate
                           safeguards work, together with the local counterparts responsible for ethnic minority development
                           and any possible land taking in their respective project sites.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The EA safeguards documents (EMP, PMP) were prepared through consultation (e.g. interview,
                           meetings) with key stakeholders such as local farmers, farmers’ cooperatives. The EMP and PMPs
                           documents were locally disclosed on Sept 5, and Sept 6, 2012 respectively through announcements
                           published on the local website. These documents were disclosed at the Bank Info shop on
                           September, 11, 2012.



                                                                     Page 8 of 10
                           The project’s key stakeholders would be the local farmers and rural villages in the project areas of
                           the six provinces/regions/municipality (Gansu, Hunan, Jiangxi, Liaoning provinces, Xinjiang
                           Autonomous region, and Chonqging municipality). During project preparation, the project
Public Disclosure Copy




                           information dissemination campaign and repeated rounds of communication and consultation were
                           carried out by POCADs, COCADs and local practitioners among the villages in all project areas.
                           In particular, social assessment exercise with PRA measures was intensively conducted by the SA
                           team among the ethnic minority groups. Of a total of 24 ethnic minority communities concentrated
                           with Uygur, Kazak and Mongol populations in the project areas in Xinjiang and Liaoning
                           provinces, 12 were selected by the SA team for detailed sample surveys and fieldwork, including
                           11 village meetings, 28 focus groups, 109 household interviews with PRA methodologies of the
                           seasonal calendars, wealth ranking, community resources mapping, and problem trees.
                           Information and alternative options about the project, plan of civil works, proposed locations of
                           project activities were shared and solicited with the public and key stakeholders during
                           consultation. The EMDP report was disclosed locally on August 27, 2012 and in the Bank
                           Infoshop on August 31, 2012. The RPF report was disclosed locally on August 27, 2012, and in
                           the Bank infoshop on September 4, 2012.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      10-Sep-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  06-Sep-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   11-Sep-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      23-Sep-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  27-Sep-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   04-Sep-2012
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      23-Aug-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  27-Aug-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   31-Aug-2012
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      10-Sep-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  05-Sep-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   11-Sep-2012
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:

                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
                         ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                             If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                             in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                             Management Specialist?
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                             Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Rabih H. Karaky
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:         Name: Mark R. Lundell (SM)                          Date: 19-Sep-2012




                                                                       Page 10 of 10
