                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC5425

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Sep-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 30-Sep-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Jamaica                          Project ID:      P146460
                            Project Name:       Second Jamaica Inner Cities Basic Services for the Poor Project (P146460)
                            Task Team           Eric Dickson
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           25-Nov-2013                      Estimated        11-Feb-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      LCSDU                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Other social services (40%), Water supply (30%), Sanitation (30%)
                            Theme(s):         Other social development (20%), Other urban development (80%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        52.58                Total Bank Financing:         52.58
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                       0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                         52.58
                              Total                                                                         52.58
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           9. The proposed Development Objective of the operation is to enhance access to basic urban
                           infrastructure and services and contribute towards increased citizen security in selected poor and
                           socioeconomically vulnerable inner city communities of Jamaica.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed Development Objective of the operation is to provide improved access to basic urban
                           infrastructure and services and develop local capacities in 17 poor and socioeconomically vulnerable
                         inner city communities of Jamaica. Specifically the project will strengthen critical elements of social
                         capital vital to urban community development through a focus on urban renewal and upgrading. This
                         will require increases in the level of urban investments to keep pace with the growth and demands of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Jamaica’s urban population.

                         The proposed project builds on the successful implementation of the first Inner Cities Basic Services
                         Project (ICBSP). The first ICBSP was approved by the World Bank in 2006 to respond to
                         accelerating urban decay and declining citizen security. At the time of project preparation Jamaica
                         was characterized by a record high murder rate of 63 murders per 100,000 persons. Upwards of 60%
                         of Jamaica’s murders were attributable to the Parishes of Kingston & St. Andrew, St. Catherine,
                         Clarendon, and St. James. The project sought to upgrade the physical infrastructure and enhance
                         citizen security in 12 communities within these Parishes which faced limited social amenities,
                         inadequate access to basic services and high levels of poverty and incidence of crime. Specifically
                         the project encompassed activities aimed at improving the quality of life of community residents
                         through improving access to services such as water, sanitation, solid waste collection, and drainage,
                         and undertaking electricity regularization, road paving, and measures to enhance perceptions of
                         safety. In parallel the project undertook activities to promote security of tenure and the provision of
                         financial services for community members. Importantly the project supported the improvement in the
                         integrity of crime data at the community level through a Japan Social Development Fund (JSDF)
                         Grant for the development of the Jamaica Crime Observatory. Project indicators show increased
                         access to urban infrastructure in target communities, in particular water and sanitation, improved
                         urban roads and enhanced public safety. The total number of beneficiaries with improved access to
                         urban services (PDO indicator) has surpassed the 60,000 end target (61,953 in total to June 30,
                         2013). In 2011 the project was extended for two years and will close in December 2013. It has
                         disbursed 88% of loan proceed and rated Satisfactory in the last Implementation and Status Report
                         (August, 2013).

                         An independent assessment of projects in Jamaica that focused on community security and
                         transformation found that the original ICBSP was unique in its focus on community basic
Public Disclosure Copy




                         infrastructure as a means to community security and transformation. The comprehensive approach to
                         community development that the ICBSP has undertaken has been central to the results seen.
                         Infrastructure is a key component in community transformation; improvements to infrastructure
                         increase societal inclusion, job creation, access of state security forces to communities and access of
                         community members to economic services outside their communities. In addition to increasing
                         access to improved basic services, the ICBSP has enhanced public safety through mediation services,
                         community capacity building, skills training and related social services. Given the gains of the
                         ICBSP, and the demonstrable need for future programs that follow in the ICBSP’s footsteps, a
                         second phase of the ICBSP is deemed necessary, to capture the momentum of the good work done
                         under the current project and to replicate it in other inner city communities across Jamaica.

                         The proposed project will strengthen and further expand the objectives of the original Jamaica Inner
                         Cities Basic Services Project through four mutually reinforcing components. The related activities
                         encompassed under each component are hinged on the basic tenets of enhancing the quality of access
                         to services for communities, transforming the physical environment within these communities,
                         enhancing citizen security, and further improving the national and local governance capacity for
                         urban management. Given that implementation of the sub-component ‘Land Titling’ in the first
                         ICBSP proved to be challenging from an institutional and operational perspective; this sub-
                         component will not be included in the proposed operation. Instead, as part of the ‘Technical
                         Assistance for Strengthened Urban Management’ (Component 3 of the second ICBSP), the
                         preparation of a national policy on land regularization could be financed. The sub-component on
                         ‘Access to Financial Services’ also encountered difficulties; however, given its relevance to the
                         proposed development objective, the treatment of this under Component 1 (Basic Infrastructure and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Access to Services) will be explored in consultation with the GoJ for the second ICBSP. Specifically,
                         options to strengthen financial awareness, in addition to supporting financial inclusion for the 12
                         original communities under the first ICBSP will be assessed.

                         Within the selected communities the new project will target the following groups: (i) at risk males
                         and unattached youth (males and females) between the ages 6-35 years old; (ii) female single headed
                         households; (iii) gang members; (iv) children within state remand facilities; (v) teenage parents; and
                         (vi) families requiring counseling and civil support to access basic social services.

                         The proposed operation will directly support the Government of Jamaica’s Community Renewal
                         Programme (CRP). The CRP seeks to build on the very activities and approaches delivered under the
                         ICBSP. The CRP ranked communities using a combination of weighted variables associated with
                         their volatility and vulnerability. Volatility variables included: crime, violence related injuries,
                         presence of gangs. Vulnerability variables included: poverty, teenage pregnancy, literacy, ex-
                         convicts, accessibility of communities, child abuse, and presence of squatters. The CRP has
                         prioritized 20 of the 100 most vulnerable inner city communities. In-line with the GoJ’s thrust
                         towards Community Renewal and the experience of the ICBSP and the best practices honed, the
                         proposed project would be implemented in a further set of 17 communities for a concentrated set of
                         interventions aimed at improving infrastructure, enhancing citizen security, and strengthening
                         capacities for urban management.


                         Proposed components of the project include

                         Component 1: Basic Infrastructure and Access to Services (USD$36 million) that could finance
                         activities such as Road works, Sewage and water pipelines, Formalization of household electrical and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         water connections, Rehabilitation of educational facilities, Zinc fence removal, Community center
                         construction, Greening of public spaces, Physical improvements to schools Litter management and
                         collection.

                         Component 2: Public Safety Enhancement and Capacity Building (USD$8 million) that could
                         finance activities such as Education/training/skills development programs, Mediation and conflict
                         resolution, Capacity building, for CBOs and community business owners, Family support programs,
                         School-Based Violence Prevention, Scaling-up of the Jamaica Crime Observatory.

                         Component 3: Technical Assistance for Strengthened Urban Management (USD$5 million) that
                         could finance activities such as Capacity building to Parish governments for infrastructure operations
                         and maintenance, Preparation of a national policy on land regularization, Definition of innovative
                         affordable housing solutions, Improved environmental design for green spaces, Strengthened solid
                         waste management practice

                         Component 4: Project Administration Component (USD$3 million) that could finance activities such
                         as Project management, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Communications.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         While the exact project location is currently unknown, the Government of Jamaica Community
                         Renewal Program has prioritized 20 of the 100 most vulnerable inner city communities. In-line with
                         the GoJ’s thrust towards Community Renewal and the experience of the ICBSP, the proposed project
Public Disclosure Copy




                         would be implemented in a further set of 17 communities for a concentrated set of interventions. One
                         of the criteria used in the definition of community vulnerability is the presence of squatters,
                         suggesting that informal occupation of public land and the right of way for infrastructure could pose
                         a challenge.

                         All communities that have been pre-identified are located within urbanized areas, which avoids
                         impacts to natural habitats or forests, but which could affect physical cultural resources.
                         Construction activities will create minor impacts such as dust, noise, storage and disposal of debris,
                         traffic and utilities disruption, and safety of workers and road users. Pesticides may be used in small
                         amounts for building treatments, and historical or archeological properties may be encountered
                         during excavation in settled areas, therefore the pest control and physical cultural resource policies
                         may be triggered as a precaution. An exclusion list within JSIF's Operations Manual and
                         Environmental Management Framework (EMF) prohibits projects of large scale, those with
                         environmentally complex conditions, or which could generate impacts to natural habitats, effects to
                         historical or religious sites, involve dam construction or rehabilitation, or construct new roads more
                         than 5 kilometers long or 5 meters wide. Proposed project activities will be verified in a pre-
                         appraisal mission during project preparation.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The institution responsible for the implementation of the project is the Jamaica Social Investment
                         Fund (JSIF) which was established in 1996 to reduce poverty and help create an environment for
                         sustainable development. JSIF is currently executing the first Inner Cities Basic Services Project
                         financed by the World Bank and the Government of Jamaica. Since inception, the JSIF has
                         completed over 1,000 sub projects in vulnerable communities and delivered these to some 1.6 million
                         underserved beneficiar¬ies.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The capacity of JSIF in terms of managing involuntary resettlement, and other social management
                         issues (such as grievance redress and conflict resolution) was rated highly during the implementation
                         of the first ICSB. JSIF successfully applied the measures specified in the resettlement policy
                         framework to the mitigation of two minor cases of land acquisition. Otherwise, JSIF pro-actively
                         screened sub-project locations in order minimize potential resettlement and land acquisition.
                         Furthermore, JSIF was considered adequately staff in terms of social management, having six
                         specialists primarily engaged in outreach and capacity building activities with project beneficiaries.

                         JSIF's capacity for environmental safeguard policies is also considered to be very strong. JSIF
                         developed an Environmental Management System (EMS) and successfully achieved ISO 14001
                         certification in 2009 and recertification in 2011. The EMS is integrated with Fund Manager software
                         to faciliate application of the EMS to all JSIF projects, including another World Bank project (Rural
                         Economic Development Initiative or REDI). Equivalence and acceptability assessments have
                         resulted in positive outcomes for environmental safeguards relative to the first phase of ICBSP.
                         Jamaica is a leader in the region for piloting the use of country systems.

                         Safeguards instruments for the first phase of ICBSP included an Environmental Management
                         Framework (EMF). The EMF contains comprehensive protocols for screening and monitoring the
                         environmental aspects of subproject activities. Proposed subproject sites are subject to field visits by
                         project officers, and projects requiring Environmental Permits from the National Environment and
                           Planning Agency (NEPA) are also flagged during screening and assessment. Updates or revisions of
                           the EMF for Phase 2 are not anticipated, but will be evaluated during project preparation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Supervision missions have verified the implementation of the EMF, including the incorporation of
                           mitigation measures into contract documents, field supervision, and procedures development. Since
                           2012 staff at JSIF has included a full-time Environmental Manager, whose duties involve program
                           management, staff development and training in environmental matters.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Martin Henry Lenihan (LCSSO)
                           Michael J. Darr (LCSEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             Construction activities will create minor impacts
                           BP 4.01                                            such as dust, noise, storage and disposal of
                                                                              debris, traffic and utilities disruption, and safety
                                                                              of workers and road users. The existing EMF
                                                                              (for ICBSP Phase 1) will be updated to reflect
                                                                              the proposed Phase 2 sub-projects, assess
                                                                              institutional capacity for environmental
                                                                              management and ensure it contains the latest
                                                                              legal environmental provisions.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        TBD             The possibility of natural habitat effects to peri-
                                                                              urban areas will be evaluated during project
                                                                              preparation, as specific subproject areas are
                                                                              reviewed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                 TBD             It will be confirmed during project preparation
                                                                              that forest management or harvesting initiatives
                                                                              are to be excluded from the program.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09            TBD             Small amounts of pesticide may be used for
                                                                              foundation and ceiling treatments, so this policy
                                                                              may be triggered as a precaution.
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/    Yes             This policy is triggered as a precaution since
                           BP 4.11                                            excavation and construction activities will occur
                                                                              in settled areas.
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No              Although there are cultural minorities (such as
                                                                              Maroons, Rastafarian and other groups) in
                                                                              Jamaica, there are no groups that could be
                                                                              considered indigenous people as defined in OP
                                                                              4.10.
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     Yes             There is a possibility that land may be acquired,
                           4.12                                               or private assets affected, due to the
                                                                              implementation of activities planned under the
                                                                              basic infrastructure program. This is especially
                                                                              the case in communities characterized by high
                         number of squatters who may be occupying the
                         right of way for infrastructure, or other public
                         spaces. Under ICSB there were two minor cases
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of land acquisition which were successfully
                         mitigated using the original resettlement policy
                         framework. Due to the demand driven nature of
                         this project, the exact location of the sub-
                         projects will not be known at the time of
                         appraisal, and it will not be possible to identify
                         the resettlement impacts of the project in
                         advance. Therefore, similar to the first ICSB, a
                         resettlement policy framework remains the
                         appropriate resettlement planning instrument. In
                         some instances, minor land acquisition may be
                         managed through voluntary donations, and the
                         current resettlement policy framework makes
                         provisions for this. During the preparation of
                         this project this resettlement policy framework
                         will be reviewed by the social development
                         specialist and updated by JSIF, in order to
                         ensure its continued relevance to JSIF 2. The
                         review of the RPF will take into account (i) the
                         types of works, locations, level of land
                         regularization, and range of potentially affected
                         people (land owners, squatters, renters, etc.)
                         within the new communities to be supported,
                         and (ii) new or innovative housing or livelihood
                         restoration practices. The updated RPF will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         have clear procedures for resettlement impacts
                         related to easements and partial impacts, as well
                         as screening criteria related to voluntary land
                         acquisition to ensure such transactions are
                         carried out with the informed consent of and
                         free choice of the proprietors

                         Another potential resettlement impact relates to
                         the possible downstream effects of technical
                         assistance provided under component three of
                         the project for the preparation of a land
                         regularization policy. While such policies
                         normally seek to regularize informal users of
                         land, there is a risk that the policy may require
                         the removal of users from land where they
                         cannot be regularized due to safety concerns (e.
                         g. floodplains, seismic zones, hillsides etc) or
                         other public uses (e.g. protected areas). These
                         groups of users would need to be provided with
                                                                                                                                 alternative sites of equivalent locational value
                                                                                                                                 under the policy. Similarly, the policy would
                                                                                                                                 need to pay attention to the unique situation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 vulnerable groups who may face discrimination
                                                                                                                                 in the land regularization process, the provision
                                                                                                                                 of complementary social services and livelihood
                                                                                                                                 opportunities to regularized, as well as access to
                                                                                                                                 alternative grievance redress and dispute
                                                                                                                                 resolution mechanism. In order to mitigate these
                                                                                                                                 and other related risks, World Bank advice
                                                                                                                                 provided as part this TA will be fully consistent
                                                                                                                                 with the provisions of OP 4.12.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The policy is not triggered because the project
                                                                                                                                 will not support the construction or
                                                                                                                                 rehabilitation of dams nor will support
                                                                                                                                 investments which rely on the operation of
                                                                                                                                 existing dams.
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            The policy is not triggered since the project will
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            not affect any international waterways as
                                                                                                                                 defined under the policy.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The policy is not triggered because the project
                                 7.60                                                                                            will not affect disputed areas as defined under
                                                                                                                                 the policy.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 10-Oct-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The task team social development specialist will work with the staff of JSIF to update the existing
                                      Resettlement Policy Framework, to ensure it reflects the latest legal provisions for land acquisition
                                      in Jamaica, as well as state-of the art resettlement planningpractice in the World Bank. The update
                                      of the framework, as well as evaluation of the Environmental Managent Framework (EMF), will
                                      take place during the preparation stage of the project, which is scheduled for September 2013. The
                                      task team social development specialist and citizen security specialists, will also work with JSIF
                                      during this time to update the relevant sections of the project operational manual to ensure other
                                      social risks are addressed as part of project design, including (i) the sustainability of service
                                      regularization including concerns regarding the capacity of households to pay for services
                                      provided, as well concerns surrounding household legal status (ii) the potential for outbreaks of
                                      violence to address community works, and systems of alternative dispute resolution and
                                      communication to deal with these outbreaks (iii) systems for inclusive and participatory planning,
                                      transparency, and social accountability for community investments.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Eric Dickson

                                 Approved By:


                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Regional Safeguards Name: Dianna M. Pizarro (RSA)   Date: 25-Sep-2013
                         Coordinator:
                         Sector Manager:     Name: Anna Wellenstein (SM)     Date: 30-Sep-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy
