                                                                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                            APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                          Report No.: ISDSA835
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Aug-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                       Africa                                  Project ID:                      P130174
                              Project Name:                  First Part of the Second Phase of the Niger Basin Water Resources Development and Sustainable Ecosystems
                                                             Management Program - APL 2A (P130174)
                              Task Team Leader:              Amal Talbi
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 15-Aug-2012                                  Estimated Board Date:            27-Sep-2012
                              Managing Unit:                 AFTN2                                   Lending Instrument:              Adaptable Program Loan
                              Sector:                        Hydropower (25%), General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (25%), Irrigation and drainage (25%),
                                                             General agriculture, f ishing and forestry sector (25%)
                              Theme:                         Water resource management (40%), Other rural development (30%), Climate change (15%), Social risk mitigation
                                                             (15%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                  Financing Source                                                                                                      Amount
                                  BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                      186.59
                                  International Development Association (IDA)                                                                             200.00
                                  IDA Grant                                                                                                                 3.00
                                  ABU DHABI Abu Dhabi Fund for Arab Economic Development                                                                   10.00
                                  African Development Bank                                                                                                124.41
                                  Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa                                                                             10.00
                                  Economic Community of West African States                                                                                 7.50
                                  FRANCE French Agency for Development                                                                                     92.30
                                  Islamic Development Bank                                                                                                 50.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                                  KUWAIT Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development                                                                         20.00
                                  OPEC FUND                                                                                                                15.00
                                  SAUDI ARABIA Saudi Fund for Development                                                                                  20.00
                                  West African Development Bank                                                                                            46.24
                                  Total                                                                                                                   785.04
                              Environmental Category:        A - Full Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              The program objective of the Water Resources Development and Sustainable Ecosystems Management APL, as described in the PAD, is to
                              enhance regional cooperation, development, and sustainability of water resources management in the Niger River Basin. The development
                              objective of this project (WRD-SEM APL 2A) is to increase access to water for agriculture development and capacity for energy generation in the
                              Recipient’s part of the Niger Basin.

                              3. Project Description

                              The key institutional and planning activities required prior to launching implementation of the Niger Basin 20-year Investment Program (IP) have
                              progressed satisfactorily and the countries are preparing to move to the construction stage. It is an opportune moment for the Niger Basin
                              Authority, with its enhanced institutional capacity, to support the countries in implementing the large and complex IP. The proposed project, which
                              will support physical infrastructure investments of the Kandadji Program, is an example of the next generation of high-risk, high-reward projects in
                              the Niger Basin. The design of the IDA-funded Program (WRD-SEM APL) as an APL was – and still is a relevant approach, providing the flexibility
                              needed to support the Basin countries to coordinate and implement the investment projects emerging from the SDAP and the IP.

                              The proposed project will contribute to Phase I and Phase II of the Kandadji Program and will finance three components: (i) institutional
                              strengthening of the NBA; (ii) construction of the Kandadji Program energy infrastructure; and (iii) implementation of environmental and social
                              safeguards, and growth pole community development. The components are outlined below.

                              Component 1 (Estimated cost US$3 million, of which IDA US$3 million from the regional IDA Grant). This component will enhance the NBA’s
                              capacity for project supervision of IDA-funded project activities and support the institutional strengthening of regional water resources

                                                                                                                                                                       Page 1 of 7
                         management:

                         Component 2 (Estimated cost US$498.1 million, of which IDA US$140 million, Development Partners US$286.55 million, GoN US$71.55 million).

                         i.        Sub-Component 2.1 (Estimated total costs US$250 million, of which Development Partners US$178.45 million, GoN US$71.55 million).
                         This sub-component focuses on the construction of the Kandadji dam (including the preparation studies and the supervision costs).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         ii.       Sub-Component 2.2 (Estimated cost US$248.1 million, of which IDA US$140 million, Development Partners US$108.1 million). This
                         sub-component will support: (i) the equipment and installation of the power plant; (ii) engineering supervision, (iii) Niger Basin independent panel of
                         experts for dam safety and for environmental and social aspects, (iv) critical studies on the energy master plan and linkage with the West African
                         Power Pool as well as the design of the dam and the power plant operation’s contract; and (v) implementation support to the executing agency (i.
                         e., HCDNV), including financing of personnel to strengthen the implementation of the project . The parts of this sub-component to be co-funded by
                         the AFD, AfDB, and the Bank will support the equipment and installation of the power plant. Based on the engineering design, the power plant
                         consisting of four Kaplan turbines will be constructed at the base of the dam. The power plant will have a capacity of 130 MW and generate an
                         average of 600 GWh.

                         Component 3 (Estimated cost US$283.94 million, of which IDA US$60 million, Development Partners US$108.9 million, GoN US$115.04 million).
                         This component will support resource planning and community development and provide a number lessons learned and practice on the local
                         development of growth pole program in a context of (i) zone experiencing influx of refugees, and (iii) a paradigm shift in integration of the benefits
                         of a major infrastructure in the local development timely to fully explore all the new opportunities. This component would consist of three sub-
                         components:

                         i.         Sub-Component 3.1 (Estimated cost US$109.10 million, of which Development Partners’ contribution of about US$22.16 million, and
                         GoN’s contribution is about US$86.94 million.) This sub-component will focus on planning, implementing, and monitoring environmental and
                         social safeguards mitigation measures.

                         ii.          Sub-Component 3.2 (Estimated cost US$74.84 million, of which IDA US$30 million, and other Development Partners US$23.4 million,
                         and GoN’s contribution is about US$21.44 million.) This sub-component will support irrigation development through: (i) preparation of a master
                         plan for an optimal and long term sustainable development of the Kandadji Program area (i.e., the 45,000 hectares and other uses such as fishery,
                         trade, tourism, livestock etc.), (ii) rehabilitation of about 1,000 hectares of existing irrigated schemes to consolidate food security in the area and
                         provide lessons to the master plan to ensure adequate sustainability of the new schemes; and (iii) the design and implementation of a pilot agro-
                         business growth pole of approximately 1,500 hectares of diversified commercial crops downstream of the future Kandadji Dam, and for which
                         private-public partnerships will be developed. It is critical to note that for a significant and quick up-scale of irrigation in Niger and more broadly in
                         Africa, it is important to continue building on the knowledge of ways to rely more on private sector in irrigation. There are already some
                         experiences in Senegal, Burkina Faso, and Zambia, and more is needed. This building of knowledge is particularly important in the case of the
                         Kandadji program that also includes the influx of refugees putting a pressure additional stress in resources in an area that is already highly
                         vulnerable.

                         iii.       Sub-Component 3.3 (Estimated cost US$100 million, of which IDA US$30 million, other Development Partners US$63.34 million, GoN
                         US$6.66 million) will support local development initiatives consisting of: (i) strengthening capacities planning and implementation capacities rural
                         communes, communities and partner organizations and communities in the Program areas for local development and investment planning, (ii)
                         establishing local development fund for (a) financial support to eligible municipalities and communities to implement agreed investment plans,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         primarily community investment for access to basic services and natural resources management, through a community driven development (CDD)
                         approach; and (b) and matching grants to support income generating initiatives centered on micro-business activities, including within the pilot
                         growth pole, for selected categories, of which women and youth living in the program areas will be favored.

                         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         The site for the Kandadji Dam is near the small town of Kandadji, Niger, about 180 km northwest of the capital Niamey and about 60 km from the
                         Malian Border. The irrigation and the local development will be upstream and downstream of the Kandadji Dam site.

                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                         Zarafshan H. Khawaja (AFTCS)
                         Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTSG)
                         Robert A. Robelus (AFTFW)
                         Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTCS)
                         Paula F. Lytle (AFTCS)
                         Africa Eshogba Olojoba (AFTN1)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                            Triggered?        Explanation (Optional)




                                                                                                                                                                       Page 2 of 7
                         Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01      Yes   OP 4.01 is triggered as the project will have impacts on the environment due to the
                                                                        construction and operation of the Kandadji Dam, Reservoir and associated
                                                                        irrigation and other activities.

                                                                        Under an African Development Bank funded project, an ESIA was completed in
                                                                        2006. For the purpose of its financing, the World Bank has requested that the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        ESIA be updated and completed. The final updated Environmental and Social
                                                                        Impacts Assessment (ESIA) and associated Environmental and Social
                                                                        Management Plan (ESMP) has been endorsed and disclosed in country on
                                                                        February 23, 2012, and in Infoshop on February 13, 2012. The ESMP (i) includes
                                                                        a Construction and an Operation ESMP, and (ii) addresses among others: (a)
                                                                        chance finds procedure for physical cultural resources, (b) Local Development
                                                                        Plan; (c) impacts on biodiversity and Environmental Offset; and (d) impacts on
                                                                        fisheries and fisheries development and management, including aquaculture
                                                                        development. Finally, a cumulative impact assessment has been completed, and
                                                                        submitted to the Bank along with the final updated ESIA/ESMP.
                                                                        An Environmental and Social Advisory Panel has been put in place by the Niger
                                                                        Basin Authority (NBA), financed by the Bank, and a first field mission was carried
                                                                        out in September 2011.

                                                                        With regard to component 3 of the project, as the location of the activities is yet to
                                                                        be known, the appropriate safeguard instrument to use is an Environmental and
                                                                        Social Management Framework (ESMF). The update of the ESMF for the WRD-
                                                                        SEM APL has been approved by the Bank and disclosed in country on February
                                                                        23, 2012, and in Infoshop on February 13, 2012. The Project has adapted this
                                                                        revised ESMF for the WRD-SEM APL 2A and will apply it as an environmental and
                                                                        social screening tool when implementing component 3.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04              Yes   OP 4.04 is triggered due to the project location and impacts on aquatic natural
                                                                        habitat. Per the request of the Bank, the client has provided a biodiversity
                                                                        management plan that has already been approved by ASPEN. The project design
                                                                        includes the establishment of an Environmental Offset to compensate for the lost
                                                                        aquatic biodiversity. This Environmental Offset will be co-managed by the
                                                                        communities and there will not be a restriction of access. The protected area will
                                                                        better protect manatees, hippos and migratory birds. The plan is included in the
                                                                        updated ESIA/ESMP as an annex and is disclosed in country and in Infoshop on
                                                                        February 23, 2012, and on February 13, 2012, respectively.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                       Yes   The Kandadji Program will have impacts on some of the remaining shrub forest
                                                                        areas in the reservoir area, which triggers the policy. Also activities under
                                                                        Component 3.3 might cover agro-forestry and support to establish community
                                                                        forest reserves or woodlots in highly degraded areas to enhance their
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        sustainability.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09                  Yes   OP 4.09 is triggered as at least 1,500 hectares of new irrigation will be developed.
                                                                        The Pest Management Plan is part of the updated ESIA/ESMP approved and
                                                                        disclosed in country on February 20, 2012, and in Infoshop on February 13, 2012.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   Yes   OP 4.11 is triggered due to potential impacts on physical cultural resources
                                                                        associated with the Kandadji Dam infrastructure supported through the project.
                                                                        Compliance is handled through the updated ESIA/ ESMP, approved by the Bank
                                                                        and disclosed in country on February 20, 2012, and in Infoshop on February 13,
                                                                        2012.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            No    OP 4.10 is not triggered as there are no known indigenous peoples in the project
                                                                        area of influence.




                                                                                                                                                  Page 3 of 7
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12            Yes              OP 4.12 is triggered as construction of the Kandadji Dam involves significant
                                                                                               involuntary resettlement.

                                                                                               Under the African Development Bank funded project, a RAP was completed in
                                                                                               2006. After the Bank engaged in the project, it asked for an update of the RAP.
                                                                                               The updated RAP which relates to the first step of resettlement was endorsed by
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               the Bank and disclosed in country on February 23, 2012, and in the Infoshop on
                                                                                               February 13, 2012. The update included change of the cut-off date defined as
                                                                                               September 2010 and a census of persons to be resettled under the first wave to be
                                                                                               affected by the construction of the dam. The first step affects 774 households (that
                                                                                               is 5,410 people).

                                                                                               The displacement of the remaining approximately 32,500 people (second step) will
                                                                                               not occur before 2016. The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) prepared for
                                                                                               WRD-SEM APL, disclosed in February, 2007 has been updated and disclosed
                                                                                               before appraisal. It includes all information available to date on the people affected
                                                                                               by the project (PAPs) location, current estimated census numbers, entitlement
                                                                                               matrix, resettlement support and social measures, and estimated costs. The RPF
                                                                                               takes account of the complexity of completing the census of the PAPs, the
                                                                                               arrangements and consultations for the host sites and irrigation schemes as well
                                                                                               as other activities (fishery, livestock, trade, etc.) to establish new livelihoods for the
                                                                                               PAPs, the dam construction underway, the recent situation with the Malian
                                                                                               refugees (about 11,000 of whom have moved into the Kandadji Program area),
                                                                                               and the final technical decisions about the height of operation of the reservoir and
                                                                                               subsequent impoundment area. Once these issues are known or resolved, the
                                                                                               Bank will ensure that there are sufficient resources to complete the RAP for the
                                                                                               remaining approximately 32,500 PAPs in a realistic time frame (about 18 months
                                                                                               after the Board date of the project). Finally, the financing agreement is drafted to
                                                                                               ensure that disbursements for civil works and local development activities are
                                                                                               linked to progress in preparing and implementing the RAPs according to the
                                                                                               requirements of the Bank’s Involuntary Resettlement policy (OP4.12).
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                      Yes              OP 4.37 is triggered as the project is supporting dam infrastructure higher than 15
                                                                                               meters in the Niger basin. A Panel of Experts on Dam Safety (PEDS) is already in
                                                                                               place, and will be further supported through Component 2 of the project. PEDS
                                                                                               started its review of the Kandadji Dam design in September 2011 and the review is
                                                                                               expected to be completed before appraisal. Per OP 4.37 requirements, the
                                                                                               developer is expected to integrate the observations and the relevant
                                                                                               recommendations of the PEDS in the construction design, operation and the
                                                                                               Project’s dam safety plans. Dam safety plans: Instrumentation Plan, Operations
                                                                                               and Maintenance Plan, and a draft Emergency Preparedness Plan have been
                                                                                               prepared and are being reviewed by the PEDS prior to appraisal.
Public Disclosure Copy




                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP      Yes              OP 7.50 is triggered because of impacts of dam infrastructure on the Niger river,
                               7.50                                                            whose basin includes nine riparian countries – Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon,
                                                                                               Chad, Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea, Mali, Niger, and Nigeria. Infrastructure development
                                                                                               in the Niger River, including under the “Strategic Development Action
                                                                                               Plan? (SDAP) adopted by the riparian countries in 2007, will have cumulative
                                                                                               impacts in the Niger basin. The Kandadji Dam infrastructure plays a critical role in
                                                                                               the basin’s development program. In compliance with OP 7.50 requirements,
                                                                                               riparian were notified on November 16, 2011 by the NBA in accordance with the
                                                                                               provision of the water Charter which is binding on all riparian. The deadline for
                                                                                               response was January 10, 2012, and so far the NBA and Government received
                                                                                               responses in support of the project from Benin, Burkina Faso, Chad, Cote d’Ivoire,
                                                                                               Guinea, and Mali. Nigeria requested information on June 20, 2012, and Niger
                                                                                               through the NBA provided all the information by June 27, 2012. The Government
                                                                                               of Niger committed to further disclose to riparian any additional safeguard
                                                                                               documents and/or instruments to be developed and adopted for the purpose of the
                                                                                               project.
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60          No               OP 7.60 is not triggered as there are no known disputes over the project area.


                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any potential l arge scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                  Given its complexity, the Kandadji Program will have significant environmental and social impacts. The Kandadji reservoir would create (at the
                                 optimal operating level of 228 meters above sea level) a 282 square kilometers reservoir and given the density of the area, this will result in the
                                 displacement of about 38,000 people.

                                 The project will have impacts on natural habitats, both during construction and operation of the dam. The main impact will be the flooding of a
                                 considerable area. The ESIA indicates that none of the flooded terrestrial and aquatic natural habitat is critical. Forest issues include wood
                                 salvage from the future reservoir, as well as control of induced impacts at the periphery of the reservoir. Since the Kandadji Project is located

                                                                                                                                                                             Page 4 of 7
                           on the edge of the Sahara Desert, the few forests remaining consist mostly of shrubs.

                           The project will have significant environmental impacts, including: (i) the loss of mostly aquatic natural habitat due to flooding and infrastructure
                           footprint. An Environmental Offset in the form of a new protected area in order to better protect manatees, hippos and migratory birds is part of
                           project design; and (ii) the predictable environmental, human and health risks associated with the construction and operation of any large
                           infrastructure in a high area.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Given the planned development of new irrigation, about 45,000 ha, potentially harmful, quantities of pesticides and other biocide products will
                           be utilized and for the control of disease vectors in the irrigated areas. A Pest Management Plan (PMP) has been prepared and disclosed to
                           Infoshop on February 13, 2012 and in-country on February 23, 2012.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                             The Kandadji Program will have long term impacts on biodiversity and on human settlements. This project will be implemented under Part A of
                           the APL 2 (the WRDSEM APL 2A) while other sub-projects will be implemented under Part B of the APL. While many of the future sub-projects
                           are expected to have low environmental and social impacts, their cumulative impacts may be substantial. The impacts of sub-projects
                           individually and their cumulative impacts are to be assessed in compliance with the rules, principles, processes and standards described in the
                           ESMF and in the EIES/ESMP.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                             An Analysis of Alternatives, prepared as part of project preparation, indicated that the present chosen site is the best alternative from an
                           environmental, social, technical, economical and financial perspective. The project site and design were selected based on conclusions from
                           several studies both at the regional level (under the NBA) and at the national level (under the HCDNV) of alternative locations for reservoirs,
                           considering costs, benefits and the fact that only two sites in Niger are suitable for storage. The storage of water in these tributaries could be
                           increased but evaporative losses significantly reduce the volume of water stored and would not be enough for the water needs of Niamey in
                           2025. In addition, the hydroelectric potential of these tributaries is limited or even nonexistent.

                           The dam project of Dyodyonga on the Mékrou river is one alternative that was studied for years. However, this site, because of its location in
                           the extreme south of Niger could only be beneficial to hydropower generation and not for the large-scale irrigation. The Gambou site is located
                           125 km south of Niamey. The dam would have a reservoir of about 0.430 billion m3 (i.e., about 3.5 time smaller than Kandadji reservoir) and
                           produce between 236 and 291 GWh/year (compared to 600 GWh/year from the Kandadji Program). Despite the production of electricity, this
                           project would not meet the needs of irrigation across the country as it is located significantly downstream to the site needed by people to irrigate
                           and it would not guarantee a minimum flow in Niamey since it is located downstream.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                            and implement the measures described.
                             The implementation agencies have some experience in implementing the Bank’s safeguards policies in the first phase of activities. However,
                           not all institutional arrangements for the NBA that are provided for under the Water Charter are in place. The NBA has adopted a phased
                           approach, having created (on a priority basis) an Environmental and Social Advisory Panel of experts and a permanent technical committee,
                           including a Dam Safety Panel, and is planning for the establishment of a regional group and sub-basin committee in the future. The NBA’s
                           institutional capacity may be somewhat limited while this full set of regional cooperative bodies is under development. In Niger, the HCDNV
                           has historically had limited on-the-ground experience with large-scale technical projects, coordinating several independent government
                           agencies and ministries, and with managing a resettlement program of this scale. This, combined with a lack of cross sector coordination and
                           capacity, could threaten timely and effective implementation of safeguard policies. For this reason, effective measures to strengthen safeguards
Public Disclosure Copy




                           capacity and activities are critical.

                           The implementation arrangements for the WRD-SEM APL 2 are the following: The NBA will be responsible for the implementation of
                           Component 1 and the HCDNV will be responsible for the implementation of Components 2 and 3. As such, the WRD-SEM APL 2A will ensure
                           that adequate support is provided to the HCDNV on safeguard issues to ensure proper follow up of the recommendations that will be issued
                           from key safeguard documents (ESIA, ESMP, RAPs, ESMF, and RPFs). In particular, the project will include a suitable training program,
                           supported by a technical assistance package as needed.

                           It is expected that around 38,000 people will be affected by the Kandajdi Program. A first step of resettlement shall involve 5,410 persons. A
                           RAP was prepared in 2006 and was updated to reflect changes that occurred between since 2006 and to take into account Bank’s
                           requirements on involuntary resettlement. The second step of persons to be resettled before the impoundment of the reservoir planned for
                           2016 shall involve around 32,500 persons and was also part of a 2006 RAP. The update of the RAP of the second step of displacement
                           (expected to take place in 2016) is on-going and is expected to be finalized at the latest 18 months after the Board of WRD-SEM APL 2A.

                           Institutional arrangements for ESMP implementation are very clearly spelled out, including the responsibilities of all the stakeholders involved
                           The project is also benefitting from the Panel of Independent Environmental and Social Experts, the Dam Safety Panel and the supervision by
                           experts from donors institutions. New units are proposed for the project to monitor day-to-day implementation of environmental and social
                           mitigation measures.

                           Under the ESIA, the contractor, in charge of building the Dam, must develop its own Contractor ESMP. This Contractor ESMP is presently
                           under review by the Bank. The Bank provided comments on a former version. This Contractor ESMP will have to include all relevant health,
                           safety, environmental and social (HSES) measures and plans showing how they plan to conform to the ESMP in conducting the construction
                           work.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                            on potentially affected people.
                            The key stakeholders identified are the state of Niger, industry, local NGOs, farmers, local fishermen and herders. Extensive consultations
                           with stakeholders were held as part of each of the major safeguards documents (ESIA, ESMP, RAPs, ESMF, and RPFs). These consultations
                           concluded well in advance of project appraisal, with final reports for most safeguards documents disclosed to Infoshop by February 13, 2012
                           and in–country by February 23, 2012.

                           Moving forward, a comprehensive communication strategy has been developed to explain its approach to water / sector interventions and its

                                                                                                                                                                     Page 5 of 7
                           support to preparatory activities for the project to civil society, NGOs and other stakeholders. The communication to date has focused mainly on
                           in-country stakeholders and to some extent on international NGOs who have followed the proposed project. The following communication
                           actions have already been undertaken:
                           •         Support for the preparation and dissemination of analytical work on political economy issues around the project;
                           •         Promotion of proactive, open consultation with stakeholders including CSOs and NGOs, including regular meetings at the Bank office
                           in Niamey with CSOs to discuss the Bank’s work in the region. These included meetings in:
                           •         Communications on World Bank safeguard policies, including environmental and social standards as well as procedures for public
Public Disclosure Copy




                           consultation and disclosure of information.

                           Concurrently, HCDNV has reinforced its communication unit to strengthen its broad communication capacity expert and has opened a local
                           office close to the project site. The HCDNV is also updating its communication strategy and will continue to plan upcoming information and
                           coordination meetings to be held in the framework of the ESIA process.

                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                    07-Feb-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                                23-Feb-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                 13-Feb-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive                 28-Jun-2012
                           Directors
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                    07-Feb-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                                23-Feb-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                 13-Feb-2012
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                                 Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                    07-Feb-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                                23-Feb-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                 13-Feb-2012
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                         disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         N/A

                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                           Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                     Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [   ]

                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                           If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) natural   Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [   ]
                           habitats, does the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                           If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or SM? Are                   Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [   ]
                           PMP requirements included in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                           Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                           Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts on               Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [   ]
                           cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                           If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the             Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [   ]
                           plan?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                           Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include provisions for              Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [   ]
                           certification system?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                           Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements been made                      Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [   ]
                           for public awareness and training?
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                                                                                                                                                               Page 6 of 7
                              Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                                         Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?              Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language      Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for   Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?              Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard    Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same        Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Task Team Leader:                    Amal Talbi
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:     Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                        Date: 14-Aug-2012
                            Sector Manager:                      Name Jonathan S. Kamkwalala (SM)                                         Date: 13-Aug-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                                               Page 7 of 7
