                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC313

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Dec-2011
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Tonga                            Project ID:     P122939
                            Project Name:      Tonga Energy Road Map Implementation Project (P122939)
                            Task Team          Roberto Gabriel Aiello
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          04-Jan-2013                      Estimated       18-Nov-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASNS                            Lending         Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector:            Other Renewable Energy (70%), Energy efficiency in Heat and Power (30%)
                            Theme:             Infrastructure services for private sector development (60%), Rural services and
                                               infrastructure (40%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           1.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                    5.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Bilateral Agencies (unidentified)                                            3.00
                              Foreign Private Commercial Sources (identified)                              3.00
                              Total                                                                       12.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed development objective is to improve energy security and reduce vulnerability to oil
                           price shocks in Tonga, through support for implementation of the Tonga Energy Roadmap.

                           The TERM sets out a ten year road map to reduce Tonga➃?➂ s vulnerability to oil price shocks and
                           achieve an increase in quality access to modern energy services in an environmentally sustainable
                           manner. The proposed project would provide assistance in implementing aspects related to
                           improving energy security to reduce vulnerability to oil price shocks. Other development partners
                           are providing support focusing on increasing quality access.
                         C. Project Description
                         The proposed project will support the implementation of key components of Phase 0 and Phase 1 of
                         the Indicative TERM Implementation Plan.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The specific Phase 0 activities to be supported under the proposed project are :
                         -        Implementation of key recommendations for improving petroleum supply chain efficiency
                         and price risk management;
                         -        Implementation of institutional, legal, policy and regulatory updates for petroleum and
                         electricity;
                         -        Design and launching of the Tonga Green Incentive Fund.

                         The specific Phase 1 activities to be supported under the proposed project are :
                         -      Review of initial experience with petroleum financial risk management and implementation
                         of modifications as required. In addition, the proposed project will support the strengthening of
                         TPL#s system to effectively use the energy to be supplied under RE power plant investments
                         proposed under Phase 1.

                         Other development partners are working with GOT and TPL at various stages of preparation and
                         implementation of Phases 0 and 1 (e.g. ADB on energy efficiency and RE grid supply on Ha#apai,
                         Vava#u and Eua; JICA and EC on off-grid aspects; IUCN on climate change assessment; GoNZ on
                         1MW solar PV project and upgrading the TPL village network to address key safety aspects of the
                         electricity infrastructure).

                         There will be two implementing agencies: TERM Implementation Unit (TERM IU) and Tonga
                         Power Ltd.

                         The proposed project components are as follows:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Strengthening the Energy Sector Framework and Structure
                         Implementing agency: TERM IU
                         This component would include technical assistance support in the areas of:
                         -       review and update of energy (electricity and petroleum) sector policy, legal and regulatory
                         aspects to be consistent with TERM vision and approach. REEEP and GOT are finalizing a scope of
                         work for some REEEP assistance in this area. The specific activities to be financed under the
                         proposed project will be defined taking into account the final scope of the REEEP assistance. This
                         could include, for example, consultants to: undertake the electricity tariff review; draft revised
                         energy sector laws; draft revised regulations for petroleum; undertake a physical inspection of
                         petroleum storage and handling facilities.

                         -       Technical support to TERM IU including funding for long and short-term specialist advisors,
                         including in the areas of safeguards and procurement as needed. The exact scope will be defined on
                         the basis of the TERM IU operational plan, currently under preparation with REEEP assistance.

                         -       Technical assistance to implement and evaluate a pilot petroleum price risk management
                         strategy.


                         Component 2: Tonga Green Incentive Fund (TGIF)
                         Implementing Agency: TERM IU
                         The aim of the TGIF is to provide a financial mechanism to support the development of sustainable
                         renewable energy to contribute to reducing reliance on imported petroleum and diversifying sources
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of supply. This component would include:
                         -         Technical assistance for the final detailed design and establishment of the Tonga Green
                         Incentive Fund (TGIF) and assistance in initial implementation, including:
                         o         consultations with development partners who would be potential contributors to the fund,
                         initially or in the future;
                         o         selection of Fund Manager and legal work to establish the TGIF Fund;
                         o         technical and transaction advisory assistance in working through first award from TGIF.

                         -      Initial Funding for Tonga Green Incentive Fund (TGIF) .
                         o      Initial funding for the TGIF, to be disbursed into the fund once TGIF has been established
                         and according to rules set up in establishing the TGIF.


                         Component 3: Preparing TPL for Renewable Energy Supply
                         Implementing Agency: TPL
                         This component will be primarily technical assistance, but will include some equipment (e.g.
                         breakers, system control equipment, etc.). The activities would include:
                         -        Design of Upgrades to the Networks and Systems Operations Procedures on Tongatapu,
                         Vava#u and Ha#apai in order to:
                         o       reduce the impacts of system instability events;
                         o       facilitate the integration of new renewable energy power plants;
                         o       upgrade the capacity of the plant and systems operators to manage a changing matrix of
                         energy inputs; and
                         o       advise on the benefits and conditions of the developing systems that would make the control
                         and management of the generation and networks best performed in a dedicated system control centre.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         -       Identification and installation of equipment at existing TPL facilities to upgrade the
                         protection systems in the TPL grids to improve overall stability.

                         -      Identification and installation of equipment at existing TPL facilities (e.g. control systems,
                         switchboard) to ensure continuing stable operation of the systems and maximize the benefit of
                         proposed renewable energy plant supply.

                         -       Provide TPL operations staff with training and tools to manage the generation system as
                         increasing amounts of renewable energy plants are installed.

                         -       Develop a least-cost generation and associated network development plan for the period of
                         five years (2012 through 2017) with renewable energy plants scheduled to achieve the GoT target of
                         a 50% reduction in imported fuel for electric generation plus an indicative plan for the system
                         development for an additional 10 years (through 2027). In addition, TPL staff would receive training
                         and tools so that they will be able to update the plans at regular intervals.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the             safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The only potential social and environmental impacts would be a result of investment supported under
                           the TGIF. Specific investment to be supported under the TGIF will not be known until proposals
                           have been submitted once the project is operational.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The Tonga Energy Road Map Implementation Unit (TERM IU) under the Prime Minister's Office
                           will be the implementing agency for Component 2: The Tonga Green Incentive Fund. The TERM IU
                           will be responsible for developing an Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF),
                           which will include a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), that will guide the design and
                           implementation of the TGIF. In developing the ESMF the TERM IU will work closely with the
                           Ministry of Environment, which has obtained experience and knowledge of implementing Bank
                           environmental safeguard requirements in previous Bank infrastructure projects as well as with the
                           Department of Lands and Surveys. Responsibility for reviewing and approving Resettlement Plans
                           (RP), Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and Environmental Management Plans
                           (EMP) with respect to investment supported by the TGIF will remain with the Ministries according
                           to the existing legal framework.

                           The TERM IU is a newly-restructured entity, but with resources, experienced leadership and high
                           level GOT support to quickly access implementation support from across GOT, e.g. from ministries
                           responsible for environment and land / compensation issues. Although not experienced in managing
                           safeguard aspects of World Bank projects, it will receive support, training and guidance from the
                           World Bank in the process together with other responsible Ministries
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Maria Fernanda Miralles Gasparini (SEGOM)
                           Xiaoxin Shi (EASOS)
                           Penelope Ruth Ferguson (EASNS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             Environmental impacts could be generated from
                           BP 4.01                                            the renewable energy (RE) investments, which
                                                                              are yet to be identified and approved by the
                                                                              TGIF during project implementation. These RE
                                                                              investments could include solar and wind power
                                                                              plants possibly with battery storage, landfill gas
                                                                              from existing landfills, and displacing of diesel
                                                                              fuel in some areas with coconut oil derived from
                                                                              existing coconut plantations. Therefore, the
                                                                              potential environmental impacts from TGIF
                                                                              supported investments are unlikely to be
                                                                              significant or unprecedented, and can be
                                                                              managed readily by mitigation measures and
                                                                              sound design.

                                                                              An Environmental and Social Management
                                                                              Framework (ESMF) will be prepared by
                                                                              appraisal to layout the safeguards approach and
                                                            guide the preparation of applicable
                                                            environmental and social plans, if needed, for
                                                            the TGIF-supported investments. The TERM IU
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            will work closely with relevant Ministries as the
                                                            principle implementation agency for the
                                                            implementation of the ESMF. The ESMF will
                                                            generally include the following aspects:
                                                            #        Screening and scoping requirements to
                                                            identify the appropriate environmental and/or
                                                            social safeguard instruments for the
                                                            investments;
                                                            #        Process to be followed for the review,
                                                            approval and disclosure of the environmental
                                                            and social plans prepared for the applicant
                                                            investments;
                                                            #        Requirements on the general scope and
                                                            public consultation of the afore-mentioned
                                                            plans;
                                                            #        A summary of public consultations
                                                            undertaken for the ESMF, including issues
                                                            identified and how they have/will be addressed;
                                                            and the proposed investments;
                                                            #        Institutional responsibilities, budget,
                                                            monitoring and reporting arrangements for the
                                                            implementation of the ESMF;
                                                            #        Chance Find Procedures;
                                                            #        A negative list of investments (if any)
                                                            that might cause significant impacts on natural
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            habitats and Physical Cultural Resources.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No   This policy is not triggered because the location
                                                            of the individual applicant investment can be
                                                            selected to avoid causing significant conversion
                                                            or degradation of natural habitats. Further, the
                                                            ESMF will include guidelines for subproject
                                                            siting, and will include requirements of
                                                            including suitable management measures in the
                                                            individual safeguard instruments for applicant
                                                            investments to avoid or minimize potential
                                                            impacts on natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No   The policy is not triggered because the project
                                                            will not affect the health and quality of forests,
                                                            the rights and welfare of people whose
                                                            livelihoods are dependent on forests, nor the
                                                            project intends to change the management/
                                                            protection/utilization of forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       No   The project will not involve procurement of
                                                            pesticides. Nor an increase of pesticide use as a
                                                                                                                                 result of the project is foreseen. The ESMF will
                                                                                                                                 include requirements on using manual /
                                                                                                                                 mechanical measures for vegetation clearance
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 and maintenance
                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No                            This policy is not triggered because the location
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         of the individual applicant investment can be
                                                                                                                                 selected to avoid causing impacts on PCRs. The
                                                                                                                                 ESMF will include siting criteria and
                                                                                                                                 requirements of including suitable management
                                                                                                                                 measures in the individual safeguard
                                                                                                                                 instruments for applicant investments to avoid
                                                                                                                                 the destruction, obstruction or removal of PCRs.
                                                                                                                                 In addition, Chance Find Procedures will be
                                                                                                                                 included in the ESMF.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            People in Tonga are ethnically Polynesian
                                                                                                                                 (98%). They speak Tongan language and
                                                                                                                                 identify themselves as Tongan. They do not
                                                                                                                                 consider themselves Indigenous People as per
                                                                                                                                 the WB policy. Therefore the Indigenous
                                                                                                                                 Peoples policy does not apply.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           The only potential involuntary resettlement
                                 4.12                                                                                            impacts would be a result of investment
                                                                                                                                 supported under the TGIF. Specific investment
                                                                                                                                 to be supported under the TGIF will not be
                                                                                                                                 known until proposals have been submitted
                                                                                                                                 once the project is operational. It is possible
                                                                                                                                 that investment supported under the TGIF could
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 involve land acquisition. Resettlement Policy
                                                                                                                                 Framework (RPF) will be prepared to guide the
                                                                                                                                 potential land acquisition under the TGIF
                                                                                                                                 components. Consultations to disclose the RPF
                                                                                                                                 will be carried out. The RPF will be included as
                                                                                                                                 a part of the ESMF.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The TGIF will not support investments which
                                                                                                                                 involve the construction of dams or be reliant on
                                                                                                                                 safety of existing dams.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The investments to be supported by TGIF will
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            not be on international waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project is not in a disputed area.
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Dec-2011
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             The specific studies and their timing would be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
                             Work will start on the RPF and ESMF in September 2011. Draft documents would be completed
                             in late 2011. Consultations in Tonga will take place in early 2012.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:    Name: Roberto Gabriel Aiello

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan (RSA) Date: 20-Jul-2012
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Charles M. Feinstein (SM)             Date: 30-Nov-2011
Public Disclosure Copy
