                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSC1214

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 30-Aug-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            China                            Project ID:      P126832
                            Project Name:       CH GEF Municipal Solid Waste Management Project (P126832)
                            Task Team           Tijen Arin
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           15-Jul-2013                      Estimated        15-Jan-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      EASCS                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Focal Area:         Persistent Organic Pollutants

                            Sector:             Solid waste management (100%)
                            Theme:              Pollution management and environmental health (80%), Environmental policies
                                                and institutions (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            26.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                             12.00
                              GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT - Associated IBRD Fund                                     22.00
                              Financing Gap                                                                  0.00
                              Total                                                                         60.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                             B. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                           The Project would aim to enhance the regulatory framework for compliance with new dioxin
                           emissions standards for incineration facilities, demonstrate best available techniques (BAT) and best
                           environmental practices (BEP) in MSW management to lower dioxins and furans emissions from
                           such facilities, and establish favorable conditions for replicating project results more widely across
                           China. As such, the Project would support China in meeting its obligations under the Stockholm
                           Convention.
                         C. Project Description
                         The proposed Project would seek to demonstrate globally accepted monitoring and enforcement
                         practices in order to support Chinese authorities in regulating the expected large wave of new
Public Disclosure Copy




                         incinerators. It would also seek to support successful application of BAT and BEP to reduce dioxin
                         emissions. Lessons learned from the pilot investments would be disseminated in other parts of the
                         country.

                         FECO has selected Kunming City, Ningbo City, and the Shunyi District of Beijing as candidate
                         project areas. These three cities have met the eligibility criteria agreed by FECO and the Bank, and
                         have submitted preliminary proposals. In Ningbo City, the Project would complement the World
                         Bank loan-funded Ningbo MSW Minimization and Recycling Project (“Ningbo loan Project?), which
                         is at an advanced stage of preparation and will aim to assist Ningbo Municipality in reducing the
                         proportion of MSW disposed at landfills and incinerators through waste minimization, source
                         separation, recycling, and institutional strengthening in selected districts.

                         The proposed project activities would be grouped in four components. The cost estimates provided
                         are preliminary and will be refined during Project preparation.

                         Component 1. Piloting improved regulations, monitoring and compliance (5.58 million GEF, 10.48
                         million beneficiary municipalities, environmental protection bureaus and FECO).

                         •        Improved monitoring. In all three project areas the project would support enhanced
                         monitoring of incinerator performances in terms of dioxin emissions, through a combination of
                         dioxin testing and inexpensive monitoring of incinerator operating parameters, such as temperature,
                         which impacts dioxins emissions. Local environmental protection bureau and municipal sanitation
                         unit officials would be trained in interpreting such data to monitor the incinerators’ operations
                         continuously. The project would also fund the competitive selection and long-term contracting of a
                         laboratory for dioxin emission tests. Ningbo proposes procurement of laboratory equipment for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         dioxin testing. Such equipment will be financed under the project (a) it is determined that the GEF
                         will support it, (b) it is directly related to a strategy of reducing dioxin emissions from MSW
                         incinerators, (c) the laboratory’s cost effectiveness is demonstrated and a plan for ensuring its
                         financial sustainability is place, and (d) strategies for ongoing quality assurance and quality control,
                         and for ensuring international credibility are in place.

                         •        Improved regulations, environmental permitting and enforcement. Kunming proposes to
                         strengthen the regulatory framework for MSW source segregation, kitchen waste management, and
                         tipping fee collection. The city also proposed support for a master plan for MSW management. The
                         project may also pilot a system of permits that specify incinerator operating conditions, maintenance
                         of the operating data which will be available for inspection. This would build on a bilateral project
                         with the United Kingdom that aimed at strengthening institutional capacity for permitting and
                         regulatory compliance, whereby MSW incineration was one of the focus sectors. Ningbo and Shunyi
                         too have expressed strong interest in adopting improved enforcement tools, which will be elaborated
                         during Project preparation.

                         •      Public information dissemination. In all three project areas, data collected about dioxin
                         monitoring and incinerator operations would be shared with the public in an accessible manner.

                         •       Enhancing national level capacity for regulating MSW incineration and replication. At the
                         national level, the Project would fund technical assistance to the drafting of technical guidelines or
                         other materials that MEP identifies as high priority to support the implementation of BAT/BEP to
                         encourage compliance with the Stockholm Convention. If MEP enacts the revised PCDD/F emission
Public Disclosure Copy




                         limit before Project appraisal, the Project would also fund priority technical assistance to support
                         MEP in implementing the revised standard. The Project would also support dissemination of lessons
                         l earnt from BAT/BET applications under Components 1 and 2 through printed materials and
                         national and international workshops in order to support replication in other cities of China.

                         Component 2. Demonstrating BAT/BEP in MSW incinerator operations (5.11million GEF,
                         32.28million beneficiary municipalities, incinerator(s) and the Ningbo loan project). This component
                         would demonstrate of BAT and BEP for MSW incineration to reduce dioxin emissions and of good
                         upstream MSW management practices if they can be shown to be directly linked to dioxin reduction.

                         •        Demonstrating BAT and BEP for MSW incineration. In Shunyi, the Project would fund the
                         installation of flue gas treatment facilities, including sophisticated acid removal, dust removal,
                         nitrogen removal and activated carbon adoption systems in a planned new 700tpd-capacity, two-unit
                         incinerator. The Project would also finance training of incinerator operators for the implementation
                         of BEPs such as feed control, combustion temperature control, activated carbon dosing control, SCR
                         catalytic agent c ontrol, and preparation of specifications for the operation and maintenance of the
                         MSW incinerator and flue gas facility in the two units of the new incinerator. The proposed
                         investments would allow the incinerator to consistently maintain dioxins emissions below the 0.1ng
                         limit. While neither Ningbo nor Kunming have proposed BAT/BEP investments at any of their
                         incinerators at this stage, technical assessments of the incinerators and feasibility studies during
                         project preparation may lead to concrete investment activities.

                         •       Demonstrating good upstream MSW management practices in Kunming, Ningbo, and
                         Shunyi. The project may support a limited number of such practices provided that a direct link with
                         MSW dioxin emissions can be demonstrated and the activities are not complex and can be completed
                         within the project’s time frame.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         All three project areas have plans to introduce MSW segregation and have proposed pilot activities to
                         support these plans. In Ningbo, the Project would complement the Ningbo loan Project’s component
                         (a) “waste red uction through source separation? through public awareness campaigns aimed at
                         promoting household waste segregation. To the extent such segregation reduces the organic content
                         of the waste delivered to the city’s incinerators, it would help improve combustion ef ficiency. The
                         activities to be supported under this project that complement the Ningbo loan project will be defined
                         during project preparation. Kunming City has proposed that project finance MSW segregation and
                         transportation facilities in the Guandu district, c ollection and transportation for restaurant kitchen
                         waste, and an MSW segregation pilot in urban areas of Kunming City. In Shunyi, the municipality
                         plans to implement an MSW segregation, collection and transport pilot during 2012-2015 and has
                         indicated that during project preparation it may identify specific areas for Project support. The
                         proposed activities will be assessed during project preparation from the point of view of impact on
                         dioxin emissions, complexity, and time required for completion.

                         Component 3. Project management, and monitoring and evaluation (US$ 1.31 million GEF and US$
                         5.24 million FECO, beneficiary municipalities and environmental protection bureaus). The GEF TF
                         will support day-to-day Project management activities and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) to
                         ensure that Project output and outcome targets agreed at Project appraisal are achieved by the agreed
                         Project closing date. M&E will include periodic monitoring of dioxin emissions from the pilot
                           incinerators. The management of Project funds and procurement will be carried out in accordance
                           with World Bank policies and guidelines. World Bank environmental and social safeguards will also
                           be adhered to during Project implementation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the             safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Project activities will be carried out in Shunyi District of Beijing, Kunming City and Ningbo City.

                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Foreign Economic Cooperation Office (FECO) of the Ministry of Environmental Protection
                           (MEP) will be the implementing agency for the proposed project and will take overall responsibilities
                           for the project implementation. FECO has implemented the past three GEF-financed POPs projects
                           managed by the Bank. Past experience shows that FECO has a strong commitment to and a good
                           record in managing environmental and social safeguards issues in a manner satisfactory to the Bank.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Chaogang Wang (SDV)
                           Ning Yang (EASCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              During project identification, a variety of
                           BP 4.01                                              incineration plants in the three candidate cities
                                                                                were reviewed and consulted according to their
                                                                                willingness to join the project and technical and
                                                                                economic considerations. Based on the review
                                                                                and consultation, at this stage the incinerator
                                                                                expansion plan of Shunyi District MSW
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                Comprehensive Processing Center is considered
                                                                                appropriate for the project to support.

                                                                                The key physical activity of the Project is
                                                                                installation of flue gas treatment facilities in a
                                                                                planned new 700tpd-capacity incinerator in
                                                                                Shunyi. The proposed new incinerator would be
                                                                                built in the existing Shunyi District MSW
                                                                                Comprehensive Processing Center located in a
                                                                                rural area. The center currently houses a 200
                                                                                tpd-capacity incinerator and a landfill, both of
                                                                                which were put into operation in 2008.

                                                                                Environmental Issues. Currently, the Chinese
                                                                                dioxins and furans emission standards for MSW
                                                                                incineration is 1.0ng TEQ/m3 compared with
                                                                                the more stringent limit of 0.1ng TEQ/m3
                                                                                [toxicity equivalent] in the EU and 13 ng/dscm
                                                                                (total mass, dry standard cubic meter, about 0.2
                         ng TEQ/m3) in the USA, which are the
                         emission standards identified in the EHS
                         Guidelines and are attainable by implementing
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BAT/BEP for new MSW incinerators.
                         Destruction of these toxins require a relatively
                         long holding time (over two seconds) in the
                         combustion chamber at very high temperatures
                         (over 1000°C) followed by a very rapid quench
                         to prevent reformation of larger complex
                         molecules. China is updating its national
                         standards for MSW incineration, in which the
                         emission limit for dioxins and furans is
                         proposed to reach 0.1 ng TEQ/m3. However,
                         the local MSW incinerator emission limit in
                         Beijing is already 0.1 ng TEQ/m3 and therefore
                         satisfies the EHS Guidelines of Waste
                         Management Facilities, which will apply to the
                         proposed new incinerator in Shunyi.

                         Anticipated environmental issues include
                         construction related impacts and those
                         associated with the operation of the incinerator.
                         The temporary construction environmental
                         impacts directly generated from the project are
                         currently anticipated in the building of an
                         incinerator in Shunyi to meet proposed Chinese
                         emission standards. During operation, impacts
                         of emissions from the MSW incinerator and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         disposal of ash residue are likely to be the key
                         issues.

                         Public sensitivity to MSW incinerators will
                         require the Project to maintain a continual and
                         meaningful public dialogue. The project will
                         support disseminating the experiences and
                         lessons learned via the internet, mass media,
                         booklets, and professional journals; exchanging
                         information and sharing experiences through
                         regional, national and international seminars;
                         and developing standardized training materials
                         for MSW incinerator operators. In addition, in
                         all three project areas, data collected about
                         dioxins monitoring and incinerator operations
                         would be shared with the public in an accessible
                         manner.

                         EA Category and Terms of Reference (TOR).
                         Given the sensitivity and trans-boundary nature
                         of the potential negative environmental impacts
                         associated with the dioxins and furans emission
Public Disclosure Copy




                         generated from MSW incinerators, the project is
                         proposed as Category A in accordance with
                         OP4.01 Environmental Assessment. According
                         to the policy, the task team will conduct
                         environmental screening and assist the client to
                         prepare EA TOR that is satisfactory to the Bank
                         safeguards requirements.

                         EA Preparation. Comprehensive EA procedures
                         and documentation in accordance with OP4.01
                         are needed for the EA preparation for the
                         Shunyi incinerator. The EIA/EMP will address
                         thoroughly relevant EHS issues, and provide
                         sound management plans for future
                         implementation and supervision. The following
                         issues will need to be given particular attention
                         during the environmental assessment process.

                         •        The EA will thoroughly explain the
                         process and criteria-including environmental
                         and social considerations, which lead to the
                         site’s selection. In addition, assessment of the
                         current capacities and needs for strengthening of
                         the project institutions should be included.
                         These studies should be used as the basis for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         preparation of institutional strengthening
                         component of the project.

                         •       Regulatory requirements and EHS
                         guidelines on incinerators. The EIA shall
                         include an analysis of the legal and regulatory
                         framework. In particular, the EIA shall
                         thoroughly analyze and compare EHS
                         guidelines against local legislations for specific
                         incinerators, and justify what can be
                         accomplished, taking into account specific
                         environmental settings, technical, economic and
                         social considerations.

                         •        Review of performance of the existing
                         incinerator. The Shunyi District MSW
                         Comprehensive Processing Center has an
                         existing 200tpd-capacity incinerator. A review
                         of the records of the environmental management
                         performance will be included in the EIA.

                         •        Environmental baselines. There is the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         need for a comprehensive baseline to be
                         established regarding ambient environmental
                         quality, including air, water and soil quality, and
                         the biological status of the project affected area.

                         •        Alternative Analysis. The EIA will need
                         to provide an alternatives analysis in terms of
                         comparisons between “with and without
                         project? scenario, compatibility with national,
                         local and sector development plans, different
                         resource conservation and waste control
                         strategies, technical designs and applicability of
                         different BAT/BEP.

                         •       Management of waste streams,
                         including air emissions, solid wastes and
                         wastewater that are generated from the Shunyi
                         incinerator will need to be thoroughly analyzed
                         in the EIA.

                         •        Cumulative impacts. The EA will
                         contain a discussion of potential cumulative
                         impacts, although the project will contribute to
                         the reduction of emissions potential cumulative
                         impacts. The EA analysis of cumulative impacts
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will be commensurate with project specific
                         risks.

                         •        Public consultation. At least two rounds
                         of public consultation shall be conducted among
                         potentially affected groups and communities at
                         the early stage of EA preparation and once draft
                         EIA is available. A variety of approaches
                         (public meetings, interviews and questionnaire
                         survey) shall be used to get public concerns on
                         the project. Project information shall be
                         provided or introduced to the public prior to
                         consultation. It is important to record the details
                         of these two rounds of consultation in the EIA
                         report (the consultation process, i.e. date,
                         locations, number/type of people participated,
                         key issues raised and how these issues are
                         addressed in EIA and the project design). The
                         draft EIA shall be fully disclosed in publicly
                                                                 accessible places (e.g. local government and/or
                                                                 internet) with announcement published through
                                                                 local newspaper. Establishment of a grievance
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 mechanism will also be considered given the
                                                                 public sensitivities with a project of this nature.

                                                                 •        Environmental Management Plan
                                                                 (EMP). The EMP should include sufficient
                                                                 details for implementation, including
                                                                 environmental management and supervision
                                                                 organization setup (institutional arrangements
                                                                 for each party involved, responsibilities and
                                                                 staff capacity requirements); mitigation
                                                                 measures/specifications and cost estimates;
                                                                 environmental monitoring plan; institutional
                                                                 capacity analysis and necessary training plan;
                                                                 contingency plans, and budget.

                                                                 EA Instrument. As noted above, the project is
                                                                 categorized as Category A for EA purpose.
                                                                 Therefore, for the selected incinerator, a full EA
                                                                 will be prepared. The final EA instrument will
                                                                 include:
                                                                 •        An EIA report for the selected
                                                                 incinerator
                                                                 •        A standalone EMP report for the
                                                                 selected incinerator, and
                                                                 •        An EA Executive Summary for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 project.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       TBD   The location of the proposed beneficiary
                                                                 incinerator is known; however, information on
                                                                 any sensitive natural habitats or species in the
                                                                 vicinity of this site is currently not available.
                                                                 This information will be ascertained through
                                                                 environmental screening during the preparation
                                                                 mission and it will determine whether OP4.04
                                                                 Natural Habitats is applicable to this project.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    The project will not involve any activities that
                                                                 will cause negative impacts to forests resources.
                                                                 This policy is not triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The project will not lead to purchase or use of
                                                                 any pesticides. This policy is not triggered.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    The location of the proposed beneficiary
                         BP 4.11                                 incinerator is not near any physical cultural
                                                                 resources and neither the construction nor the
                                                                 operation is expected to affect any such
                                                                resources. The standard “chance find?
                                                                procedures will be included in the EMP.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    TBD   A social screening has been carried out for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                loan project-Ningbo Solid Waste Management
                                                                Project. This GEF would complement Ningbo
                                                                loan project and has the same project areas. The
                                                                screening result indicates that no ethnic
                                                                minority communities, which possess the
                                                                characteristics as defined in OP 4.10 are found
                                                                within the project areas in Ningbo.

                                                                In Shunyi, there are 25 ethnic minority groups
                                                                scattered in the district. Most of them live in
                                                                rural areas. In Kunming, there are Miao and Yi
                                                                ethnic minorities in Guandu district. As
                                                                activities related to the MSW segregation and
                                                                transportation facilities financed by the project
                                                                need to be further assessed during project
                                                                preparation, further assessment will be carried
                                                                out to understand the project impacts on ethnic
                                                                minority communities and to determine the
                                                                application of OP 4.10.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   TBD   The proposed new incinerator would be built in
                         4.12                                   the existing Shunyi District MSW
                                                                Comprehensive Processing Center located in
                                                                rural area. The center occupies a piece of land
                                                                large enough to accommodate the proposed new
                                                                incinerators. The land acquisition was
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                completed in 2009. It is anticipated that no land
                                                                acquisition is needed for the new incinerator. To
                                                                be confirmed during project preparation,
                                                                appropriate resettlement instruments will be
                                                                prepared if land acquisition is involved, and no
                                                                legacy issues are involved in the completed land
                                                                acquisition process.

                                                                In the event the policy is triggered, the study
                                                                area would cover social impacts in the
                                                                environmental area of influence such as the
                                                                buffer zone beyond the immediate location of
                                                                the new incinerator. This would include a due
                                                                diligence of existing incinerators depending on
                                                                how long ago land was acquired for the existing
                                                                incinerator as well as linked activities such as
                                                                disposal areas.

                                                                In the event the policy is triggered, instruments
                                                                                                                                 required would be a Resettlement Action Plan
                                                                                                                                 (RAP) or a Resettlement Plan Framework (RPF)
                                                                                                                                 if resettlement related action identified in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 preparation.

                                                                                                                                 The potential impacts on waste pickers of the
                                                                                                                                 proposed project will be identified and assessed
                                                                                                                                 through social assessment. A social assessment
                                                                                                                                 has been conducted for the Ningbo Solid Waste
                                                                                                                                 Management Project. Strictly to say, there are
                                                                                                                                 no waste pickers in Ningbo according to the
                                                                                                                                 social assessment. However, the project may
                                                                                                                                 have negative impacts on community cleaners’
                                                                                                                                 income. A social action plan has been proposed
                                                                                                                                 based on the findings of social assessment in
                                                                                                                                 Ningbo.

                                                                                                                                 Social assessment will be carried out in
                                                                                                                                 Kunming and Shunyi. If the project has any
                                                                                                                                 adverse impacts on waste pickers, adequate
                                                                                                                                 mitigation measures will be developed based on
                                                                                                                                 the findings of social assessment.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project will not involve impacts to any
                                                                                                                                 dams in the project area. This policy is not
                                                                                                                                 triggered.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The project will not involve trans-boundary
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            rivers. The policy is not triggered.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project is not located in any disputed areas.
                                 7.60                                                                                            The policy is not triggered.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-May-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Tentatively scheduled for June 25, 2013.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Tijen Arin

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan (RSA) Date: 10-Oct-2012
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Paul Procee (SM)                      Date: 03-Sep-2012




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
