                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA2672
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Apr-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 02-Apr-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Africa                            Project ID:    P123093
                            Project Name:      West Africa Regional Communications Infrastructure Project - APL 2 (P123093)
                            Task Team          Boutheina Guermazi
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          18-Mar-2013                       Estimated   30-May-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     TWICT                             Lending     Adaptable Program Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector:            Telecommunications (50%), General information and communications sector
                                               (50%)
                            Theme:             Regulation and competition policy (40%), Regional integration (40%),
                                               Infrastructure services for private sector development (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     88.40                       Total Bank Financing:       60.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                                  Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            9.20
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                  60.00
                              EC European Investment Bank                                                  19.20
                              Total                                                                        88.40
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           The objectives of the project are to increase the geographical reach of broadband networks and to
                           reduce costs of communications services in the territories of the Islamic Republic of Mauritania and
                           in the Republic of Togo.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                       Page 1 of 9
                         Similarly to APL 1-A and APL 1-B, the proposed operation will have in each country three
                         components as follows:
                          Component 1: Supporting connectivity,
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Component 2: Creating an enabling environment for connectivity, and
                          Component 3: Project implementation.

                          WARCIP Mauritania

                         Component 1 Supporting connectivity will focus on: (a) building 4 fiber optic missing links (Link 1:
                         531km Nouakchott-Atar-Choum; Link 2: 723km Rosso-Boghe Kaedi-Selibaby-Kiffa; Link 3: 280km
                         Aioun-Nema; Link 4 – 43km Selibaby towards Mali border) to provide redundancy connectivity for
                         cross-border links towards ECOWAS - namely towards landlocked countries Mali, Niger and
                         Burkina Faso - and towards North Africa (via the connection with Morocco) as well as dissemination
                         of international connectivity to most provincial capitals contributing hereby to reducing the urban/
                         rural divide in the sub-region and a IXP / Carrier hotel / Datacenter building ; (b) establishing a
                         national and regional Internet Exchange Point (IXP ) in this IXP / carrier hotel / datacenter building.
                         Missing links and IXPs shall be built and operated under a PPP and in accordance with open access
                         principles. Economic and financial analysis has been conducted for the proposed investment as part
                         of project preparation. Missing links and neutral carrier hotel are jointly-co-financed with EIB.

                         Component 2 Creating an enabling environment for connectivity will include the following activities,
                         that have been identified taking due account of the strategic projects of the 2012-2016 Strategy for
                         ICT and Modernization of Public Service: (i) Technical Assistance (TA) to implement Open Access
                         Regime & PPP for national backbone including transaction/legal, regulatory and economic/financial
                         support as well as supporting the drafting of the technical tender for backbone links and for IXP/
                         Datacenter; (ii) TA on key regulatory priorities (develop technical, financial, and operational
                         conditions to access existing fibers; define fiber interconnection and sharing regulation tools; define
                         Reference Offer for International Connectivity; develop cost models for interconnection (fixed and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         mobile) and for broadband wholesale offers including facility sharing and support in defining the
                         relevant markets and approving the interconnection catalogue; set up an observatory of the telecoms/
                         ICT sector) ; (iii) TA to set up an Internet Exchange Point (IXP) and to design a management policy
                         for “.mr? domain name; (iv) TA on broadband stimulation strategies, including supporting ISPs
                         creation, using universal access funds and costing and leveraging national postal operator Mauripost
                         network, and associated action plan; (v) TA on a sector fiscal study; (vi) TA to develop institutional
                         and operational capacities of MDEFPTN and other beneficiaries in policy and regulation, including
                         training and (vii) Control/evaluation of backbone and Internet Xpoint and Carrierhotel/Datacenter
                         building works.

                         Component 3 Project implementation will (i) finance environmental and social studies, including
                         their implementation and/or the monitoring of their implementation, (ii) provide support needed to
                         strengthen the capacity of GoM to implement WARCIP Mauritania, including setting up a Project
                         Implementation Unit (PIU) located within the Line Ministry (see below), covering office equipment
                         and some operating costs, trainings on Bank’s project cycle and procurement and FM guidelines of
                         Bank funded projects, (iii) finance audits, monitoring and evaluation (M&E) including appropriate
                         actions to support efficient data collection, and communication and (iv) provide project
                         implementation contingencies.

                         WARCIP Togo


                                                                      Page 2 of 9
                         Component 1- Supporting Connectivity- will have financing and support for 2 main activities: (i)
                         establishing a carrier hotel and national / regional IXP where a bandwidth market and a national /
Public Disclosure Copy




                         regional hub for capacity could be established in order to improve terms of access to international
                         capacity at lower costs, and (ii) Purchase of bulk international bandwidth capacity to ensure that
                         international (and national) capacity is available to the country at the lowest cost and highest quality.
                         WARCIP Togo will provide resources for the launch of a competitive tender to purchase high
                         capacity bandwidth from neighboring coastal countries to be delivered at the carrier hotel. By doing
                         so, Togo will benefit from similar conditions of access to connectivity (diversity of choice, low
                         prices) as other countries in the ECOWAS region.

                          Component 2 - Creating an Enabling Environment for Connectivity will focus on (i) the
                         transactional design and operating model for ownership and management of the carrier hotel using
                         PPP and support for the competitive tender for the international bandwidth(ii) development of open
                         access principles to create an enabling environment for improved connectivity, specifically through
                         support to the regulator to develop regulatory instruments for open access to capacity and to ensure
                         that the benefits of lower prices trickle down to end users on the retail level, (iii) policy and
                         regulatory support to improve sectoral efficiency, including price regulation and market competition,
                         in application of the new ICT policy and (iv) institutional strengthening to the Ministry, to the
                         regulatory authority and to WACS SPV. A detailed list of activities is provided in Annex 2.

                         Component 3: Project Implementation, Communications and M&E will provide support needed to
                         strengthen the capacity of the Government to implement the connectivity project, including setting
                         up a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) located within the Line Ministry and covering office
                         equipment, operating costs, trainings. The component will also cover the cost audits,
                         communications, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), and environmental and social studies, including
                         their implementation and/or the monitoring of their implementation as well as provide project
                         implementation contingencies
Public Disclosure Copy




                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         For Mauritania and Togo, the exact sites and paths for civil works are not yet known. Some
                         additional information to the exact paths of the missing links in the case of Mauritania and sites of
                         neutral carrier hotels / national and regional IXPs in both countries could be known before the Board
                         meeting, but likely not all the details will be available by then.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Lucienne M. M'Baipor (AFTCS)
                         Rita Dambita (TWICT)
                         Paul-Jean Feno (AFTN1)

                          6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes               The operation includes physical investments
                          BP 4.01                                              such as missing links of national and regional
                                                                               backbones and neutral carrier hotels / national
                                                                               and regional IXPs. Because the exact nature and
                                                                               location of investments may not be determined up
                                                                               front, the Borrower has prepared an Environment


                                                                       Page 3 of 9
                                                                            and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for
                                                                            Bank’s approval before appraisal stage. ESIAs/
                                                                            ESMPs will be prepared, consulted upon, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            disclosed once sites and works are finalized
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes            The missing links shall be deployed alongside
                                                                            existing roads and the neutral carrier hotels /
                                                                            national and regional IXPs shall be established in
                                                                            the capital city. While the links are not expected
                                                                            to affect critical habitats, the ESMF process will
                                                                            assess the possibility and, where necessary,
                                                                            include mitigation measures for such impacts.
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes            The missing links shall be deployed alongside
                            BP 4.11                                         existing roads and the neutral carrier hotels /
                                                                            national and regional IXPs shall be established in
                                                                            the capital city. While the civil works are not
                                                                            expected to affect physical cultural resources, the
                                                                            ESMF process will assess this possibility and
                                                                            include “chance finds? procedures for inclusion
                                                                            in the contractors’ contract
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes             The missing links should be deployed alongside
                            4.12                                            existing roads and the neutral carrier hotels /
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            national and regional IXPs should be established
                                                                            in the capital city. While the civil works will
                                                                            most likely lead to some small land take and
                                                                            temporary disruptions, due diligence will be
                                                                            undertaken in each country. RPFs have been
                                                                            prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed. RAPs
                                                                            will be prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed as
                                                                            and when necessary during project
                                                                            implementation.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues



                                                                    Page 4 of 9
                         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                           Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                            The terrestrial fiber optic links are expected to follow roads already in place and the IXP/Carrier
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Hotel/Datacenter to be built on an existing technical site. In the case of Togo a site will be defined
                           for the carrier Hotel/Datacenter. The physical components of this project will mostly be limited to
                           the building of the terrestrial fiber optic links and the IXP/Carrier Hotel/Datacenter. The risks
                           associated with this kind of infrastructure are generally low.
                           From an environmental and social safeguard standpoint, the WARCIP Mauritania and WARCIP
                           Togo projects are rated as a Category B. That is, the environmental and social impacts of the
                           project, for the most part, are expected to be minimal, site-specific and manageable to an
                           acceptable level. Therefore, the following Safeguards policies are triggered: OP/BP 4.01
                           (Environmental Assessment); OP/BP 4.04 (Natural Habitat), OP/BP 4.11 (Physical Cultural) and
                           OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement. As the exact nature and location of investments may not
                           be determined up front, the borrowers prepared and consulted upon an Environmental and Social
                           Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF).

                           Negative environmental and social impacts of the project will come mainly from the laying of the
                           fiber in the case of Mauritania and building the carrier Hotel in the case of Togo (and excavation
                           through human settlements, fields, forests, etc.) that could lead to: soil erosion (esp in dune areas);
                           soil and water pollution; loss of vegetation (tree felling); the disruption of life (waste from work),
                           of socio-economic activities and livelihoods located on the way (workshops, garages, shops, etc.);
                           disturbance of traffic; noise; dust; risk of accident and the generation of waste; risks of land
                           acquisitions, occupation of private land; possible destruction of crops (in the areas of Rosso,
                           Boghé, Kaédi, Selibabi, Kiffa and Nema), but also the risk of vandalism and social frustration
                           when local workforce is not used. The potential environmental and social impacts are likely to be
                           small-scale and site-specific and thus easily remediable and reversible. The accurate estimate of
                           the number of people who will be affected is not feasible at this stage of the study. However, in the
                           case of Mauritania a rough estimate of 1,192 could be made according to the proposed RoW,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           which is yet to be finalized. Land requirements are estimated at 85 ha. The specific ESIA with the
                           EMPS when the detailed technical studies are available will confirm the project impacts to the
                           land acquisitions and the number of population affected by the project in compliance with the
                           principles and procedures agreed within RPF. In the case of Togo the figure does not exist as the
                           site is still not identified.

                           As the carrier Hotel in Mauritania will be built on an existing technical site, negative impacts for
                           the IXP/Carrier Hotel/Datacenter should be limited to risks of accidents during the works and the
                           works wastes.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            n/a
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            n/a
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            Because the exact nature and location of investments may not be determined up front, the
                           borrowers prepared and consulted upon an Environmental and Social Management Framework


                                                                       Page 5 of 9
                         (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). Once the final path for the carrier hotel in
                         Togo and the terrestrial fiber foreseen alongside existing railway tracks and roads and the final
                         location of the associated technical sites are chosen and the specific civil works identified, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Borrowers will prepare and consult upon an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP)
                         as well as a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) or an Abbreviated RAP whichever will be
                         appropriate. These safeguard documents will be prepared as part of project implementation but
                         before the carrier Hotel is built and the terrestrial fiber optic link is laid.

                         The ESMF for Mauritania and ESMF for Togo outline: (i) Mitigation of impacts of the fiber
                         laying and building the carrier hotel including environmental guidelines for contractors and
                         guidelines applicable to health, safety and environment; (ii) Measures in case of archaeological
                         discovery; (iii) Institutional strengthening measures (strengthening environmental expertise of the
                         WARCIP PIU); (iv) Strengthening technical measures (provision for the implementation of
                         environmental impact assessments ; monitoring and evaluation of WARCIP); (v) Informing
                         stakeholders involved in the implementation of the project and public awareness; (vi) A program
                         of surveillance and monitoring; (vii) Institutional responsibilities for environmental monitoring;
                         (viii) The institutional arrangements for implementing the ESMF; (ix) The recommendations for
                         implementation; (x) The timing for the implementation of measures and the Costs of
                         environmental and social measures.

                         The ESMF guides the preparation of safeguards instruments during sub-project preparation and
                         implementation. It contains a simple of TORs for Environmental and Social Impacts Assessments
                         (ESIA) and the screening guidelines to be used by the Environment and Social Focal Point of the
                         project. Based on the outcomes of the screening process, the requirement to carry out an
                         Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) that includes an Environmental and Social
                         Management Plan (ESMP) will be undertaken during project implementation in parallel with
                         subproject technical feasibility studies. At the same time, prior to subproject appraisal, the
                         implementing agency will agree to apply the following minimum standards during
                         implementation: inclusion of standard Environmental Codes of Practice (ECOP) in the bid
Public Disclosure Copy




                         documents for the rehabilitation of IXP/Carrier Hotel/Datacenter.
                         The proposed operation mainly the terrestrial fiber optic links which follow roads already in place
                         and the IXP/Carrier Hotel/Datacenter to be built on an existing technical site, is not expected to
                         pose risks of damaging existing community cultural property. Nevertheless, proposed subprojects
                         will be screened for their potential impacts on cultural property and chance find procedures will be
                         applied and appropriate mitigation measures for both the identification and protection of cultural
                         property. These measures will be included in standard bidding documents as part of the social and
                         environmental clauses for consideration by the construction companies. While not damaging
                         cultural property, subproject preparation may later identify and include assistance for preservation
                         of historical or archeological sites. If these opportunities occur, cultural property management
                         plans would be prepared for those subprojects. The ESMF has provided the systematic steps to be
                         followed once these properties are discovered during project implementation.

                         The proposed activities under this operation should not cross natural parks or reserves. However,
                         the project should make special arrangements for sites sensitive (wetlands and natural habitats). If
                         the works will result any pressures on natural ecosystems, fauna and flora, the ESMF has
                         recommended step to be followed during ESIA preparation in addition to avoid these sites with the
                         project design (to follow existing roads as much as possible).

                         The need for involuntary resettlement resulting from land acquisition in specific subproject areas

                                                                   Page 6 of 9
                          will only be known during project implementation when site-specific plans are available. The RPF
                          includes guidance for preparing socio-economic surveys, a census of people and assets, and
                          appropriate eligibility and entitlement frameworks. Therefore, subprojects will be screened for
Public Disclosure Copy




                          application of the resettlement policy and any subprojects involving involuntary resettlement or
                          land acquisition will only be approved after preparation of a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP)
                          acceptable to the Bank. Several issues will increase the complexity of land acquisition, including
                          the lack of reliable land record systems and the inability of people losing land to either document
                          ownership or be physically present to make eligibility claims. The safeguards framework will thus
                          include procedures for identifying eligible project-affected individuals, calculating and delivering
                          compensation, and determining mechanisms for land dispute grievance redress as well as
                          mechanisms for adequately monitoring and evaluating the level of compliance.

                          For Mauritania The total cost of activities is estimated at US$1,190,000. Bank will finance US
                          $800,000 and GoM US$390,000. For Togo it is estimated at US$ 406,000. The Bank funds will
                          not finance land acquisition.

                          The supervision of safeguards implementation for WARCIP Mauritania will be done as part of the
                          overall project implementation by the WARCIP PIU (on behalf of the National Connectivity
                          Commission) in conjunction with the Line Ministry in charge of Environment and Sustainable
                          Development. The technical expert within the WARCIP PIU will serve as an Environment and
                          Social Safeguards Focal Point (Point Focal Environnement et Social (PFES) that will be in charge
                          of coordinating the implementation, the monitoring (control and audit) of social and environmental
                          aspects and be an interface between the project, local authorities and other stakeholders. He will be
                          assisted by two external environmental and social experts.         To ensure successful
                          implementation of the project safeguard measures, capacity of the WARCIP PIU as well as of the
                          Line Ministry MDEFPNT, the APAUS and of the Line Ministry in charge of Environment and
                          Sustainable Development will be strengthened throughout the project. To ensure effective Bank
                          supervision, the WARCIP PIU will prepare and update reports on the implementation of the
                          safeguards instruments prepared under WARCIP Mauritania before Bank supervision missions.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          During and throughout the project supervision, the World Bank task team will assess the
                          appropriate implementation of the environmental and social mitigation measures and subsequently
                          recommend additional strengthening measures as needed.

                           In the case of Togo, WARCIP Togo PIU will be strengthened by hiring an environmental and
                           social safeguards consultant (part time) who will work closely with Agence Nationale de la
                           Gestion Environnemtale (ANGE). This environmental and social focal point (SEFP) responsible
                           for following up on safeguards concerns to ensure that all subprojects identified for operation
                           financing have included consistent and coherent environmental and social measures and are
                           responsible for applying the safeguard screening and mitigation requirements to each subproject.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Mauritania
                           Key stakeholders for consultation include current inhabitants (where applicable), Line Ministry in
                           charge of Environment and Sustainable Development, the Line Ministry MDEFPNT, the APAUS,
                           businesses and civil society. Stakeholders were interviewed in the project target areas during field
                           visits made by the consultants working on the environmental and social safeguards. All the key
                           actors, called to play a part in this process, have been consulted and informed. The potentially
                           affected persons have been consulted as well.


                                                                      Page 7 of 9
                           In the case of Togo key stakeholders for consultations included elected local governments,
                           operators including Togo Télécom, le DT de Moov and Togo cellulaire, in addition to Ministry of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           post and Telecom, Ministry of Environment and ANGE, in addition to businesses, civil society in
                           the three potential sites for the carrier hotel (Afidényigba site, new Presidency site and Cacavelli
                           site, all in the Capital city).

                           During the preparation of safeguard documents for the subprojects and their implementation, the
                           PUI will consult project-affected groups and local nongovernmental organizations on all
                           environmental and social aspects of the project and will take their views into account accordingly.
                           The implementing agency will initiate these public consultations as early as possible and will
                           provide all relevant material in a form and language(s) that are understandable and accessible to
                           the groups being consulted in a timely manner prior to consultation. The ESMF and RPF have
                           been disclosed in the countries, in Mauritania on March 12, 2013 and in Togo on March 20, 2013.
                           Both documents have been also disclosed at the World Bank's Infoshop for Mauritania on March
                           08, 2013 and Togo on March 19, 2013.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      14-Jan-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   20-Mar-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Mauritania                                                       12-Mar-2013
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Togo                                                             19-Mar-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      26-Feb-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   20-Mar-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Mauritania                                                       12-Mar-2013
                           Comments:
                           Togo                                                             19-Mar-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:




                                                                      Page 8 of 9
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                             If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                             project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Boutheina Guermazi
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                       Date: 02-Apr-2013
                            Coordinator:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Randeep Sudan (SM)                                Date: 31-Mar-2013




                                                                        Page 9 of 9
