                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA4301
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Jun-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Jun-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Congo, Republic of                 Project ID:    P128628
                            Project Name:     Congo Skills Development for Employability Project (P128628)
                            Task Team         Cristina Isabel Panasco S
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         24-Jun-2013                        Estimated   17-Sep-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    AFTEW                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Vocational training (90%), Adult literacy/non-formal education (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for the knowledge economy (85%), Micro, Small and Medium
                                              Enterprise support (15%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      30.00           Total Bank Financing:                 10.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                       Financing Gap:                         0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        20.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                               10.00
                              Total                                                                                     30.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to improve job and entrepreneurship skills for vulnerable
                           urban youth in order to improve their labor market insertion and earnings.
                            3. Project Description
                           Despite strong macroeconomic performance, Congo faces persistent human development challenges,

                                                                       Page 1 of 5
                         while the political context is somewhat fragile. The cohorts of youth entering the labor market are
                         large, and will further increase in the coming years. An increasing proportion of these youth will
                         have completed primary schooling with hopes of continuing their education or finding a job. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                         education system does not offer training in the types of skills needed to increase the productivity and
                         earnings of informal sector workers. Skills needed in the informal sector are first and foremost good
                         basic skills (functional literacy and numeracy) which many Congolese youth do not have enough of,
                         due to the low quality of primary education. Secondly, informal sector workers need some non-
                         cognitive skills—in particular communication or inter-personal skills—which can be learned through
                         a job or an internship. After these are met, informal sector workers need some technical or vocational
                         skills. Most youth entering the labor market today cannot find formal sector employment and become
                         engaged in the informal sector by default or, in the case of many girls, economically inactive.
                         Presently, the majority of youth working in the informal sector have incomplete secondary education,
                         weak basic skills, no work experience and little or no vocational skills. The regular education system
                         currently has little to offer these youth in terms of training to enable them to increase their
                         productivity. With little savings and a need to earn their living on a daily basis, their opportunity
                         costs are often high, and therefore training programs need to be short and targeted to their needs.

                         The Project is structured into two components as follows:

                         Component 1. Skills training, job insertion and entrepreneurship support for vulnerable urban youth
                         and micro-entrepreneurs

                         Sub-component 1.1 will provide packages of short skills training, internships, job search support, and
                         support for entrepreneurship to urban youth and young adults with insufficient connection to the
                         labor market. These services will be delivered, in part through existing private and public training
                         institutions in Pointe-Noire and Brazzaville, which have been identified and evaluated during project
                         preparation, and in part by competitively selected Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs). Some
                         of the pre-identified institutions already work with vulnerable youth in Brazzaville and Pointe-Noire.
                         Performance-based contracts will be established with the participating institutions. The project will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         offer training in most of the existing areas of skills training offered by these institutions (but
                         shortened and adapted to the target group) as well as in new skills areas, with training opportunities
                         targeted to wage jobs or self-employment/entrepreneurship according to the skills needs of the labor
                         market, as identified by employers’ associations such as Union Patronal et Interprofessionnel du
                         Congo/Congo Employers and Inter-professional Union (UNICONGO). One of the new of areas of
                         skills training will be business training, targeted in particular to the many young women working as
                         self-employed in small trade. Institutions will recruit trainees based on pre-established criteria and
                         methodology, and youth will self-select into the various job skills or entrepreneurship tracks. The
                         component also includes a rigorous impact evaluation to assess and document the results of the
                         project.

                         The Component will target youth and young adults ages 17-30 living in the peri-urban and urban
                         areas of Pointe-Noire and Brazzaville, who: (a) have finished primary education but not completed
                         upper secondary education, and have been out of school for at least one year (so as to not distort the
                         existing education market, by drawing away students who would otherwise have continued into
                         conventional academic or technical vocation education and training (TVET) education streams that
                         are less subsidized than these programs); and (b) who are not working in formal or informal wage
                         jobs (both criteria need to be met).

                         Sub-component 1.2 will finance the development of a training program targeted to young men and

                                                                      Page 2 of 5
                         women who are already micro-entrepreneurs, and the delivery of this training program to at least
                         1,000 beneficiaries in Brazzaville and Pointe Noire. By micro-entrepreneurs is meant owners/
                         partners of household or micro-enterprises. These likely operate in the informal sector given that a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         recent study found that 98 percent of household enterprises are not registered. They often have low
                         productivity. The aim of the training is to increase the productivity and earnings of household
                         enterprises and micro-entrepreneurs through upgrading the skill content of their activities and helping
                         them to scale up.

                         Sub-component 1.3 will finance apprenticeships and functional literacy training for out-of-school
                         adolescent youth.

                         This sub-component will support apprenticeship training for at least 6,000 out of school adolescent
                         youth ages 16-19 in Brazzaville and Pointe Noire that have less than completed secondary education.
                         The activity scales up a pilot apprenticeship training program for out-of-school adolescent youth
                         implemented under the World Bank Support to Basic Education Project, known in Congo as
                         PRAEBASE (Projet d’Appui a l‘Education de Base). Improvements will be introduced based on the
                         lessons learned as presented in a report completed in May 2013: “Analyse de la Situation
                         Socioprofessionelle des Jeunes Apprenants Formés à Brazzaville”. Participants will be placed in
                         apprenticeships with master craftsmen for 12 months. They will also be provided functional literacy
                         training and life skills training by qualified trainers, typically for one day a week. The program will
                         be expanded from the six trades included in the PRAEBASE pilot (hair dresser, carpenter, auto-
                         mechanics, welder, clothes-maker, agricultural worker) based on a market assessment.

                         Component 2. Strengthen the technical, planning, implementation, and monitoring and evaluation
                         capacity of METPFQE

                         The component will support activities of a technical nature in order to strengthen the capacity of
                         METPFQE to better plan, coordinate and support the TVET system in the country with the objective
                         of improving its efficiency and quality, while also increasing access in line with present and future
Public Disclosure Copy




                         labor market demands.

                         The component will also strengthen the project implementation capacity of the Projects Coordination
                         Unit (PCU) of the METPFQE, which will be responsible for the day-to-day coordination and
                         management of the implementation of the project.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Project activities will take place in existing traning institutions in Brazzaville and Pointe Noire and in
                         enterprises in the two cities, which will host trainees in internships and apprenticeships. No civil
                         works will be financed.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Abdoulaye Gadiere (AFTN3)

                          6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/         No
                          BP 4.01




                                                                       Page 3 of 5
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09              No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               None
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                              in the project area:
                               None
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.

                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                                The Borrower is aware of issues around safeguards, but none are expected from this project.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                                Project interventions are designed to respond to the needs of youth and the realities of the labor
                              market and have been designed in consultation with training providers, professional associations,
                              business development associations, enterprises, non-governmental organziations, and the
                              authorities. Particular attention has been paid to the specific constraints facing young women in
                              accessing training. Based on the experiences of programs in other countries, every effort will be
                              made to ensure the safety of young girls and women, as they participate in the training programs.
                              The project is expected to have a positive impact on all beneficiaries.
                           B. Disclosure Requirements


                                                                         Page 4 of 5
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
                                                                                             Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Cristina Isabel Panasco S
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Peter Nicolas Materu (SM)                   Date: 19-Jun-2013




                                                                      Page 5 of 5
