                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA1368
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Sep-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                              Project ID:   P126856
                            Project Name:      CN-Jiangxi Poyang Lake Basin and Ecological Economic Zone Small Town
                                               Development Project (P126856)
                            Task Team          Ximing Zhang
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       18-Sep-2012                           Estimated   26-Mar-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: EASCS                                  Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector:            Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (30%), Agricultural extension and
                                               research (20%), General water, sanitation and flood prote ction sector (20%),
                                               Irrigation and drainage (20%), Public administration- Health (10%)
                            Theme:             Rural services and infrastructure (60%), Other environment and natural
                                               resources management (20%), Water resource management (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                               Financing Source                                                             Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Borrower                                                                     160.45
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        150.00
                              Total                                                                        310.45
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           The development objective of the project would be to improve the level of key selected public
                           services in small towns of Jiangxi Province through improvements to prioritized infrastructure.
                            3. Project Description
                           Tentatively, total project cost is estimated US$ 310.45 million. The project would comprise the
                           following two components and main activities:

                           Component A: Small Towns Infrastructure Construction (estimated base cost: US$261.53 million).


                                                                       Page 1 of 11
                         This would be the main investment component of the project and would fund priority infrastructure
                         investments grouped into 2 sub-components: (i) Transport infrastructure improvement and (ii) water
                         resources infrastructure (see Annex 3 for detailed sub-projects description).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sub-Component A1: Transport Infrastructure Improvement (estimated base cost: US$174.96
                         million). This sub-component would fund construction/upgrading of 72.9km of urban and country
                         roads for 13 roads in 8 counties/cities (41.2km of urban road, 31.7km of country roads); rebuilding of
                         a bridge in Nanfeng County, and a construction of a new urban central bus station in Gongqingcheng
                         City.

                                 The construction/upgrading of urban roads includes pavement of road base of Grade II and
                         III; construction of cross river bridges and culverts; layout of urban sanitary pipelines, urban
                         drainage pipelines, and electric cable; construction of greenbelt and a number of bus stops; and other
                         urban road ancillary facilities. The construction/upgrading country roads includes pavement of road
                         base ranging from 7.5-12m, and construction of a number of bus stops.

                                The old bridge is to be rebuilt with a new one with 296m long and 32m width.

                                The construction of a new bus station includes construction of a passenger transportation
                         building, a maintenance building, and a comprehensive building. (See Annex 4 for detailed
                         description).

                         Sub-Component A2: Water Resources Management Infrastructure (estimated base cost: US$86.56
                         million). This sub-component would fund a number of investments to address priority improvements
                         to water related services and the improvements in the land and water environment impacting on
                         Poyang Lake as follows. The construction works include improvement of flood protection and
                         drainage services, construction of wastewater and storm water collection pipes, construction of a
                         water supply and treatment plant, and river and wetlands restoration.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Improvement of flood protection and drainage services: including strengthening of 36 km of
                         dikes on 5 urban city areas (Jinxian, Riujin, Luxi, Jinggangshan, Jiujiang) to bring flood protection
                         levels for urban areas up to national standards (GR50201-94); construction of three major urban
                         drainage pumping stations with a combined pumping capacity of 163m/sec; provision of access
                         roads for dike system to improve operations and maintenance and public access; provision of cross
                         dike structures like cross drainage structures; beautification and landscaping along rivers to better
                         utilize the newly constructed dike systems as a multi purpose public open space areas;

                                Construction of wastewater and storm water collection pipes: including construction of 7.75
                         km of wastewater and storm water collection pipes to improvement of the river environment and
                         water quality in Jinggangshan City;

                               Construction of water supply and treatment plant: including construction of an additional
                         10,000 m/day water supply treatment plant capacity and associated urban reticulation works in Luxi
                         City;

                                Wetland restoration: including (i) to reduce the primary sewage up to 15,000,000 m3/a
                         discharged along Mian River, to improve its water quality and cut down contaminations of Poyang
                         lake upstream; (ii) to restore and re-construct about 200 hectares wetland along the river to restore
                         the wetland biodiversity, enhance natural purification ability of the tidal wetland and the ecological

                                                                      Page 2 of 11
                         zone along the river and reduce pollution loads; and (iii) to provide recreation and environmental
                         education for the local residents that will help increase their environmental awareness besides
                         improved environmental quality.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component B: Project Management and Capacity Building (estimated base cost: US$23.59 million).
                         This component would be made up of 2 sub-components: (i) Institutional Strengthening and Capacity
                         Building; and (ii) Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation.

                         1.        Sub-Component B.1: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building (estimated base cost:
                         US$8.54 million). This sub-component would fund activities associated with institutional
                         strengthening such as workshops, staff training, study tours, technical assistance for research and
                         development, and policy studies. This component will be designed to support enhanced institutional
                         capacity to plan, design, construct, and sustainably manage modern, high quality infrastructure for
                         the delivery of improved services particularly in the areas of transport systems, water and waste
                         water services, and flood protection systems. In particular, the component will fund activities such
                         as: (i) technical, managerial, and financial skills training for government staff at provincial and
                         county/city levels; (ii) technical assistance for transportation plans and management in three
                         counties/cities, and flush flood prevention and management in two counties; (iii) human resources
                         development support in Jinxian County; and (iv) upgrade of integrated transportation system in
                         Gongqingcheng City.

                         2.       Sub-Component B.2. Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E)
                         (estimated base cost: US$15.06 million). This component would support the PMOs at the various
                         jurisdictional levels responsible for the implementation management of the project to ensure effective
                         and efficient management of implementation performance, outputs, and outcomes of the Project. It
                         would fund (i) the introduction of modern, computer based management information systems (MIS);
                         (ii) M&E systems to enhance management capability at each level, including monitoring on
                         resettlement management, environmental management, and establishing project review and
                         evaluation system; (iii) project detailed design and engineering works management; and (iv) the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         procurement of office furniture, vehicles, and computer hardware and software.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Jiangxi consists of 100 counties (county level cities and districts), and over 96% of them are located
                         in the Poyang Lake Basin and eco-economic area. After discussions with Jiangxi PDRC, PFB,
                         PPMO and relevant county governments, it was agreed that the project location selection should be
                         in line with the following criteria: (1) located in the Poyang Lake Ecological Economic Area or
                         Poyang Basin Area; and (2) have relevant industry development basis for development.
                         The project will be located in Poyang lake basin and Poyang Lake Ecological Economic Area in
                         Jiangxi Province, which includes 11 counties (or county level cities): Located in the subtropical
                         monsoon climate zone, the project area features moderate climate, sufficient sunshine and rainfall,
                         distinctive seasons and a long frost-free period. The average annual rainfall is about 1,700 mm, about
                         60% of the rainfall is in April-June.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Zong-Cheng Lin (EASCS)
                         Yiren Feng (EASCS)




                                                                     Page 3 of 11
                         6. Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes             Based on the review of the subprojects, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BP 4.01                                      project is classified as Category B project due to
                                                                      its type, location and scale, nature and magnitude
                                                                      of the potential impacts during the construction
                                                                      and operation phase. As per requirements of the
                                                                      Bank and Chinese domestic regulations,
                                                                      Environment Assessment (EA) reports were
                                                                      prepared in accordance with national and the
                                                                      Bank requirements. The reports include (a) EIA
                                                                      (including Environmental Code of Practice
                                                                      (ECOPs), and Environmental Management Plan
                                                                      (EMP) for the Mian River wetland project of
                                                                      Ruijin, (b), and EMP (including ECOPs) for all
                                                                      the other subprojects.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    Yes             The proposed dike strengthening project in
                                                                      Jinxian county may have potential adverse
                                                                      impacts on Qinglan lake (a provincial natural
                                                                      reserve), such as noise, flying dust, waste water
                                                                      and solid wastes (if not well managed and
                                                                      discharged into the lake) during construction, and
                                                                      mainly noise impact by the two pumping stations
                                                                      during operational phase, thus the policy is
                                                                      triggered. The specific mitigation measures were
                                                                      incorporated into the EMP and ECOP to ensure
                                                                      the potential adverse impacts were sufficiently
                                                                      addressed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      For the Mian river (Lucao Lake) Protection and
                                                                      Utilization project in Ruijin city, the overall
                                                                      environmental impact of this sub-component is
                                                                      positive and successful implementation will help
                                                                      protect and restore the wetland ecosystem of
                                                                      Mian River, and ultimately to create favorable
                                                                      conditions for the sustainable development of this
                                                                      wetland. However, some limited negative impacts
                                                                      may arise during the associated construction
                                                                      activities, such as negative impacts on soil, air,
                                                                      water, acoustic environments, and surrounding
                                                                      communities. These impacts are short-term,
                                                                      temporary and site-specific, and with the proper
                                                                      mitigation measures incorporated in the ECOP
                                                                      and EMP during construction and operation
                                                                      phase, these potential impacts can be avoided,
                                                                      minimized or even eliminated.




                                                              Page 4 of 11
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No              Project activities will not affect forest areas, the
                                                                         project includes small size plantation with 140ha.
                                                                         However, the purpose of plantation in this project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         is to control soil erosion, the project will not
                                                                         commercially harvest the plantation; ECOP for
                                                                         plantation was prepared for the project as part of
                                                                         EA. the forests Policy is not triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No              The project will not procure pesticides or
                                                                         increase use of pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes             The EA process confirms that the project will
                         BP 4.11                                         not affect any physical cultural resources.
                                                                         However, some subprojects will affect some rural
                                                                         households' graves, which might be viewed
                                                                         connecting to local tradition. In this light, this
                                                                         policy could be triggered, while all the
                                                                         compensation and relocation measures for those
                                                                         graves are formally planned and designed in the
                                                                         RAP, based on detailed survey and extensive
                                                                         consultation among the owners.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No              The mission conducted a screening for
                                                                         Indigenous Peoples through meeting and
                                                                         communication with PMO/design institute staff
                                                                         and local township authorities, and visits to the
                                                                         proposed project sites and villages. The screening
                                                                         concluded that there are no ethnic minority
                                                                         communities in the project's area of influence.
                                                                         Upon request from the mission, the Civil Affairs
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         Bureau of Jiangxi Province also confirmed that
                                                                         these proposed project cities/counties and
                                                                         townships were not traditionally ethnic minority
                                                                         concentrated areas, and that there were no ethnic
                                                                         minority groups in these areas, as defined in OP
                                                                         4.10. Therefore, the mission concluded that
                                                                         OP4.10 does not apply to this project.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes             Through field visits and meeting discussions
                         4.12                                            with local authorities, the project identification
                                                                         mission conducted a preliminary screening of
                                                                         subprojects and concluded that all subprojects of
                                                                         11 counties may involve land acquisition and
                                                                         resettlement. Thus, the OP4.12 Involuntary
                                                                         Resettlement would be triggered. During project
                                                                         preparation, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP)
                                                                         for each county was prepared by County PMOs
                                                                         and a consolidated RAP to summarize the overall
                                                                         resettlement at the provincial level was prepared
                                                                         by the PPMO in accordance with the policy



                                                                 Page 5 of 11
                                                                               requirements. In addition, there is a linked project
                                                                               identified in one of the project county, Luxi, that
                                                                               is the Shankouyan reservoir construction. This
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               reservoir construction was recently completed
                                                                               and the reservoir would become the water
                                                                               resources for a water supply plant to be extended
                                                                               under this project. Therefore, this project
                                                                               prepared a due diligence review on the
                                                                               resettlement of the reservoir construction in
                                                                               accordance with the policy.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          Yes               Although the project does not finance the
                                                                               construction of any new dams but it will
                                                                               withdraw water from a dam under construction.
                                                                               The Longjiang River Integrated Management
                                                                               Subproject in Longshi Township of Jingganshan
                                                                               City will rely on the performance of the existing
                                                                               dam, whose failure could cause extensive to or
                                                                               failure of the Bank-funded sub-project.

                                                                               The dam safety in the task team expert will (a)
                                                                               inspect and evaluate the safety status of existing
                                                                               dams, their appurtenance, and performance
                                                                               history; (b) review and evaluate the owner's
                                                                               operation and maintenance procedures; and (c)
                                                                               provide written reports of findings and
                                                                               recommendations for any remedial work or
                                                                               safety-related measures necessary to upgrade the
                                                                               existing dams to an acceptable standard of safety.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               The PPMO and relevant county PMOs would
                                                                               also assign special staff to assist the Bank team to
                                                                               ensure the project is implemented in line with the
                                                                               OP4.37.
                            Projects on International          No               No sub-project will be located in international
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                               waterways. The policy is not triggered and no
                                                                               actions are required.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 No project area will be located in disputed areas.
                            7.60                                               The policy is not triggered and no actions are
                                                                               required.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential l arge scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The environmental assessment for the project shows that the project as a whole will have positive
                              environmental impacts, with benefits outweighing the negative potential impacts. Some negative
                              short-term construction and long-term operational impacts may result from project


                                                                       Page 6 of 11
                          implementation. The main environmental issues of the project are the construction related impacts
                          during the construction phase. These include limited negative impacts on soil erosion, ambient air,
                          water, acoustic environments, solid wastes, worker safety, traffic disturbance and surrounding
Public Disclosure Copy




                          communities. These negative impacts will be short-term, temporary and site-specific due to the
                          small scale of the project. To enhance the environmental benefits of the project, the project has
                          integrated the mitigation measures into the project design, construction phase and operational
                          phase respectively. Preventive and mitigation measures during the construction and operation
                          phases were prepared and are noted in the EIA, EMP, and ECOPs respectively. Proper
                          implementation of the mitigation measures required by the project will minimize the impacts to
                          acceptable level, or eliminate them entirely.

                           Social Aspects: While the project brings benefits to local people and communities, its
                           infrastructure construction would entail land acquisition and resettlement that cause adverse
                           impact on local society. 22 sub-projects in 11 counties would require 606 mu of state-owned land
                           and 3667 mu of collective land from 50 rural villages 27 townships, which would affect 7184
                           farmers in 1662 households. Meanwhile, these sub-projects would also cause relocation of 1293
                           people in 315 households due to house demolition. 2 enterprises would be affected containing 120
                           people as well. In addition, a linked project, the recent construction of Shankouyan reservoir in
                           Luxi county, was concerned this project, due to the nature of the reservoir as a water resource to
                           the water supply plant to be supported by the project. More than 4500 mu of village land were
                           acquisitioned and 485 households were affected by the reservoir construction. All the adverse
                           impacts were surveyed and addressed during preparation of the project RAP and DDR (Due
                           Diligence Review) as required by OP4.12.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            It is expected that the long term impacts of the project area will be sustainable economic
                           development in selected towns of Jiangxi province. Employment opportunities and income will be
                           increased, and the quality of life will also be improved significantly due to public infrastructure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           development and the strengthened capacity of related institutions. Furthermore, the project will
                           cause some long term impacts such as traffic noise nuisance, sludge disposal etc, however, with
                           the mitigation measures incorporated in EMP, the potential impacts will be minimized or
                           mitigated to acceptable level.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            During project preparation, alternative technical processes and designs were explored and
                           considered. The EIA identified, evaluated and compared various options, with the objective of
                           avoiding or otherwise minimizing potential adverse environmental and social impacts, and to
                           maximize environmental benefits. The EA team worked closely with the project planners and
                           implementing agencies, as well as the feasibility study teams, to evaluate alternatives. The inlet
                           water to be treated within the project scope is domestic sewage dispersed in residents and farmer
                           households. The technique with small construction investment and simple and relatively
                           independent running maintenance is required according to water quality features and treatment
                           degree required by the discharge. Therefore, constructed wetland treatment system and integrated
                           sewage treatment equipment are selected to be as the alternatives, Optimal alternatives were
                           selected based on the avoidance of adverse social and environmental impacts including land
                           occupation, effluent quality, as well as other economic, technical, and financial considerations for
                           the least cost solutions. A "no project" scenario was also considered as an alternative. Details of
                           the alternatives and the review process are in the EIA report.

                                                                     Page 7 of 11
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            Environment Assessment (EA) reports were prepared in accordance with national and the Bank's
Public Disclosure Copy




                           OP/BP/GP 4.01. The reports include (a) EIA (including Environmental Code of Practice (ECOPs),
                           and EMP) for the Mian River wetland project of Ruijin, (b), and EMP (including ECOPs) for all
                           the other subprojects.

                          To enhance the environmental benefits of the project, the project has integrated the mitigation
                          measures into the project design, construction phase and operational phase respectively.
                          Preventive and mitigation measures during the construction and operation phases were prepared
                          and are noted in the EIA, EMP, and ECOPs respectively. All mitigation measures related to
                          contractors will be included in the bidding documents and the corresponding contracts.

                          A set of ECOPs were prepared for each type of investment, including ECOPs for roads, flood
                          protection and drainage infrastructure, pipelines network, septic tank, wetland construction,
                          plantation, tunnel, bridge, bus station, and small civil works. These will be included as part of the
                          Operational Manual. It also includes the reporting and supervision arrangements for the
                          implementation phase of the project.

                          The EMP specifies mitigation measures for the project, to address all potential adverse impacts
                          during preparation, construction and operation of the proposed investments. It also outlines the
                          institutional arrangements and responsibility of each party during the design, construction and
                          operation phase. It details environmental monitoring for construction and operational phases,
                          including parameters to be monitored, locations, frequencies, monitoring agency and budget
                          estimates. The EMP also includes budgeted monitoring plan and training plan which are included
                          in the overall implementation plan of the project.

                          The environmental monitoring has been integrated and budgeted for in the overall monitoring and
Public Disclosure Copy




                          evaluation of the project. The EMP including Chance Finding Procedures for PCRs will also be
                          incorporated into bidding documents and contracts to ensure their implementation. The EMP will
                          become mandatory for contractors, EMP training is required to be held prior to the commencement
                          of construction, and EMP will be incorporated into bidding/contract documents.

                          Social Aspect and Resettlement:

                          In view of the complex nature of the project's multiple components, a social assessment (SA) was
                          conducted during project preparation in order to inform the project design of the social factors that
                          affect, or are affected by, the project, and so as to help maximize socially sound beneficial impacts
                          of the project and minimize its negative impacts. The SA exercise presented the project's effort to
                          make its preparation more transparent and inclusive, which would lead to a more equitable sharing
                          of development benefits to be brought by the project's, as well as a more adequate and to-the-point
                          mitigation plan for its adverse impact.

                          Because of unavoidable land acquisition under 22 sub-projects in 11 project counties, each of them
                          prepared a county level individual RAP addressing resettlement issues in the county. The
                          provincial PMO invited experienced resettlement consultant from Hohai University to help the
                          counties on this work, and eventually consolidated these 11 county level RAPs into a provincial
                          level RAP (including also the Due Diligence Review for the Shanyanghe reservoir resettlement in


                                                                     Page 8 of 11
                          Luxi county). In accordance with the relevant national laws/regulations and the Bank policy, and
                          based on the detailed socio-economic and impact surveys and extensive consultation with the
                          project affected people (PAP), the RAPs set forth accurate impact inventories and sufficient
Public Disclosure Copy




                          compensation to the lost, and raised practical measures for PAP's livelihood rehabilitation from
                          which PAP's living standards would be surely restored and improved. All the county sub-project
                          entities assumed the ownership of the RAPs and attested their implementation, and the Bank team
                          oversaw the RAP preparation and ensured the Bank policy compliance.

                           The implementing entity is the Jiangxi Provincial Development and Reform Commission (PDRC),
                           which is a strong government agency with the capacity to coordinate with different parties. The
                           Project Management Office (PPMO) is located within this organization. The provincial and county
                           level PMO structure has already been established at all levels. The PMOs will be responsible for
                           all tasks associated with project preparation and implementation. The PPMO and 4 of the 11
                           counties have had recent experience with the World Bank funded Jiangxi Integrated Agricultural
                           Modernization Project (P065463), which was completed satisfactorily in 2010. The key staff on
                           Safeguards involved in that project at provincial and county levels will continue on in the
                           respective PMOs set up for this project. For the other seven counties that have no experience with
                           Bank funded projects, to ensure they are prepared to implement safeguards activities, the Bank
                           task team and expert consultants have provided training from the beginning of the project proposal
                           stage throughout the project life cycle. The towns and entities operating the subprojects now have
                           ownership of the safeguard instruments including the EIA/EMP, ECOPs, RAPs, and are
                           committed to carrying out project implementation in accordance with these instruments. The Bank
                           will continue to provide training in using the safeguard instruments to ensure project
                           implementation in compliance with the safeguards requirements.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             During the preparation of EIA/EMP, two rounds of public consultation were undertaken. The
                           first round took place at the beginning of EA preparation during April and May 2012. The second
Public Disclosure Copy




                           round was carried out after the draft EA was completed during July and August 2012. The project
                           information was disclosed at project villages, communities, and government websites before each
                           round of consultation. Public consultation of the EA was undertaken following each round of
                           information disclosure. These consultations took various forms including questionnaires,
                           interviews and meetings with project affected people and experts. The EA and EMP incorporated
                           countermeasures to address the concerns of the people consulted. In addition, the public
                           consultation mechanism during construction was also included into the ECOPs.

                          From the social development perspectives, the primary project stakeholders would be local
                          communities and people in the 11 counties who would benefit from the project activities such as
                          road construction and flood protection, while the key stakeholders also particularly include those
                          affected by sub-projects' land acquisition and population relocation.

                          During project preparation and component feasibility studies, project information dissemination
                          campaign was conducted in project areas in each of the project counties, and repeated rounds of
                          resettlement census and socio-economic surveys were carried out under the subprojects causing
                          land acquisition. In March and April 2012, census and impact inventory were carried out with two-
                          way flows of communication and consultation in each of affected villages and households in all of
                          the 11 counties, guided and assisted by resettlement experts from Hohai University. Based on the
                          surveys and consultations, county level individual RAPs were drafted and revised when the


                                                                    Page 9 of 11
                           subprojects' were preliminarily designed and redesigned during May and June. The RAPs were
                           finalized in July with all PAP's consultation and agreement on practical measures for impact
                           compensation and living standards. In August, a provincial level consolidated RAP in both
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Chinese and English versions was developed to summarize and present the overall resettlement
                           under the project.

                           All the county level individual RAPs were disclosed in county libraries and county PIUs' offices
                           by August 31, and the provincial level consolidated RAP were made available in the PMO website
                           at the same time, and in the InfoShop on September 5, 2012.

                           In accordance with the Bank's information disclosure policy, prior to project appraisal, the latest
                           safeguards documents, including EIA, EMP, and ECOPs were made available in the project areas
                           and are accessible at PMOs by August 31, 2012. They were also disclosed on the websites of the
                           local government agencies, and major local newspapers Jiangnan Metropolitan Newspaper on
                           August 30, 2012 . All the environmental safeguard documents mentioned above were also
                           disclosed at the World Bank Infoshop on Sept 6, 2012.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      03-Sep-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  30-Aug-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   05-Sep-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      03-Sep-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  30-Aug-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   05-Sep-2012
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:

                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
                         ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [      ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or       Yes [      ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources




                                                                     Page 10 of 11
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                             Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Ximing Zhang
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:         Name: Mark R. Lundell (SM)                          Date: 19-Sep-2012




                                                                       Page 11 of 11
