                                                                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                            APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSA170
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Dec-2011

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                       China                                   Project ID:                       P123133
                              Project Name:                  China: Gansu Qingyang Urban Infrastructure Improvement Project (P123133)
                              Task Team Leader:              Ji You
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 12-Dec-2011                                  Estimated Board Date:             24-May-2012
                              Managing Unit:                 EASCS                                   Lending Instrument:               Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                        General transportation sector (60%), General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (40%)
                              Theme:                         Other urban development (100%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                      Amount
                                   Borrower                                                                                                                 97.20
                                   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                                   100.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                   197.20
                              Environmental Category:        B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to assist Xifeng District, the capital of Qingyang Municipality to improve selected urban
                              infrastructure services including urban roads and urban environmental services.

                              3. Project Description

                              Component 1: Urban Infrastructure Improvement
Public Disclosure Copy




                              (a)        Sub-component 1.1: Urban Bypass Road Construction of (i) Construction of bypass roads (southern section of West Ring Road
                              L2.568km/W60m; northern section of East Ring Road, L1.9 km/W60m) with associated pipe works and an urban bridge (L206m/W20mx2); (ii)
                              Construction of three connection roads to by-pass corridors (connection road from West Ring Road to Provincial Highway 202, L1.007km/W37.5m;
                              section of Anding Xi Road linking to West Ring Road, L0.7km/W24m; section of Guxiang Dong Road linking to East Ring Road, L0.54km/W40m)
                              with associated pipe works.
                              (b)        Sub-component 1.2: Integrated Road Corridor Improvements of (i) three selected main corridors (Nan Bei Street, Anding Dong Xi Road,
                              West Ring Road), civil works including road pavement, traffic channelization, lighting and greening, along with drainage and sewage system
                              improvements; (ii) Rehabilitation of selected backstreets and small lanes for slow traffic (tentatively identified three backstreets of Nanyuan Lane,
                              Tianhe Lane, Xifeng Lane); (iii) Parking Action Plan; (iv) Public Transport Action Plan; (v) Traffic Safety, Education and Enforcement Action Plan
                              (c)        Sub-component 1.3: Drainage and Sewage Pipes, including: (i) constructing drainage and sewer mains for the middle section of West
                              Ring Road (L3.614km / W60m); (ii) constructing drainage and sewer mains for a section of Anding East Road (L0.577km / W24m); (iii)
                              constructing drainage and sewer mains for a section of Anding West Road (L0.511km / 24m); (iv) rehabilitation of sewage collection pipes in
                              Xifeng’s built-up area (20 roads, total length of 22.9 km); (v) associated civil works of road pavement improvement, street lighting and greening
                              along these roads; (vi) GIS-based assets management of drainage/wastewater pipe networks.
                              (d)        Sub-component 1.4: Wastewater Treatment Plant construction of (i) a new WWTP in Xifeng’s eastern area (capacity of 20,000 t/d); (ii) a
                              wastewater pumping station in Xifeng’s northern area (capacity of 11,500 t/d); (iii) associated wastewater trunks and collectors.

                              Component 2: Institutional Capacity Building
                              (e)        This component will include four sub-components: (i) water resource management study; (ii) O&M improvement of urban infrastructure
                              services in the key sectors of drainage/wastewater, urban road/transport; (iii) capacity building and training for local government agencies; (iv)
                              project implementation TAs.

                              4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                              The project will be located in Xifeng District, Qingyang Municipality, which is in the east of Gansu province bordering Shaanxi Province in the east
                              and north, and Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region in the west. Xifeng District is the only urban district of the Qingyang Municipality which was
                              developed over last two decades as the center of local governmental agencies, commerce and industry, public services and residential housing.
                              The key industry inside the Xifeng District includes food processing and petrochemical processing. There are no national level significance
                              physical culture properties inside the district. Xifeng is situated on the Dongzhi Plateau with elevation from 1200-1500m. It is surrounded by
                              ravines and is largely within the Jinhe Basin. There are two major rivers in Xifeng including the Malian, and Pu. The rainfall is mainly concentrated
                              around July to September. Annual precipitation is 459.5mm. Its annual average temperature maintains between 8 C and 10 C.


                                                                                                                                                                        Page 1 of 5
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                         Zhefu Liu (EASCS)
                         Feng Ji (EASCS)

                         6. Safeguard Policies Triggered             Yes      No   Explanation
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01          ✖            The project is overall positive. Nevertheless some negative impacts have been
                                                                                   identified in the EA process. The principal negative impacts and their
                                                                                   mitigation measures described in the EA and EMP, are summarized below.(i)
                                                                                   Soil Erosion. There would be impacts, ifnot managed well, of the soil erosion
                                                                                   caused project activities; (ii) Sludge Disposal. 40 tons of dewatered sludge
                                                                                   (moisture@80%) will be generated from a new Chengdong WWTP and an
                                                                                   existing Chengnan WWTP; (iii) Noise and Odor from the operation of the
                                                                                   wastewater treatment plant and pumping station; (iv) Noise Impact. Traffic on
                                                                                   the improved roads will increase noise level to some extent; (v) Construction-
                                                                                   related Impacts from construction activities; and (vi) the road construction will
                                                                                   cause demolition of a farmer house (400m2) which has been used as a church
                                                                                   by the Catholic Patriotic Association of the Xifeng District.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                          ✖    The project will not convert, degrade or restore any natural habitats or critical
                                                                                   natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                                   ✖    The project will not finance activities that would involve significant conversion
                                                                                   or degradation of critical forest areas or related critical natural habitats as
                                                                                   defined under the policy.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09                              ✖    The project will not procure any pesticides nor will any use of pesticides result
                                                                                   from the project.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11       ✖            During the EA process, 35 graves owned by local farmers will be relocated
                                                                                   due to the road construction.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                        ✖    A field screening and desk review were conducted and TT concluded that
                                                                                   there is no indigenous community in the project area. According to the census
                                                                                   data information of Xifeng District, there are over 220,000 populations in the
                                                                                   Xifeng District and there are eleven Chinese minorities in this District, including
                                                                                   Hui, Mongolia, Man, Korea, Zhuang, Miao, Tu, Tujia, Dongxiang, Zhang and
                                                                                   Russian minorities. The total Chinese minorities in Xifeng District are 1,859
                                                                                   populations with 442 households. Among those Chinese minorities, Hui
                                                                                   minorities contribute 88% of entire Chinese minority population in Xifeng
                                                                                   District. The rest of the Chinese minorities are scattered in Xifeng District.
                                                                                   There are two villages among those eight affected villages in the project area
                                                                                   where Chinese minorities are present in. One village has only one Chinese
                                                                                   female Hui minority who was immigrated by marriage with a villager and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                   another village has Chinese Hui minorities with 29% of village populations.
                                                                                   Based on the Bank definition of indigenous peoples, Chinese Hui minority
                                                                                   within the project area does not present the criteria of Bank indigenous
                                                                                   peoples. It was thus determined that OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples is not
                                                                                   triggered.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12          ✖            The project will affect 8 villages in 5 townships in a peri-urban area. The
                                                                                   project will require the permanent acquisition of 781 mu (52 hectares) of land.
                                                                                   The breakdown of this land use is 403 mu (27 hectares) of cultivated land, 133
                                                                                   mu (8.9 hectares) of forest land, 110 mu (7.3 hectares) of orchard land, 89 mu
                                                                                   (6 hectares) of housing lots and 45 mu (3 hectares) of unused land. The
                                                                                   dominant land use is for growing corn and wheat (50 percent of the area), and
                                                                                   the rest is mostly forest, land for apple orchards and housing in roughly equal
                                                                                   shares. Some temporary land use will be required during project
                                                                                   implementation by contractors, mitigation measures will be taken. The
                                                                                   municipal resettlement office will supervise the activities. The project will affect
                                                                                   206 families with 892 persons by land acquisition and 143 families with 528
                                                                                   persons by structure demolition in the peri-urban areas. The 528 people to be
                                                                                   displaced belong to 143 families, consisting of 113 families in peri-urban areas
                                                                                   (average size 3.62 persons) and 30 families in city areas (average size 3.7
                                                                                   persons). Among those displaced peri-urban families, no any family will lose
                                                                                   all of their cultivated land. Lastly, 10 shops and a church will be demolished
                                                                                   and relocated, affecting 56 employees. The church relocation has been
                                                                                   addressed by environmental safeguards.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                            ✖    The project will not finance construction or rehabilitation of any dams as
                                                                                   defined under this policy.
                         Projects on International Waterways OP/BP            ✖    Not applicable.
                         7.50
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                ✖    Not applicable.




                                                                                                                                                           Page 2 of 5
                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                 OP 4.01. Environmental Assessment. The project is overall positive. Nevertheless some negative impacts have been identified in the EA
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 process. The principal negative impacts and their mitigation measures described in the EA and EMP, are summarized below.(i) Soil Erosion.
                                 There would be impacts, if not managed well, of the soil erosion caused project activities; (ii) Sludge Disposal. 40 tons of dewatered sludge
                                 (moisture@80%) will be generated from a new Chengdong WWTP and an existing Chengnan WWTP; (iii) Noise and Odor from the operation of
                                 the wastewater treatment plant and pumping station; (iv) Noise Impact. Traffic on the improved roads will increase noise level to some extent;
                                 (v) Construction-related Impacts from construction activities; and (vi) the road construction will cause demolition of a farmer house (400m2)
                                 which has been used as a church by the Catholic Patriotic Association of the Xifeng District.

                                 OP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources. During the EA process, 35 graves owned by local farmers will be relocated due to the road construction.

                                 OP 4.12. Involuntary Resettlement.        The project will affect 8 villages in 5 townships in a peri-urban area. The project will require the
                                 permanent acquisition of 781 mu (52 hectares) of land. The breakdown of this land use is 403 mu (27 hectares) of cultivated land, 133 mu (8.9
                                 hectares) of forest land, 110 mu (7.3 hectares) of orchard land, 89 mu (6 hectares) of housing lots and 45 mu (3 hectares) of unused land. The
                                 dominant land use is for growing corn and wheat (50 percent of the area), and the rest is mostly forest, land for apple orchards and housing in
                                 roughly equal shares. Some temporary land use will be required during project implementation by contractors, mitigation measures will be
                                 taken. The municipal resettlement office will supervise the activities. The project will affect 206 families with 892 persons by land acquisition and
                                 143 families with 528 persons by structure demolition in the peri-urban areas. The 528 people to be displaced belong to 143 families, consisting
                                 of 113 families in peri-urban areas (average size 3.62 persons) and 30 families in city areas (average size 3.7 persons). Among those
                                 displaced peri-urban families, no any family will lose all of their cultivated land. Lastly, 10 shops and a church will be demolished and relocated,
                                 affecting 56 employees. The church relocation has been addressed by environmental safeguards.

                                 OP 4.10. Indigenous People. A field screening and desk review were conducted and TT concluded that there is no indigenous community in the
                                 project area. According to the census data information of Xifeng District, there are over 220,000 populations in the Xifeng District and there are
                                 eleven Chinese minorities in this District, including Hui, Mongolia, Man, Korea, Zhuang, Miao, Tu, Tujia, Dongxiang, Zhang and Russian
                                 minorities. The total Chinese minorities in Xifeng District are 1,859 populations with 442 households. Among those Chinese minorities, Hui
                                 minorities contribute 88% of entire Chinese minority population in Xifeng District. The rest of the Chinese minorities are scattered in Xifeng
                                 District. There are two villages among those eight affected villages in the project area where Chinese minorities are present in. One village has
                                 only one Chinese female Hui minority who was immigrated by marriage with a villager and another village has Chinese Hui minorities with 29%
                                 of village populations. Based on the Bank definition of indigenous peoples, Chinese Hui minority within the project area does not present the
                                 criteria of Bank indigenous peoples. It was thus determined that OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples is not triggered.

                                 Linked Projects. The local funded projects linked to the Bank supported project in Xifeng District were identified as the southern session of
                                 western ring road, the middle session of eastern ring road and two earth borrower pits. The resettlement work of the above two road sessions
                                 and two earth borrower pits were implemented in 2009. For those two road sessions, the affected villages received their entitlement and shared
                                 their land compensation after land redistribution among the affected villages as village traditional way. For those two borrower pits that were
                                 used by local funded projects and will contribute to the Bank supported project, they used to be hilly dry earth land and owned by the collective
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 villages. The villagers received RMB 500 over than their losses of crops yearly agreed by both of project entities and the community. The hilly
                                 land will be leveled down and return to the villages without any charge after the civil work of the project.
                               2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                                 The investments in the urban roads and urban environment services in Xifeng District will alleviate the traffic congestion, protect local water
                                 resource, improve public health, and atheistic impact, and are also expected to have a positive impact on local economy development in the
                                 area.

                                 The project has certain adverse impacts related to the land acquisition and structure demolition. In some cases displaced persons viewed the
                                 housing demolition as an opportunity to improve their living conditions significantly.
                               3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                                 Technical alternatives were considered for the investment components during the feasibility study and the EA to minimize environmental
                                 impacts. The EA and the feasibility study analyzed alternatives for WWTP configuration (two small WWTPs vs one large WWTP), WWTP sites,
                                 wastewater treatment technology, sludge treatment technology, road construction, potential environmental and social impacts, and the project
                                 costs. The EA also includes the “without project? scenario.

                                 The two bypass road designs and the selection of the waste water treatment plant and pump station considered the alternatives to minimize the
                                 adverse impacts to the land acquisition and structure demolition.
                               4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                                  and implement the measures described.
                                 Environmental Safeguards. The client has engaged EA consultants-Lanzhou University to prepare the Environmental Assessment (EA) report
                                 for all project components in accordance with the Bank’s requirements for OP.4.01 and Chinese EA regulations. The EA and EMP specified the
                                 appropriate mitigation measures, environmental monitoring plans, institutional arrangements, training and equipment requirements together with
                                 budget estimates for the implementation of the mitigation measures and monitoring plans. The proposed mitigation measures are mainly
                                 described below.

                                 •          Soil Erosion. The EA includes an analysis of water and soil conservation in the project area. The EMP specifies soil conservation
                                 measures for the construction activities. To minimize the impacts of Chengdong WWTP effluent discharged to a nearby gully, mitigation
                                 measures include: (a) proper selection of discharge point with adequate facility to dissipate the energy of effluent; (b) control of effluent flow
                                 velocity along the gully to avoid or minimize soil erosion.


                                                                                                                                                                           Page 3 of 5
                           •           Sludge Disposal. The investment on a sludge dying facility will effectively reduce the volume to 14-16 tons/day by utilizing solar
                           energy. Sludge cake will be sent for disposal to a nearby sanitary landfill which is equipped with lining and leachate collection and treatment
                           facility. Traffic impacts associated with the delivery of sludge for disposal at the sludge drying facility and with the transport of dried sludge for
                           off-site landfill disposal will be minimized by restrictions on the times of day allowed for these activities.

                           •         Other Operational Impacts. Noise and odor will be minimized by proper siting and by the provision of buffer zones and landscaping.
                           The odor impact will be minimized by a bio-filter system which is an integral part of the WWTP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           •          Noise Impact. The sensitive receptors have been identified. The noise impact, after confirmed once the roads are put into operation,
                           will be reduced to the acceptable level by provision of acoustic barriers and noise insulation facilities.

                           •          Construction-related Impacts. Environmental Codes of Practices (ECOP) has been prepared to address these general impacts (e.g.
                           dust, spoil disposal, noise, wastewater, disturbance to local communities) and will be included in bidding documents and civil works contracts.

                           •         A new church will be built in a site approximately 2 km away from the existing one. The new site has direct access to the city road
                           networks. An auxiliary building will be installed first at the new site as a temporary place to maintain the religious activities during the
                           construction of the church.

                           Physical Cultural Resources Impacts. Mitigation measures will be implemented in line with the relevant national regulatory and legal
                           framework. New sites for these graves have been selected and agreed. Public consultation with concerned and affected parties on the
                           proposed measures has been conducted, and concerns about the relocation have been incorporated into the EMP.

                           Social safeguards. An experienced social safeguards consultant was contracted to guide and assist Qingyang to prepare the resettlement
                           action plan. The analysis of the alternatives was carried out during the road designs and the site selection of the waste treatment plant and
                           pump station so as to minimize the impacts to the resettlement. Vulnerable groups to be affected by the project were identified and specific
                           resettlement policy will be provided. Land redistribution will be approached to ensure that no any family will lose their farming land even land
                           income only contributed less 20% of their family income. Medical insurance and pension programs will be provided for those affected families.
                           The analysis of family income generation presented in the draft RAP showed that the displaced families will not reduce their family income.

                           Qingyang Municipality has established a Project Leading Group at the municipal level to oversee and coordinate the preparation and
                           implementation of the Project. This Leading Group is chaired by a Vice Mayor with officials from a number of governmental agencies. In
                           addition Qingyang has established a project management office (PMO) with 14 full-time staff, including staff for safeguards management. For
                           project preparation, Qingyang PMO has engaged a French consulting firm with extensive experience in preparing Bank projects to prepare the
                           consolidated feasibility study report. The safeguarded documents such as EA and RAP reports have been prepared by the professional
                           institutions with the required qualification and adequate experiences on Bank projects in China. During project preparation, Qingyang PMO has
                           received necessary trainings on Bank safeguard polices and on-the-job training by working with the external safeguards consultants. Its
                           capacity to handle the safeguards compliance during project preparation is deemed adequate. The PMO’s capacity will be further enhanced
                           during the project implementation stage by engaging the project management and supervision consultants.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                            on potentially affected people.
                           Environmental Safeguards. In accordance with Bank Safeguard policies and Chinese regulations, public consultations were conducted from
Public Disclosure Copy




                           June to October 2011, including public consultation meetings and questionnaire survey, with project affected persons and other stakeholders.
                           Their opinions and concerns have been taken into account in the EA process and project design. The EA and EMPs disclosed on November
                           28, 2011 via Xifeng district government website. The EA report will be sent to the Bank InfoShop for disclosure on December 2, 2011.

                           Social Safeguards. Public consultations and participations were conducted from last November, 2010 to this November, 2011 and will continue
                           until the completion of the project. The displaced families are located in peri-urban area and most of the displaced families considered that the
                           resettlement relocation is an opportunity to improve their living and increase their family property value. A specific public consultation was led by
                           the project management office in the early November, 2011, focusing on the housing relocation. Four mitigation measures were provided for the
                           consideration of the displaced families, such as; cash compensation, centralized resettlement sites in three villages, multi-floor relocated
                           apartments and high-building apartments in the center of the city. The RAP will be locally disclosed on December 2, 2011 via Xifeng district
                           government website.

                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                               Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                  21-Nov-2011
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                              28-Nov-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                               07-Dec-2011
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                           Directors
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                               Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                  21-Nov-2011
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                              01-Dec-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                               12-Dec-2011
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                         disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                                                                                                                                                                      Page 4 of 5
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                            C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?              Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]

                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                              Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts on        Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                              If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the      Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?              Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language      Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for   Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?              Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard    Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same        Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Signed and submitted by:                                                Name                                                 Date
                            Task Team Leader:                    Xin Chen                                                                 12-Dec-2011
                            Approved By:
                            Sector Manager:                      Paul Kriss (SM)                                                          12-Dec-2011
                            Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                                                 Page 5 of 5
