                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC5522

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Oct-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 02-Oct-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Kyrgyz Republic                  Project ID:      P133446
                            Project Name:       Electricity Supply Accountability and Reliability Improvement Project
                                                (P133446)
                            Task Team           Ani Balabanyan
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       21-Apr-2014                          Estimated        13-Jun-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: ECSEG                                 Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (80%), Energy efficiency in Heat
                                                and Power (20%)
                            Theme(s):           Other accountability/anti-corruption (50%), Other urban development (50%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     15.47                      Total Bank Financing:          12.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           3.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                             0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                   12.00
                              Free-standing TF for ECA                                                       0.47
                              Total                                                                         12.47
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed development objective is to improve the reliability of electricity supply in the project
                           area and strengthen the governance of the company’s operations.
                           C. Project Description
                         The project will have three components: (i) rehabilitation of select segments of distribution
                         infrastructure, (ii) incorporation of Information Management Systems, and (iii) institutional
                         strengthening.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1 Infrastructure rehabilitation (estimated cost of US$8 million): This component will
                         strengthen the distribution infrastructure of Severelectro by focusing on the sections of the
                         infrastructure where losses are high and may jeopardize reliability of power supply. The investments
                         may include replacement of meters, conductors, transformers, switchgear and other distribution
                         assets. The scope of this component will be finalized based on the investment program that
                         Severelectro is developing with the support from an international consultant and funded by the ECA
                         Capacity Development Trust Fund Grant. The investment program will include a comprehensive set
                         of investments aimed at reducing losses and improving reliability of power supply in the service area
                         of Severelectro. Component 1 will finance priority investments (with highest potential for reducing
                         losses and improving reliability of supply) identified in the investment program and will also
                         complement the ongoing KfW financed Distribution Network Improvement Project for Bishkek.

                         The KfW financed project focuses on areas of Bishkek that do not have access to district heating and
                         account for 40 percent of consumption in Severelectro’s service area. It includes replacement of
                         110,000 customer connections by new ones designed and built to prevent electricity theft, including
                         advanced meters (with remote reading and remote disconnection/reconnection functionalities)
                         installed in protected boxes; limited replacement of conventional (bare) conductors in low voltage
                         networks by aerial bound conductors to prevent illegal connections; and establishment of metering
                         data management system.

                         Component 2 Information Management Systems (estimated cost of US$6 million): This component
                         will provide Severelectro with information tools for identification of losses and revenue leakages and
                         for modern and efficient management of the services it provides to the customers. To that end, the
                         component will finance supply, installation and commissioning of the information management
Public Disclosure Copy




                         systems (IMSs), as well as training to Severelectro employees to apply them. The IMSs will be set-
                         up company wide and may include:

                         (a) Commercial Management System (CMS) that will be available in all customer service centers of
                         Severelectro and allow: (i) integrated management of commercial cycle (metering, reading, billing,
                         collection, and receivables accounting); (ii) on-line management of customer database; (iii)
                         management of customer service orders, including registration of all the activities performed for each
                         client (e.g. service interruption, reconnection, metering replacement, new connection, etc.); (iv)
                         execution and monitoring of Severelectro’s energy balance, including evolution of losses. The CMS
                         will enable detection of billing errors and fraudulent behavior, management of delinquent accounts,
                         and facilitate quick and efficient response to the clients’ requests (e.g. general and account
                         information requests, contracting, service requests, claims, etc.).

                         (b) Incidence Recording and Management System to be integrated with the CMS and allow
                         Severelectro to better respond to client contingencies by automating the detection of distribution
                         faults and ensuring the quality of power supply.

                         (c) Implementing a Corporate Resource Management System for Severelectro to complement the
                         CMS by integrating the management of all the processes and resources (financial and management
                         accounting, procurement, human resources management, etc.) of Severelectro under a single
                           technological platform that eliminates erratic processes and unnecessary efforts.

                           The technical and functional specifications of the CMS and other IMSs will be finalized during the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           project preparation.

                           Component 3 Institutional Strengthening and Project Implementation Support (estimated cost of US
                           $1.47 million, including US$0.47 million from the ECA Capacity Development Trust Fund). This
                           component will provide technical assistance to Severelectro to enhance its institutional capacity,
                           support project implementation and incremental operating expenses of the Project Implementation
                           Unit (PIU) under Severelectro for the smooth implementation of the project and sustainability of
                           project outcomes. The technical assistance will include support for : (i) project management,
                           monitoring and evaluation; (ii) improving transparency, efficiency and accountability in procurement
                           function; (iii) strengthening financial reporting and accountability mechanisms in the company; (iii)
                           setting up systematic consumer feedback and social accountability measures in Severelectro to track
                           whether project interventions lead to a perceived improvement in its services and overall client
                           satisfaction, and ensure an iterative dialogue with consumers over the course of the project, and (iv)
                           establishing a performance-based management system in the company.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project will capture the service area of Severelectro involving around 500,000 consumers in
                           capital city of Bishkek and Chui and Talas provinces.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Severelectro has some safeguards capacity built through the implementation of donor-funded
                           projects that have involved rehabilitation works. Particularly, the company has implemented the
                           Word Bank financed Power and District Heating Rehabilitation Project (environmental category B)
                           in the past. The ECA Capacity Development Trust Fund Grant that has been recently extended to
                           Severelectro envisages support to further build the safeguard capacity of the company. Specifically,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the grant envisaged safeguards trainings for the Project Implementation Unit of Severelectro as well
                           as support with the preparation, discussion and disclosure of the Environmental Management Plan
                           (EMP). The PIU has already prepared the Terms of Reference for the EMP and disclosed it. The PIU
                           will initiate procurement of the consultant to prepare the EMP after the public consultation of the
                           TOR.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Arcadii Capcelea (ECSEN)
                           Asli Gurkan (ECSSO)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             Component 2 of the project will involve
                           BP 4.01                                              replacement of conductors, transformers,
                                                                                switchgear and similar distribution assets for
                                                                                select section of distribution infrastructure of
                                                                                Severelectro. To that end, there may be potential
                                                                                health and safety risks while implementing
                                                                                these activities, including risks associated with
                                                                                                                                 PCB contaminated transformer oils. With the
                                                                                                                                 support of ECA Capacity Development Trust
                                                                                                                                 Fund grant, the PIU will prepare an
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 Environmental Management Plan (EMP) to
                                                                                                                                 manage potential health and safety risks while
                                                                                                                                 implementing Component 2. The EMP will be
                                                                                                                                 consulted in the country and disclosed in the
                                                                                                                                 country and in the Infoshop. The Bank has
                                                                                                                                 already reviewed and approved the Terms of
                                                                                                                                 Reference for the EMP
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No
                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           OP4.12 is triggered as a precaution. Although
                                 4.12                                                                                            no land acquisition is anticipated, these types of
                                                                                                                                 projects have historically involved small
                                                                                                                                 amounts of involuntary land use, even when it
                                                                                                                                 seems unlikely at the outset. In line with the
                                                                                                                                 Bank's global practices, a Resettlement Policy
                                                                                                                                 Framework will be prepared along with the
                                                                                                                                 EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 14-Mar-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The EMP and the precautionary RPF will be prepared, disclosed in the country and in info-shop
                                      and consulted prior to the project appraisal scheduled for the end of March, 2014.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Ani Balabanyan

                                 Approved By:



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Regional Safeguards Name: Daniel P. Owen (RSA)    Date: 02-Oct-2013
                         Coordinator:
                         Sector Manager:     Name: Ranjit J. Lamech (SM)   Date: 02-Oct-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy
