                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA2244
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Mar-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Mar-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Africa                            Project ID:    P125018
                            Project Name:      West Africa Regional Disease Surveillance Capacity Development (P125018)
                            Task Team          Enias Baganizi
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          16-Apr-2013                       Estimated   20-May-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTHW                             Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector:           Health (100%)
                            Theme:            Health system performance (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         10.75              Total Bank Financing:             0.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                             Financing Gap:                    0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Borrower                                                                      0.75
                              Africa Catalytic Growth Fund (ACGF)                                          10.00
                              Total                                                                        10.75
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective is to strengthen regional disease surveillance and response system
                           of ECOWAS member states.
                            3. Project Description
                           The West African Regional Disease Surveillance Capacity Development Project (WARDS) will have
                           three components: Regional Capacity Development (Component 1), Strengthening Human Resources
                           (Component 2), and Project Management, and Monitoring and Evaluation (Component 3).



                                                                       Page 1 of 5
                         Detailed information on the types of activities and budget items will be funded under each
                         component can be found in Annex 2: Detailed project description.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1 (Regional Capacity Development): capacity development for technical and political
                         leadership in regional multi-disease surveillance and response. This involves enhancing the
                         institutional capacity of development partners and supporting discrete activities and technical support
                         functions of WAHO implementing partners to foster the harmonization of the building blocks for the
                         development of a functional regional disease surveillance and response and help ECOWAS member
                         states to meet the requirements of the international health regulations (IHR 2005).

                         Two areas have been identified under this component: (i) promoting the use of WHO-sanctioned
                         protocols and tools for integrated disease surveillance and response (IDSR) by all ECOWAS member
                         states to build core capacities required by IHR-2005 and foster a regional disease surveillance and
                         response, and (ii) improving regional information sharing.

                         The illustrative activities to be carried out include : (i) Assessment of the core capacities to
                         implement the international health regulations in the two remaining ECOWAS countries (Guinea
                         Bissau and Senegal), (ii) Revision of national disease surveillance and response strategies and plans
                         in line with the 2010 WHO’s Technical Guidance for IDSR in all ECOWAS countries, (iii)
                         Organization of regional simulation exercises on outbreak preparedness and response and , (iv)
                         Documentation and sharing of lessons learned from inter-country/cross-border collaboration
                         initiatives, (v) Regular publication and dissemination of an epidemiological bulletin for ECOWAS,
                         (vi) harmonization of tools for data sharing and the creation of a regional platform for electronic
                         information sharing.

                         The following items will be financed under this component: consultants’ contracts for technical
                         assistance for the assessments, for capacity building, for training, travel costs, and computer
                         equipment.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2 (Strengthening Human Resources) will support three key activities:

                         (i)     Long-term training in form of specialized training in disease surveillance and response
                         building on the experience of the FETP/FELTP programs that were funded by the US Centers for
                         Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). The project will expand ECOWAS member state access to
                         two types of applied epidemiology training programs: the Field Epidemiology Training Program
                         (FETP) and the Field Epidemiology and Laboratory Training Program (FELTP). The FELTP
                         contains all the components of an FETP, but it also trains select laboratory scientists using a
                         competency-based curriculum that supports laboratory-based surveillance and outbreak response.
                         The programs allow MOHs to strengthen their disease surveillance, outbreak response, and program
                         evaluation. They are modeled after the Epidemic Intelligence Service training of the CDC.

                         (ii)   Short-term and on the job training by scaling-up of the Projet d’ Appui en Surveillance
                         Epidemiologique Integree (PASEi) approach to the development of CES; and

                         (iii)  Laboratory training by expanding the RESAOLAB initiative of training laboratory network
                         personnel at district level and strengthening laboratory network. This component will finance
                         procurement of vehicles, computers, consultant services, training supplies and materials, travel costs,
                         and workshop costs.



                                                                      Page 2 of 5
                           Component 3 (Project Management, and Monitoring and Evaluation) will strengthen WAHO
                           capacity in project management through the recruitment of a project manager, a financial specialist, a
                           procurement specialist, and an M&E specialist. Technical and financial support will be provided to
Public Disclosure Copy




                           enhance the design of M&E strategies and implement project monitoring and evaluation activities.
                           This component will finance contractual staff salaries, training activities, office equipment and
                           supplies.
                            4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Regional project: Benin, Burkina Faso, Guinea, Mali, Niger, Cape Verde, Cote d’Ivoire, Gambia,
                           Ghana, Guinea Bissau, Liberia, Sierra Leone, Senegal, Togo, Nigeria. No safeguards issues were
                           identified during project preparation.
                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Svetlana Khvostova (AFTSG)

                            6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/        No
                            BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               Project activities will not include any construction or procurement of equipment or medical
                              supplies (drugs, vaccines, reagents). The project will have no adverse environmental or social
                              impacts. No safeguards policies are triggered.




                                                                        Page 3 of 5
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             No potential indirect and/or long term impacts are anticipated.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             N/A
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The direct beneficiaries of the project are the health technicians working in the statistical and
                           epidemiological data management services within the national health system and other health
                           professionals associated with the planned capacity development, particularly the West African
                           Health Organization and its technical partners. A subset of the populations of the 15 countries of
                           ECOWAS living in disease epidemic prone areas would ultimately be the indirect beneficiaries of
                           an improved regional disease surveillance system, as a result of the early warning and rapid
                           response capacity which was enhanced as a result of the project.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         N/A
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?
                          Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                          the project legal documents?


                                                                     Page 4 of 5
                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:   Enias Baganizi
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Trina S. Haque (SM)      Date: 26-Mar-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 Page 5 of 5
