                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC4420

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Jun-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 23-May-2013, 11-Jun-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Uganda                           Project ID:      P145101
                            Project Name:      Uganda: Albertine Region Sustainable Development Project (P145101)
                            Task Team          Dean A. Cira
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          16-Jan-2014                      Estimated        27-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTU1                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Vocational training (25%), Other industry (25%), Sub-national government
                                               administration (25%), Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highw ays (25%)
                            Theme(s):          Education for all (34%), City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (33%),
                                               Infrastructure services for private sector development (33%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    125.00                      Total Bank Financing:       105.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                                 Financing Gap:                 0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            20.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                  105.00
                              Total                                                                        125.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The overarching development objective is to facilitate the development and competitiveness of the
                           Lake Albert region of Uganda. This would be achieved by: (i) improving regional road connectivity;
                           (ii) improving conditions and access to urban infrastructure services and planning in selected
                           districts; and (iii) increasing access to marketable vocational training and education in the region.
                           C. Project Description
                         The Project Area is part of the Albertine Rift valley covering 6.79 million hectares. About 80% of
                         the Albertine Rift valley is under agriculture, settlement and other uses. About 20% of the region is
                         protected area with a wealth of biodiversity.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Notwithstanding the agricultural and tourism strength of the region, oil is currently driving the
                         region’s development potential. A refinery (the scale of which is still being debated) is planned at
                         Kabaale in Hoima District. An integrated power project has been proposed to utilize gas from the
                         Nzizi field to be supplemented from gas from neighboring fields. The joint venture partners
                         developing the Bulisa, Bugoma and Kaiso Tonya areas (and the main geographic focus of this
                         project) are anticipating 1.8 billion barrels with a plateau projected at 220-230 thousand barrels per
                         day. It is also estimated that about $300 million of non-oil infrastructure is required in the project
                         region to make the oil extraction viable and another $700 million in the wider region (e.g. in
                         neighboring countries). Estimates are that 10,000 jobs could be created at peak times (e.g. during
                         three-year construction phase) with indirect jobs perhaps 3 to 5 times has high.


                         The Project is envisaged to have four components: (i) Regional Connectivity; (ii) Preparing and
                         Planning for Urban Growth; (iii) Skills Development; and (iv) Project Management, Monitoring and
                         Evaluation.

                         Component 1: Regional Connectivity (approximately US$85 million). The objective of this
                         component would be to improve connectivity of the region by upgrading the existing Kyenjojo-
                         Hoima-Masindi-Kigumba road which is a principal access point to the region. The upgrading of this
                         238 km road will open access to the region and will benefit not only the oil sector development but
                         also will improve access for agriculture and tourism industry in the region. It will also provide the
                         link to the major urban growth points in the region: Hoima, Masindi and Bulisa. In addition, the road
                         project shall provide a strategic link between the northern corridor (specifically south western
                         Uganda, Rwanda and Burundi and eastern DRC) and the Kampala - Gulu -Juba corridor. It will also
Public Disclosure Copy




                         improve access to markets, social and health services and employment possibilities for residents
                         within the zone of influence of the proposed road. Moreover it will offer enormous distance and
                         journey time savings for traffic to Fort Portal, southwestern Uganda and eastern Democratic
                         Republic of Congo (DRC) and in areas north of Kigumba (Gulu, Sudan and northeastern DRC). The
                         project works shall entail upgrading the road from a gravel road to a Class II paved road standard
                         with a carriageway width of 6 meters, 3 meters shoulders and overall claiming of 30 meters road
                         reserve. The African Development Bank is to finance a 135km stretch of the road and advance
                         procurement measures are already on-going for that segment. The World Bank project would
                         finance the remaining 100 km of the road from Kyenjojo to Hoima. The detailed engineering
                         designs, EIAs and RAPs for the 100km stretch of road have already been prepared potentially
                         allowing for rapid appraisal of this component. This key piece of regional infrastructure provides a
                         potential quick win for the development of the region.

                         Component 2: Preparing and Planning for Urban Growth (approximately US$10.0 million). The
                         objective of this component would be to support the urban planning and development of several
                         urban centers in the region. This is most likely to include Hoima, Masindi and Bulisa which are
                         expected to experience pressures for urban growth. In addition to supporting on-going regional
                         planning efforts by the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development it would also support
                         local planning processes. In addition it would finance key urban and district infrastructure
                         investments that will be selected from a menu of eligible investments based on district and municipal
                         development plans. Funds in this component would also be used to prepare a second phase of the
                         operation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 3: Skills Development (approximately US$10.0 million). The objective of this
                         component would be to provide increased opportunities for skilled employment in the region. One of
                         government’s primary concerns is that the development opportunities in the region benefit those
                         living in the region. Considerable emphasis has been placed on developing local content and job
                         opportunities around the oil development, but opportunities also are present in tourism and
                         agriculture and general services. This component would aim at developing a supply of skilled labor
                         that can benefit from the development potential of the region (e.g. tourism, oil, agriculture direct and
                         indirect) and would likely include the following:

                         (i) The upgrading of the physical plant and equipment of select (1-3) technical institutes that would
                         target key trades that have been identified for greatest employment prospects in the region
                         (potentially including the Petroleum Institute in Kigumba);
                         (ii) The upgrading of the quality and capacity of instructors; and
                         (iii) Scholarships and paid internships for students coming from the Albertine region.

                         Component 4: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (approximately US$1.5 million).
                         This component will support project implementation, including M&E functions for the project
                         encompassing reporting and other tasks, outcome and impact evaluation, project audits, etc.

                         Unallocated. At this stage of project conceptualization approximately US$13 million is left
                         unallocated from a notional lending amount of US$120 million proposed project amount. This is to
                         provide flexibility during the preparation process to consider the orientation of the project as a
                         growth pole project. This might require additional components beyond those already discussed with
                         the Government of Uganda. This will be further developed during preparation.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project will be implemented in the Albertine Rift Valley Region of western Uganda, an area of
                         high biodiversity. The largest component of the project is the upgrading of the Kyenjojo-Hoima-
                         Masindi-Kigumba Road from gravel to bitumen standard. The road to be upgraded is 238 Km with
                         gravel carriage way located in Western Uganda, running through Districts of Kyenjojo, Kibaale,
                         Hoima, Masindi and ending up at Kigumba Town Council in the newly created Kiryandongo District
                         connecting to Gulu highway. It is subdivided into three links and traverses various trading centers.

                         Link Section Length             (Km)
                         I Kyenjojo to Hoima     150.5
                         II Hoima to Masindi              54
                         III Masindi to Kigumba        33
                         Total Length of Project     238

                         The World Bank project will finance approximately the first 100 km of of the Kyenjojo-Hoima
                         length. The African Development Bank is financing the remaining 138 km.

                         The Kyenjojo - Hoima stretch lies in hilly and rolling terrain with dense forests in Kibaale district
                         and parts of Hoima district. There are 2 bridges along this link.
                         The Hoima - Masindi link is 54 km that connects Hoima District to Masindi District. Some parts of
                           this link were also in a fairly good condition following periodic maintenance while other parts were
                           characterized by surface corrugations, potholes, inadequate drainage and poor alignment.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The Masindi - Kigumba link is 33 km that connects Masindi Town to Kigumba Town. The road is a
                           gravel road and in a very poor condition characterized by surface corrugations, potholes, inadequate
                           drainage and poor alignment.

                           The Preparing and Planning for Urban Growth Component (Component 2) is anticipated to be
                           implemented in the urban areas of Hoima, Masindi and Bulisa Districts. Works are anticipated to be
                           those with localized negative environmental impacts associated with civil works such as drainage,
                           markets, upgrading of urban roads and other urban infrastructure.

                           The Skills Development will also be implemented in the Lake Albert region. Construction works
                           would be limited to the rehabilitation and upgrading of existing facilities and would have limited
                           environmental impact.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Borrower has extensive capacity with implementing safeguard policies in projects with similar
                           (road and infrastructure) activities. Among the Implementing Agencies, UNRA has experience with
                           similar project, but insufficient environmental and social staff. UNRA has one Environmental
                           Specialist and one Social Development Specialist. Ministry of Education (MoE) and Ministry of
                           Lands Housing and Urban Development (MLHUD) do not have Environmental Specialists.
                           However, MLHUD has another Bank funded project USMID under which MLHUD will recruit an
                           Environmental Specialist. The project host Districts have District Environment Officers, District
                           Community Development Officers and District Land Officers who could potentially be involved in
                           project support supervision during implementation.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Martin Fodor (AFTN3)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Herbert Oule (AFTN3)
                           Constance Nekessa-Ouma (AFTCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              Triggered because the program will support
                           BP 4.01                                              investments with potential adverse
                                                                                environmental impacts. For the largest project
                                                                                activity supported with the bulk of project
                                                                                financing -- upgrade (paving) of the Hoima-
                                                                                Kyenjojo road -- an ESIA has been prepared
                                                                                and is being finalized for consultation and
                                                                                disclosure. For smaller project activities the
                                                                                locations/ size of which cannot be identified ex-
                                                                                ante, ESMF will be prepared, consulted upon,
                                                                                and disclosed before appraisal. Mitigation
                                                                                measures stemming from ESIAs will include
                                                                 addressing of potential induced impacts on
                                                                 protected areas - forest reserves.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes   Triggered because the Albertine Rift area
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 includes a number of protected areas and other
                                                                 natural habitats (large National Parks, Forest
                                                                 Reserves, wetlands, Lake Albert). The activities
                                                                 located within the Rift Valley may potentially
                                                                 affect these natural habitats. The ESMF and
                                                                 activity- specific EIAs will be used to identify
                                                                 and address potential impacts on natural
                                                                 habitats. For potential impacts which cannot be
                                                                 avoided, adequate mitigation measures will be
                                                                 included in the ESMPs.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes   Applicable because the road improvements may
                                                                 have impacts on the adjacent forest reserves,
                                                                 particularly through induced impacts due to
                                                                 improved access. ESMPs will include measures
                                                                 to address such impacts.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    Not Applicable

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   Triggered because project investments will
                         BP 4.11                                 involve civil works and may potentially affect
                                                                 known physical cultural resources in the area or
                                                                 “chance finds?.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     TBD   The task team suggests there are no indigenous
                                                                 people that may be affected by the project. The
                                                                 project area is dominated by natives of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 Bunyoro, Bagungu and Alur. This will be
                                                                 confirmed before appraisal. If there are
                                                                 Indigenous Peoples in the project area, an
                                                                 Indigenous Peoples Plan or Planning
                                                                 Framework will be prepared, consulted upon,
                                                                 and disclosed before appraisal.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   Applicable because the project investments may
                         4.12                                    support interventions that could entail land
                                                                 taking or limiting access to land and other
                                                                 resources. An RPF will be developed, consulted
                                                                 upon, and disclosed before appraisal in order to
                                                                 address potential involuntary resettlement
                                                                 issuestake care of this Policy. In addition, for
                                                                 Kyenjojo – Hoima road upgrade, a resettlement
                                                                 action plan is being prepared, consulted upon,
                                                                 and disclosed before appraisal.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No    The project does not support or depend on dams.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The project is not envisioned to affect
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            international waterways.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             There are no disputed areas in the project area.
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 29-Nov-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      An Environmental Impact Assessment and a Resettlement Action Plan have been prepared for the
                                      proposed road component. These will be consulted upon and disclosed prior to appraisal. For
                                      other components, where specific infrastructure rehabilitation activities will not be known during
                                      preparation, and ESMF and RPF will be prepared. Safeguards instruments will be prepared by
                                      September, 2013.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Dean A. Cira

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name:                                                                                                                      Date:
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Rosemary Mukami Kariuki (SM)                                                                                         Date: 11-Jun-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
