                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA4119
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 20-May-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 30-Nov-2012, 01-Mar-2013, 20-May-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                             Project ID:    P117596
                            Project Name:      China: Guangdong Social Security Integration and Rural Worker Training
                                               (P117596)
                            Task Team          Philip B. O'Keefe
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       10-Dec-2012                          Estimated   20-Jun-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: EASHS                                 Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Compulsory pension and unemployment insurance (40%), Vocational training
                                              (30%), Other social services (20%), Public administration- Other social services
                                              (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Other social protection and risk management (40%), Improving labor markets
                                              (30%), Other human development (20%), Other public sector governance (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     149.71           Total Bank Financing:                  80.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                       Financing Gap:                          0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   69.71
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                      80.00
                              Total                                                                                     149.71
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objectives are to enhance portability of social security data and



                                                                       Page 1 of 7
                         beneficiary entitlements, and to strengthen the skills base and employment prospects of rural hukou
                         workers in Guangdong.
                          3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project will have two main components: (i) Social security integration, and (ii) rural migrant
                         skills development.

                          Component One will support activities in two main areas:
                          (i) Development of an integrated MIS for social security programs would allow for exchange of
                         beneficiary and transaction information throughout the province, and integrated records management
                         across social insurance and employment services programs.
                         (ii) Policy development, TA, M&E would provide technical assistance on policy and design elements
                         of the evolving social security system; promote capacity building for provincial and selected city
                         officials, and finance monitoring and evaluation of both the project interventions.

                         Component Two will support two-ways of intervention of skills development, plus policy studies and
                         M&E:
                          (i) The project will test a new approach for training with the introduction of modular, competency-
                         based programs for short-term training of rural workers. This would involve investments in training
                         equipment, curriculum development, school-industry linkages, staff and school management training
                         capacity, and civil works in two of the three project schools (for which ECOPs have been prepared);
                         and
                          (iii) Policy Studies, Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be carried out in Guangdong province. In addition to a provincial level social
                         insurance system which should cover all residence of the province, the project will also include 3
                         project training schools within the province. The schools are in Guangzhou city (two of them) and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Yunfu City.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Yiren Feng (EASCS)
                         Meixiang Zhou (EASCS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The proposed project will finance the
                          BP 4.01                                             construction of new school buildings, workshops,
                                                                              and laboratories for additional training space and
                                                                              skills training. All planned civil works will be
                                                                              built on the existing land within the campus of 2
                                                                              of the three schools. By considering the type,
                                                                              location, sensitivity, and scale of the proposed
                                                                              project, the project will have limited adverse
                                                                              impacts during the construction and operation
                                                                              phase. During the Concept Note stage, the project
                                                                              was classified as Category C for its minimal
                                                                              adverse environmental and social impacts as per



                                                                      Page 2 of 7
                                                                         the Bank OP 4.01. However, during project
                                                                         preparation the team discovered ongoing land
                                                                         acquisition for which a due diligence report was
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         prepared. Therefore the project has been re-
                                                                         categorized as a Category B project. However, in
                                                                         order to avoid and minimize any potential
                                                                         impacts and risks, Environmental Codes of
                                                                         Practice (ECOP) were prepared for the Project.
                                                                         In accordance with the Bank’s information
                                                                         disclosure policy, prior to project appraisal, the
                                                                         ECOP was disclosed on the website of the project
                                                                         schools on November 26 (for Light Industry) and
                                                                         November 27 (for Yunfu), 2012, and also
                                                                         submitted to the World Bank Infoshop on
                                                                         November 23, 2012.
                                                                         In accordance with the Bank’s information
                                                                         disclosure policy, prior to project appraisal, the
                                                                         ECOP was disclosed on the website of the project
                                                                         schools on November 26 (for Light Industry) and
                                                                         November 27 (for Yunfu), 2012, and also
                                                                         submitted to the World Bank Infoshop on
                                                                         November 23, 2012.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes             Guangdong Provincial Technical School of
                         4.12                                            Light Industry (GPTSLI) required over 1128.42
                                                                         mu land for the school new location and
                                                                         expansion, which includes a 189.17 mu small
                                                                         pond. The land acquisition process started in July
                                                                         2008, and was almost completed by end of 2011
                                                                         except for a few remaining activities. A due
                                                                         diligence report was prepared for this case of land
                                                                         acquisition by an external professional consulting
                                                                         team. In total the reports shows that it has
                                                                         affected one village-Mache Village and five
                                                                         farmer’s cooperatives, 102 households with 389
                                                                         people. There was no house demolition. The due
                                                                         diligence report did a systematic assessment of



                                                                 Page 3 of 7
                                                                                this land acquisition and recommended follow-up
                                                                                actions to take for monitoring and evaluation
                                                                                during the Bank project implementation. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                team concludes that the Bank safeguards policy
                                                                                OP/BP 4.12 is triggered.
                                                                                The due diligence report for the Light Industry
                                                                                School also confirmed that the acquisition
                                                                                process and compensation of GPTSLI is in
                                                                                compliance with the local government laws/
                                                                                regulations and consistent with the Bank
                                                                                safeguard policy OP/BP 4.12. Nevertheless, the
                                                                                Guangdong PMO will monitor the compensation
                                                                                and livelihood restoration during project
                                                                                implementation and as necessary, remedial action
                                                                                will be taken. In accordance with the Bank’s
                                                                                information disclosure policy, prior to project
                                                                                appraisal, the due diligence report were disclosed
                                                                                on the website of the Light Industry School on
                                                                                November 26, 2012, and was updated and re-
                                                                                disclosed on May 20, 2013. It was also submitted
                                                                                to the World Bank Infoshop on November 23,
                                                                                2012, and the updated version was re-submitted
                                                                                on May 20, 2013. The due diligence report was
                                                                                also disclosed on the relevant Village
                                                                                Committee's information board on Nov. 23, 2012
                                                                                and an updated version on May 20, 2013.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                The proposed project will finance the construction of new school buildings, workshops, and
                              laboratories for additional training space and skills training. It will bring in significant social
                              benefits through improved vocational training, employment information services and facilities and
                              institutional capacity building for service providers for migrants. All planned civil works will be
                              built on the existing land within the campus of 2 of the three project schools. But Guangdong
                              Provincial Technical School of Light Industry (GPTSLI) required over 1128.42 mu land for the
                              school new location and expansion, which includes 189.17 mu small pond, of which 20.28 mu (1.5
                              ha, or 57656 m²) land will be used for the civil works supported by the Bank project. The land
                              acquisition process started in July 2008 and was almost completed by end of 2011. A due
                              diligence report was prepared for this case of land acquisition by an external professional

                                                                        Page 4 of 7
                          consulting team. In total the reports shows that it has affected one village-Mache Village and five
                          farmer’s cooperatives, 102 households with 389 people. There was no house demolition. The team
                          concludes that the Bank safeguards policy OP/BP 4.12 is triggered.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          The due diligence report for the Light Industry School also confirmed that the acquisition process
                          and compensation of GPTSLI is in compliance with the local government laws/ regulations and
                          consistent with the Bank safeguard policy OP/BP 4.12. Nevertheless, the borrower will monitor
                          the involuntary resettlement, compensation and livelihood restoration during project
                          implementation and as necessary, remedial action will be taken. In accordance with the Bank’s
                          information disclosure policy, prior to project appraisal, the due diligence report were disclosed on
                          the website of the Light Industry School on November 26, 2012, and also submitted to the World
                          Bank Infoshop on November 23, 2012. The due diligence report was updated re-disclosed on May
                          20, 2013 on the school’s website and re-submitted to InfoShop on May 20, 2013.

                          By considering the type, location, sensitivity, and scale of the proposed project, the project will
                          have very limited adverse impacts during the construction and operation phase. During the
                          Concept Note stage, the project was classified as Category C for its minimal adverse
                          environmental and social impacts as per the Bank OP 4.01. However during project preparation
                          the team discovered ongoing land acquisition for which a due diligence report was prepared.
                          Therefore the project has been re-categorized as a Category B project. However, in order to avoid
                          and minimize any potential impacts and risks, the team decided to take a prudent approach in
                          preparing for an Environmental Codes of Practice (ECOP) for the Project. The ECOPs for the
                          Light Industry School and the Yunfu Technical School have been reviewed by the Senior
                          Environmental Specialist of the Bank and approved. They were sent to the InfoShop on November
                          23, 2012 and published on the websites of the schools on November 26 and 27, 2012 respectively.
                          No ECOP was needed for the third project school as there are no civil works there.

                          The project will consider social dimensions such as gender equality, inclusion of poor and
                          vulnerable people. For the training component, the focus is on rural workers, whether current
Public Disclosure Copy




                          workers who are migrants in urban areas, or new entrants in some cases. It will also provide
                          tailored support to migrants from zero-employee families and female migrants. In Guangdong as
                          in the rest of China, TVET is heavily focused on rural residents and those in urban areas with rural
                          hukou. Of all graduates of tertiary level TVET colleges (the target group for the training
                          component), 88 percent are the first generation in their families to take part in higher education of
                          any form. These groups have attracted substantial and increasing public subsidies towards the
                          costs of their TVET training. In gender terms, enrollments in TVET in China are almost balanced.
                          At the tertiary level, female enrollment as share of total has increase from 48 percent in 2005 to 51
                          percent in 2011, with a matching decline at the secondary tertiary level from 54 percent to 51
                          percent.

                           For the MIS component, the major beneficiaries of the enhanced inter-operability of the social
                           insurance and employment services networks will be workers who are mobile and those seeking
                           services beyond their home prefecture. This group is dominated by migrant workers, both from
                           rural areas of Guangdong and from other provinces (typically poorer central and western
                           provinces).
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            See above.


                                                                     Page 5 of 7
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             NA
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             There are no major safeguards policy issues as noted above. The Borrower appears to have
                           reasonable capacity to conduct construction and project implementation consistent with the ECOP.
                           The training component is managed by a division of the DHRSS which is managed a current
                           TVET project in Guangdong and has shown satisfactory capacity to implement and manage
                           safeguards compliance. Even though the team discovered ongoing land acquisition in the project
                           area, the due diligence report indicates that this was undertaken in compliance with the local
                           government laws/ regulations and consistent with the Bank safeguard policy OP/BP 4.12.
                           Nevertheless, the PMO will monitor the compensation and livelihood restoration during project
                           implementation and as necessary, remedial action will be taken. The Bank project team will
                           supervise the monitoring process as part of regular implementation support.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The key stakeholder on issues related to minor environmental impacts are the staff and students
                           of the schools themselves, the campuses of which will be the sites for the civil works. These
                           groups have been consulted in the preparation of the ECOPs.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         23-Nov-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      20-May-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                               26-Nov-2012
                           Comments: Guangdong Advanced Technical School of Light Industry disclosed the ECOPs and
                                         the Report on Due Diligence Review of Land Acquisition and Resettlement at their
                                         website http://www.qggj.com/notice/20121122-1.asp, and the due diligence report
                                         was also disclosed at their Village Committee's information board on Nov. 23, 2012.
                                         Yunfu Technical Scool disclosed its ECOP on their website on November 27, 2012.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         19-Nov-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      23-Nov-2012
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                               26-Nov-2012
                           Comments: A due diligence report was prepared for the land acquisition that had taken place in
                                         the project area and the report shows that this was undertaken in compliance with the
                                         local government laws/ regulations and consistent with the Bank safeguard policy
                                         OP/BP 4.12. The report was re-disclosed on May 20, 2013.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the


                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Philip B. O'Keefe
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:         Name: Jehan Arulpragasam (SM)                       Date: 20-May-2013




                                                                        Page 7 of 7
