                                                                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                            APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSA254
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Feb-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                       Kazakhstan                              Project ID:                      P128050
                              Project Name:                  East-West Roads: Western Europe - Western China International Transit Corridor (CAREC-1b) (P128050)
                              Task Team Leader:              Jacques Bure
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 24-Feb-2012                                  Estimated Board Date:            03-May-2012
                              Managing Unit:                 ECSS5                                   Lending Instrument:              Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                        Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (90%), General transportation sector (10%)
                              Theme:                         Trade facilitation and market access (80%), Regional integration (10%), Infrastructure services for private sector
                                                             development (10%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                     Amount
                                   Borrower                                                                                                               188.00
                                   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                                 1068.00
                                   Financing Gap                                                                                                             0.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                 1256.00
                              Environmental Category:        A - Full Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              The project development objectives (PDOs) are to increase transport efficiency along the Western Europe-Western China Road Corridor within
                              Almaty Oblast and to modernize highway management on sections of the Western Europe-Western China Road Corridor.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              3. Project Description

                              The Project covers a road section of about 305 km with about 60% of the alignment requiring new road construction, with the remainder being the
                              upgrade of an existing two-lane highway to four lane. The Project will be a Class I (4-lane) highway between Almaty and Khorgos with alignment
                              entirely within Almaty oblast. The project is being prepared based on three different road sections of roughly equal length:

                              Section 1 (024-126 km) starts from about 20 km NNE from the city centre of Almaty in suburban Almaty, runs in a north-easterly direction
                              paralleling the foothill of the Tien Shan mountain range towards the Shelek river which lies just east of a major settlement of the same name. This
                              section consists primarily of new construction to bypass towns and villages and impacts agricultural areas, including some highly-productive
                              irrigated land. This green field section, close to the largest city in Kazakhstan, and with an expected traffic above 10,000 vehicles per day, may be
                              tolled to recoup part of the investment and to introduce concession for operation and maintenance of 4 lane road infrastructure.

                              Section 2 (126-268 km) continues NE from the Shelek river, passes north of the Charyn National Park and continues through arid steppe or semi-
                              desert rangeland ending to the south of River Ili.

                              Section 3 (268-360 km) crosses the River Illi and turns off from the existing route A351 towards the flood plain of the Khorgos River to the Chinese
                              border. The bulk of this section runs through dunes, marshes, rangeland and small, seasonal watercourses.

                              Project Components
                              Component 1: Upgrade and Construction of WE-WC Road Sections within Almaty Oblast (estimated at a cost of US$1,168 million without
                              contingencies). The component would finance the upgrade and construction of a 305 km section of the WE-WC Corridor between Almaty and
                              Khorgos, including road safety features and ancillary facilities (e.g., rest areas, service areas, warehouses for winter maintenance), and related
                              consultants’ services for supervision and audit of civil works. Land acquisition and road design costs would be financed through the Borrower’s
                              own funds. The detailed design would accommodate the growth of average annual daily traffic on the section from the current 6,901 vehicles per
                              day (vpd) (2011) to about 17,000 vpd (2025)—of which 16 percent represents trucks and buses. An upgrade from 2 to 4 lanes would be built to
                              accommodate a 13 ton per axle bearing capacity with a 5 meter median and 3.50 meter wide emergency lanes. The update and construction of
                              the road would lead to significant increases in road capacity and safety.

                              Component 2: Modernize Highway Management of Sections along the WE-WC Corridor (estimated at a cost of US$32 million). The component
                              would finance related works, equipment and consultants’ services for the following sub-components that would complement each other:(a) Operate
                              and Maintain the section of the WE-WC Corridor between Zhambyl and Kyzylorda based on Agreed Upon Levels of Service (estimated at a cost of
                              US$30 million); (b) Review User-Pay Options, such as Tolling on the section of the WE-WC Corridor between Almaty and Khorgos (estimated at a
                              cost of US$1.5 million); and (c) Scale-Up Road Sector Reform Efforts at the MoTC (estimated at a cost of US$0.5 million).
                                                                                                                                                                        Page 1 of 7
                         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         The Project will cover a 305 km road between Almaty and Khorgos (the border with China East of Almaty) partly through an existing 340km 2 lane
                         road. The project will expand the road to 4 lane, partly within an existing right of way (about 40%), partly with green field construction (about 60%).
                         It thus has all physical characteristics of a large linear infrastructure project, with significant spatial extension, visible impact on landscape,
                         biosphere and land use patterns, strong dependence of its impacts on topography, climate, natural conditions and anthropogenic activity, and in
                         the specific case of the Amaty-Khorgos corridor, the crossing of a variety of land forms, land use types and (micro) climatic zones.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project alignment lies entirely within Almaty Oblast. It covers 5 Rayons: Ili, Talgar, Enbekshikazakh, Uighur and Panfilov. The project is being
                         prepared based on three different sections of roughly equal length which, are likely to translate into construction lots during implementation. They
                         are subsequently described, including features and information relevant for safeguards classification and the design of safeguards instruments:

                         Section 1 (024-126 km) starts about 20 km NNE from the city centre of Almaty (the chainage refers to a reference point in Almaty). The first 10 km
                         run through what can still be seen as suburban zone of Almaty, characterized by a dense network of infrastructure (roads, power lines, railroad)
                         and numerous satellite settlements, with intense agricultural land use in non-built-up areas. From the village of Baiserke the alignment then heads
                         steadily in north-easterly direction, about 2-5 km north and parallel to the existing main traffic line, the A351 (?Kuldzhinskiy Trakt“). About 80% of
                         the alignment runs through lands which are under intense agricultural use (with minor animal husbandry) and are mostly irrigated. Irrigation water
                         is derived from the nearby Tian Shan range, whose foothills run parallel to the alignment about 8-10 km to the South. The alignment crosses
                         between 10-15 seasonal rivers, which run dry in summer, but can carry considerable water and sediment loads in spring. Most of them are use for
                         gravel extraction. About 15 km to the north, and thus downstream of, and topographically at a lower elevation than the project alignment, lies the
                         Kapchagai Reservoir formed by damming Ili River. Ili then continues to flow NW into Lake Balkash, which is the second largest lake in Kazakhstan
                         and the receptacle for the entire surface water network in the project area.

                         From about 100 to 120km the alignment runs through more arid rangeland, which is mostly covered by brush and grass and used mainly as
                         pastureland for animals. The end of the first section is defined by river Shelek which lies just east of a major settlement of the same name. River
                         Shelek appears to be a perennial watercourse, albeit with large fluctuations in discharge rate. It is under intense use for gravel extraction in the
                         project area. In this section (about 100-126 km) the new alignment will use the existing right of way. The existing bridge will be reconstructed and a
                         new bridge built to accommodate two additional traffic lanes.

                         As a result, in this first section close to Almaty, there will be two roads: the new 4-lane running in parallel to the existing road, bypassing many
                         settlements, and the existing road that will be discharged of all the transit traffic and that will still be the life line road for the settlements. Overall,
                         about 85% of the road under Section One would be constructed on a new alignment, the remainder following the existing route A351.

                         Section 2 (126-268 km) continues NE from river Shelek, while A351 turns off due east, running roughly parallel to the project alignment at a
                         distance of about 20-25 km to the southeast. The alignment follows a secondary road, which is a narrow asphalted road for the first 25-30 km and
                         then turns into a gravel road for about 70-80 km. This part of the alignment was projected to be upgraded to a transit highway in the 1980s, but
                         construction did not proceed beyond a gravel platform. Alignment adjustments and new sections are planned in 3 parts of this section: (i) about 5
                         km at the start of the section (new alignment crossing agricultural lands), (ii) about 2-3 km at 15 km from the section start, where the new
                         alignment will cross a wetlands area, and (iii) about 20 km stretch towards the end of the section, where the new section will be routed between an
                         alluvial fan with irrigated agriculture, and a semi-desert type area.

                         At about km 250-255 the road alignment will pass about 10-15 km to the north of the Charyn National Park, an ancient woodland which has
Public Disclosure Copy




                         survived in a narrow, sheltered canyon along a 25 km stretch of Charyn River. The park’s southern boundary lies only several hundred meters
                         north of the existing highway A351. This forest is one of the last remnants of a much larger forest which once stretched along the foothills of the
                         Tian Shan Mountains after the last Ice Age. It is the last location in Central Asia and one of the few places in the world which still supports a large
                         population of the endangered Sogdian ash tree.

                         Following the alignment to NE directions there is a visible trend towards a more arid climate, thus the bulk of the alignment of this section would
                         run through arid steppe or semi-desert type rangeland, with no perennial rivers, no wetlands (except the aforementioned) and few temporal rivers
                         (located in the NE of the section, at km 230-268). Agricultural lands will be affected only along about 25 percent of the section. About 80 percent of
                         section 2 will run along existing, albeit much smaller and lower capacity roads. The section ends about 5 km South of River Ili, where the project
                         alignment rejoins route A351.

                         Section 3 (268-360 km) runs through a variety of landscapes and land use types: 5 km after its start river Ili is crossed via a 700 m long bridge.
                         River Ili is the largest river of the entire project area and the main tributary to Lake Balkash. Several km before and after the crossing of Ili River the
                         project alignment would follow the existing route A351, and a new bridge would be built parallel to the existing one to accommodate 2 additional
                         lanes. A few km after the river crossing the projected road would again turn off the existing route A351 and run on a new alignment for the rest of
                         the project. The bulk of the section would run through dunes, marshes and rangeland, with some sand dunes and occasional small, seasonal
                         watercourses. At about 290-320 km there is a stretch of land used for irrigated agriculture with a few small settlements. The closest is bypassed at
                         a distance of about 4 km. The last section of the road (320-355 km) runs parallel to and through a large field of sand dunes with sparse vegetation.

                         The last 5 km cross the broad flood plain of Khorgos River to the Chinese border, where a new border-crossing is planned. This development has
                         been started some years ago and has advanced considerably on the Chinese side of the border. It will serve as dry port for both road and railroad
                         and is in itself a project considerable size. Although the two projects are not functionally linked in Bank policy terms, it is possible that works
                         undertaken in close physical proximity and in a similar time frame could pose reputational risks for the Bank. Accordingly, the team will undertake a
                         screening analysis of the environmental and social due diligence processes undertaken by the investor. This has already been included in TOR
                         developed by the team for updating and upgrading the existing ESIAs.

                         Most of the section is semi-arid and is under sporadic, open-access use for animal husbandry (mainly sheep, goats and cows). Roadworks will not
                         significantly reduce the area of land for such usage. During project preparation, designs will be reviewed to determine whether, or where,
                         underpasses or other measures may be necessary to allow for safe and effective access, and confirmation will be obtained from rayon akimats
                         that remaining land areas will continue to be available on an open access basis. The district centre, Zharkent, lies at a distance of about 5 km East
                         from the alignment. In the vicinity of the border the development of a free trade zone has started in 2006, involving the regulation of Khorgos river
                         and the construction of a dry port facility on the Kazakh side of the border.
                                                                                                                                                                             Page 2 of 7
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                         Daniel R. Gibson (ECSOQ)
                         Wolfhart Pohl (ECSS3)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                     Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01       Yes          The safeguards category of A is justified by the extensive new road sections
                                                                                planned under the project. The alignment will run through a variety of areas with
                                                                                different safeguards implications: (i) in zones of intense agricultural use existing
                                                                                irrigation systems will have to be preserved, (ii) where the road would cross
                                                                                rangeland under use for animal husbandry animal underpasses will have to be
                                                                                planned to guarantee the safety of drivers and animals, (iii) protected area /
                                                                                national park will be circumvented..

                                                                                The main envisaged negative impacts during construction is the operation of
                                                                                borrow areas, generation of waste (construction materials, spent consumables,
                                                                                household waste and wastewater from camps), land use and conversion, topsoil
                                                                                destruction and erosion. There is also a potential impact on groundwater and
                                                                                surface water from turbidity and siltation, washing equipment in rivers (e.g. cement
                                                                                trucks) and accidental spills involving fuels and lubricants. During operation of the
                                                                                road storm drainage management, soils, ground and surface water contamination
                                                                                by heavy metals, soot and organic compounds (e.g. PAH), noise, dust, air pollution
                                                                                will be the main issues and will be addressed by road design. There will be no
                                                                                significant destruction or disruption of natural habitats and ecosystems by the road
                                                                                construction or operation. Potential impacts that have been identified have been
                                                                                addressed with effective mitigation measures.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04               No           The selected road alignment will pass about 10 km to the North of the Charyn
                                                                                National Park, which is a 25 km stretch of protected forest along the Charyn river.
                                                                                Another alternative that would have crossed the park on the existing road
                                                                                alignment was abandoned due to environmental considerations. The forest will not
                                                                                be affected by the project, as the alignment would run at a sufficient distance from
                                                                                the park boundary, North of Charyn town, which would additionally buffer between
                                                                                road and national park.

                                                                                No other protected areas or national parks or other significant natural habitats are
                                                                                sufficiently close to the project area to be at risk of negative impacts. According to
                                                                                the GIS database on the RAMSAR website none of the sites mapped in
                                                                                Kazakhstan will be affected by the project area.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                        No           Besides the national forest described under OP4.04 only small patches of mostly
                                                                                planted forest occur in the Western section of the project area. No significant
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                impacts on forests are expected and the policy thus not triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09                   No           The use of pesticides or herbicides is not foreseen under the project. The policy is
                                                                                not triggered.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11    Yes          Several PCR sites have been identified close to the alignment and one on the
                                                                                alignment itself. The ESIA and EMP contain analysis of the sites and provisions for
                                                                                their salvage before the commencement of road construction. The KZ Ministry of
                                                                                Culture is managing this process with the help of experienced academic
                                                                                institutions. Before the start of construction the sites will be excavated,
                                                                                documented and all relevant objects and artifacts removed from the site and stored
                                                                                in archives and museums.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10             No           No indigenous peoples live in the project area or will directly or indirectly be
                                                                                affected by the project.




                                                                                                                                                            Page 3 of 7
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12             Yes              Road works require acquisition of 2,883 hectares of land from 769 plots. Of this
                                                                                                amount 94 plots, or 1,866 hectares of land, was already state-owned (including
                                                                                                open access range land periodically used for livestock grazing). The remaining
                                                                                                1,018 hectares, from 675 plots has been acquired, or is in the process of being
                                                                                                acquired, from private owners or leaseholders, including one hectare zoned for
                                                                                                commercial use and four hectares zoned for residential use. A total of 22
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                commercial enterprises are affected. The remaining privately owned or leased
                                                                                                areas are agricultural land without permanent structures. No residential demolition
                                                                                                is required.

                                                                                                Because planning began years before Bank financing was sought, almost all of the
                                                                                                land required for the Project has already been acquired—except for a small
                                                                                                number of outstanding cases.Therefore, instead of a Resettlement Action Plan
                                                                                                intended to guide future land acquisition, the Bank has required the client to
                                                                                                prepare a Resettlement Implementation Review (RIR), to establish facts relating to
                                                                                                prior land acquisition and to assess consistency of the acquisition process with the
                                                                                                Resettlement Policy Framework agreed for the entire WE-WC Corridor.

                                                                                                A draft RIR has been prepared and reviewed. Generally, it demonstrates that most
                                                                                                cases of acquisition have been completed in a manner consistent with domestic
                                                                                                regulations and the agreed RPF. According to latest RIR draft, about 80 land
                                                                                                acquisition cases remain outstanding for various reasons (e.g., missing owners,
                                                                                                contested compensation, ownership challenges). Any cases that remain
                                                                                                unresolved at appraisal will be subject to follow-up to align the compensations with
                                                                                                the principles set in the RPF and the practices agreed under the SWRP.

                                                                                                The draft RIR also establishes that retroactive measures are necessary to bring
                                                                                                two aspects into full compliance with agreed RPF standards: A transitional
                                                                                                allowance must be paid to about 14 business owners forced to relocate, and
                                                                                                supplemental assistance must be paid to about 250 persons losing more than 10%
                                                                                                of their productive land. The RIR remains under revision, and will not be deemed
                                                                                                acceptable until additional details are provided regarding the nature of outstanding
                                                                                                cases and the nature of additional compensation in compliance with RPF
                                                                                                requirements. Required compensation to be paid to affected parties should be
                                                                                                complete prior to commencement of civil works which would affect land/property
                                                                                                and their own/rent/occupy/use.

                                                                                                The project documents will covenant a requirement for the client to fully implement
                                                                                                the same retroactive measures in the ongoing SWRP, under implementation in
                                                                                                South Kazakhstan Oblast, by July 2012 —which would confirm the capacity of the
                                                                                                client to implement similar measures under the proposed Project prior to the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                commencement of the works (as mentioned above).
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                       No               No dam safety issues were found during the site appraisal. The only dams near
                                                                                                the project area are low dykes for the containment of rivers and irrigation channels,
                                                                                                as well as flood protection works on river banks, which pose no safety risk. The
                                                                                                Kapchagai reservoir, which has a substantial dam structure, is located downstream
                                                                                                and topographically below the road alignment.
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP       No               No international waterways will be affected by the project. The impact on the
                               7.50                                                             hydrological regime and flow pattern of rivers crossed by bridges will be
                                                                                                insignificant, as their hydrological flow pattern will remain entirely unchanged..
                                                                                                Moreover the project area lies in the basin of Lake Balkash, an endorheic (closed)
                                                                                                basin shared by Kazakhstan (as downstream recipient) and China, with a small
                                                                                                part in Kyrgyzstan. The basin drains into the lake via seven rivers, the major one
                                                                                                being Ili River, which brings the majority of the riparian inflow. As China lies
                                                                                                upstream of the project and there are no hydrological impacts associated with the
                                                                                                project there are no grounds to trigger OP7.50.
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60           No               The project is not located in or near disputed areas.


                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                   The design of the road has taken measures for the minimization of environmental impacts into account. The routing as much as feasible
                                 avoids sensitive areas and habitats and protected areas, follows existing infrastructure corridors and thus limiting the conversion of land to non-
                                 critical land types and land use types. The design includes measures to protect the adjacent population from noise (routing, barriers), increase
                                 traffic safety by speed controls, pedestrian crossings and underpasses. The design also has taken into account requirements articulated from
                                 farmers along the alignment for safe crossings for animals and farm traffic through sufficiently dimensioned underpasses. Similar underpasses
                                 will facilitate wildlife crossings (mainly deer and wild boar) especially in Section 2 in the vicinity of the National Parks. The design has included
                                 results from hydrographic and hydrological studies, installing sufficient culverts to avoid damming of permanent of seasonal watercourses and
                                 the creation of swamps or waterlogged areas, and the dimensioning of bridges is taking the seasonality of discharges, as well as the proneness

                                                                                                                                                                          Page 4 of 7
                           to flash floods into account.

                           Most environmental impacts during the construction period will be mitigated by good housekeeping measures. There will be standard
                           procedures for the control and mitigation of emissions, such as dust, noise, exhaust fumes and liquid discharges from camps and the road
                           platform. Surface watercourses will be protected by settling ponds and filters (e.g. straw bales). Wastewater from construction camps will be
                           treated on site in settlement and aeration basins, where biological waste will be processed, before discharge into surface streams or rivers.
                           Septic sludge from toilets will either be composted on site or trucked to existing water treatment plants along the alignment. Groundwater is not
Public Disclosure Copy




                           expected to be impacted by the project, as no deep excavations or major cuts are expected. Water for the construction activities as well as the
                           camps will be extracted in relatively small quantities from existing wells or the public supply system. Generally water availability is
                           unconstrained in the project area.

                           Noise and exhaust emissions will be minimized by the requirement for Contractors to use modern equipment and machinery complying with
                           modern emission standards, and to maintain the equipment in good working order throughout the project. This will be prescribed in the
                           equipment specifications in the tender documents. Nuisance to the public will moreover be minimized by limiting work hours and not allowing
                           nighttime works. Where works are carried out in close vicinity to residential areas additional measures, such as noise barriers or the installation
                           of insulating windows will be implemented in accordance with good practice and in consultation with the community.

                           Borrow pits will be operated by the Contractors only at locations that have been pre-identified previous to project implementation and for which
                           both operational and environmental permits have been obtained. No borrow pit will be operated without a site specific EMP that will contain a
                           plan for its closure, remediation and re-cultivation that will be approved by the local environmental authorities (as required under Kazakh
                           regulations) as well as the supervising engineer (who will ensure that international good practice is followed).

                           All environmental management measures to be carried out by the Contractors during the construction period will be integrated in the tender
                           documents and become part of the works contracts. This will also include a manual on chance find procedures to be followed in case of
                           unanticipated discovery of potential PCR. The salvage dig at the one site identified on the alignment will be carried out by the Kazakh State
                           Archaeological Survey under the Ministry for Culture and will be completed before any works may start in the specific area. The Contractors will
                           be required to have permanent staff on site with the specific responsibility of environmental and social management (including a grievance
                           specialist), reporting to the supervision engineers and local authorities.

                           As described in the section on Involuntary R esettlement above, the land acquisition and associated impacts are moderate for a project of this
                           scope and complexity. Additionally the land acquisition has already been completed except about 80 cases being dealt with. The Resettlement
                           Implementation Review (RIR) being finalized establishes that land acquisition generally has been undertaken in a manner consistent with
                           domestic regulations and with the Resettlement Policy Framework for the WE-WC Corridor, of which the project area is a part. The RIR is
                           awaiting finalization and formal submission from the CR. There will be a need for follow-up on land acquisition cases that remain outstanding,
                           and requires retroactive measures to provide transitional allowances to businesses forced to relocate, and supplemental assistance to affected
                           persons losing more than 10% of their productive land area.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                            It should be noted that in over 90% of the "greenfield" sections the new road will follow existing tracks or dirt roads, and existing infrastructure
                           corridors (railway, gas pipeline) which were constructed some years to decades ago when this infrastructure corridor was established and a
                           road upgrading and re-routing already planned. Thus the road will not open up a hitherto untouched area.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           During operation the functionality of noise and traffic safety measures described above in the Section on design will be monitored and
                           maintained. Any required modifications, upgrades or additions (e.g. issues relating to pedestrian safety or to excessive road kills of domestic or
                           wild animals) will be flagged and integrated into the road repair and maintenance plans for rectification.

                           As the road corridor already exists no significant impacts are expected from induced or secondary development. While traffic volumes are
                           expected to increase the optimized alignment will contain impacts and in some areas (e.g. the crossing of the Charyn National Park) lead to a
                           long term reduction of existing environmental stress. The road will not contribute significantly to habitat fragmentation in addition to the impacts
                           already established by railway and pipeline.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                             In Section 1 there were a number of minor alignment changes from the original FS to minimize impacts on existing irrigation infrastructure and
                           the natural gas pipeline which follows a similar corridor.

                           Section 2: In the vicinity of Tashkarasu and Charyn the original alignment for this Section followed the existing route of A351 which passes
                           through the Charyn National Park. The upgrading of this original alignment was discarded at an early stage precisely because it passes though
                           the National Park and thus is not in accordance with Kazakh environmental policy. The current alignment was proposed by the Uigur Rayon
                           Akimat and strongly supported by local environmental NGOs (represented mainly by Almaty-based “Green Salvation?) as a means of (i)
                           avoiding irrigated agricultural land to the south and east of the town of Tashkarasu and (ii) avoiding passing through the protected Charyn
                           National Park south of Charyn. The selected alignment now passes through largely unused open land, in an infrastructure corridor already
                           containing the railway line and a gas pipeline, which is neither used for agriculture or grazing, nor has significant environmental or ecological
                           value.

                           Section 3: In the area of Koktal and Zharkent the alternative alignment avoided irrigated agricultural land north and west of Zharkent. The
                           original proposed alignment followed the present route through Kaktal and then bypassed Zharkent immediately to the south. This affected
                           irrigated land immediately to the south of Zharkent. The selected alignment passes approximately 10 km south of Koktal and Zharkent and
                           avoids all agricultural land and passes through unused land or low intensity grazing land, as well as a fragile sand dune habitat at the eastern
                           end of Section 3.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                            and implement the measures described.
                            The EIA process in Kazakhstan is described in the Environmental code (2007) and a set of detailed implementation instructions. It foresees 4
                           stages, which correlate with the respective design activities and range from (i) a desk study for pre-feasibility level, (ii) a preliminary EIA and (iii)
                           a detailed ("full") EIA for the detailed design stage and (iv) an EMP as separate section of the design documentation. In this respect the EIA
                                                                                                                                                                        Page 5 of 7
                           process is both logical and deemed compatible with international good practice.

                           The borrower prepared ESIA reports for all three alignment sections. These were reviewed by the Bank team, a gap analysis carried out and
                           issues to be rectified and improved identified. The team, the PMC (project management consultant) from the ongoing SWRP (South West
                           Roads Project) and a qualified Consultant assisted the Borrower to address the identified gaps and upgrade the ESIAs to a quality acceptable
                           to the Bank before project appraisal.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           It also should be pointed out that along a 1,000 km section of M32 large scale construction works for the rehabilitation, reconstruction and the
                           construction of new bypass sections have been ongoing for 2 years (currently 21 lots under construction). The works are being implemented
                           under supervision of a Project Management Consultant (PMC) who works closely with the Borrower and who has a team of environmental and
                           social specialists in the country that closely monitor and supervise the implementation of environmental due diligence on the construction sites.
                           While someThe environmental issues remain to be improved inidentified under the ongoing construction, environmentalworks financed by the
                           SWRP are being addressed by the supervision team under the guidance of the CR. Environmental compliance is generally satisfactory, as has
                           been determined by several performance assessment missions carried out by the World Bank team. The same structure and approach will be
                           used for thisthe proposed project (EWRP).

                           As explained above, the client has already undertaken land acquisition, and most of it has been completed in a manner consistent with
                           requirements agreed in the Resettlement Policy Framework for the WE-WC Corridor. A draft Resettlement Implementation Review identifies
                           information that must be provided regarding outstanding cases of land acquisition, and identifies two retroactive measures necessary to bring
                           land acquisition in the project up to standards agreed in the RPF. The RIR will be finalized when the necessary information is provided and
                           when the Committee for Roads formally commits to CR has incorporated in it the provision of the necessary retroactive measures. Additionally,
                           a described in the RPF. A loan agreement covenant also will require the Committee for RoadsCR to implement the same retroactive measures
                           infor the ongoing SWRP project in South Kazakhstan Oblast. The Committee has formally committed to do so, but as yettiming for the
                           implementation of thethose various activities is as follows: (i) the final version of the RIR will have to be approved by Appraisal, (ii) the RC will
                           have to complete all retroactive compensation measures remains incompletepending in SWRP SKO prior to effectiveness of EWRP, and (iii)
                           during implementation, all required compensation will have to be paid to all affected parties prior to commencement of civil works which would
                           affect land/property and their own/rent/occupy/use.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                            on potentially affected people.
                            The key stakeholders of the road are (a) the Committee for Roads, an agency of the Government of Kazakhstan, as the project proponent; (b)
                           commercial and private road users, who will be the primary beneficiaries from improved road quality; and (c) PAPs such as the residents of
                           communities along the road, farmers, herders, the national park agency and proprietors of roadside services. For this last group there will be
                           benefits as well as some disadvantages and negative impacts caused by the project.

                           To ensure that all views and concerns of all stakeholders are appropriately reflected in project design and implementation, and environmental
                           and social safeguards instruments fully capture the baseline situation, the expected impacts and the views and concerns of the PAPs, two sets
                           of consultations were undertaken during the preparation of the Bank financed project. They took place on October 4-6, 2011 (one meeting in
                           each of the 5 Rayons to discuss the ESIA TOR) and in January 23-25, 2012 (to discuss the final draft ESIA). The results of those meetings
                           have been factored into the final draft versions of ESIA and RAP.

                           Previous to Bank involvement the Borrower organized several consultations and public hearings under the Kazakh regulatory framework, in
Public Disclosure Copy




                           which the draft design and the ESIAs produced according to domestic standards were presented to and discussed with the stakeholders.

                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                             Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                06-Dec-2011
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                            13-Dec-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                             13-Dec-2011
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive             26-Jan-2012
                           Directors
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                             Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                30-Jan-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                            27-Feb-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                             27-Feb-2012
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                         disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         A draft version of the Resettlement Implementation Report is now disclosed. Bank staff considered this version detailed enough to be published
                         prior to appraisal. Prior the RIR, a RPF was disclosed one March 19, 2009 during the preparation of the previous project (SWRP) and covered
                         the section of the corridor financed by the new project. The Resettlement Implementation Report (in lieu of a RAP) is not the final version. Bank
                         staff will continue advising the client about the adjustments that would be needed to finalize the document. The final version of the document will
                         be publish again once approved by the Bank.

                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                                                                                                                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                              Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?              Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                              Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts on        Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              cultural property?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                              If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the      Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?              Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language      Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for   Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?              Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard    Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same        Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Task Team Leader:                    Jacques Bure
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:     Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                                                Date: 28-Feb-2012
                            Sector Manager:                      Name Henry G. R. Kerali (SM)                                             Date: 28-Feb-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                                               Page 7 of 7
