                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA2599
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Apr-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 02-Apr-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Burkina Faso                      Project ID:    P120960
                            Project Name:      Burkina Faso Donsin Transport Infrastructure Project (P120960)
                            Task Team          Fabio Galli
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          04-Mar-2013                       Estimated   16-May-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTTR                             Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector:            Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (90%), Aviation (10%)
                            Theme:             Infrastructure services for private sector development (40%), Regional
                                               integration (40%), Export development and competitiveness (20 %)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     85.00                       Total Bank Financing:      85.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                                  Financing Gap:                 0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                  85.00
                              Total                                                                        85.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           The proposed PDO is to improve road access to the Donsin area to facilitate its development as a
                           transport hub for greater Ouagadougou.

                           The Bank’s support will contribute to the achievement of the above PDO by supporting Burkina Faso
                           in:

                           - Improving road infrastructure to better connect Ouagadougou to the Donsin area;


                                                                       Page 1 of 7
                         - Providing the Maitrise d’Ouvrage de l’Aeroport de Donsin (MOAD) Technical Assistance (TA) to
                         enhance its capability to manage the proposed project; and
                         - Providing the MOAD TA to put in place a PPP framework for the operation of the existing and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         future Ouagadougou international airports.
                         3. Project Description
                         I)      The proposed project supports the development of the Donsin area by focusing on: (a)
                         upgrading and construction of key road transport infrastructure required to connect Ouagadougou to
                         the Donsin area; and (b) TA to assist GOBF in putting in place a PPP framework to operate the
                         existing and future Ouagadougou international airports. The estimated cost of the proposed project is
                         about US$85.0 million and the project objectives are expected to be achieved through the
                         implementation of the following two major components:

                         Component A – Upgrading and construction of road infrastructure to connect Ouagadougou to the
                         Donsin area (about US$78.3 million inclusive of all taxes). The proposed project will finance the
                         following major activities under component A:

                         (a)     Upgrading of NR3. The proposed project will fund the upgrading of NR3 from
                         Ouagadougou to Loumbila (17.5 km) (about US$38.0 million).
                         (b)     Construction of a new two lane paved link road. The proposed project will fund the
                         construction of a 24.3 km new two lane paved link road, with shoulders, from the Loumbila NR3
                         junction to the Nionogo NR22 junction. This is to form a link road which connects NR3 and NR22
                         while at the same time connecting the planned Donsin area to Ouagadougou (about US$33.0
                         million).
                         (c)     Rehabilitation of existing rural roads. The proposed project will finance the rehabilitation/
                         spot improvement of about 40 km of unpaved rural roads in the Donsin area (about US$2.5 million).
                         (d)     Supervision and monitoring of road works. The proposed project will finance internationally
                         experienced supervision consultants to supervise the road infrastructure works (about US$3.30
                         million); and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (e)     Implementation of social and environmental safeguard measures. The proposed project will
                         finance part of the implementation costs for the Environment and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)/
                         Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for the planned road infrastructure works (about US$1.0
                         million

                         Component B – Technical Assistance to MOAD and for project management (about US$6.9 million
                         inclusive of all taxes).

                         III)     This component will support MOAD by financing the technical management of the proposed
                         project and put in place a PPP framework to operate the existing and future Ouagadougou
                         international airports. In addition, it will finance operating costs, monitoring and evaluation of the
                         entities involved in the execution of the proposed project, as well as training on Bank procedures and
                         policies in procurement, financial management, and social and environmental aspects. More
                         specifically, the project will support the following activities:

                         (a)     Consultant services to assist MOAD to put in place a PPP framework to operate the existing
                         and future Ouagadougou international airports (about US$1.2 million);
                         (b)     TA to strengthen MOAD capacity to manage the proposed project (about US$1.08 million);
                         (c)     Technical studies (about US$0.58 million);
                         (d)     Acquisition of goods and equipment (about US$1.80 million);


                                                                      Page 2 of 7
                         (e)     Training and capacity building in project management (about US$0.50 million);
                         (f)     Operating costs (about US$1.25 million); and
                         (g)     Technical and financial audits (about US$0.29 million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The general project area is located about 35 km Northeast of Ouagadougou, on the central plateau of
                         the country. Like most of the central plateau of Burkina Faso, the Donsin area is characterized by
                         sudano-sahelian landscape features: desertification; water scarcity; wind and soil erosion filling up
                         watersheds; decreasing soil fertility due to demographic pressure and land tenure challenges.
                         Management of the limited resources (vegetation, watershed and soil fertility) is critical. Particular
                         attention will be given to the Loumbila water reservoir in the project since it currently supplies clean
                         drinking water to part of Ouagadougou.

                         The specific project location covers an existing paved road (NR3) corridor from Ouagadougou to
                         Loumbila, the Donsin Area and a new road corridor that will link NR3 with NR22. The planned
                         project road works start from the outskirts of Ouagadougou and consist in: (a) upgrading of NR3
                         from Ouagadougou to Loumbila (17.2 km); (b) construction of a new paved link road between NR3
                         in Loumbila and NR22 at Nionogo (24.3 km); and (c) rehabilitation of about 40 km of existing rural
                         roads in the Donsin Area.

                         The proposed road infrastructure to be rehabilitated/constructed under the proposed project, traverse
                         urban, semi-urban and rural areas. More specifically, NR3 will be upgraded under the project to a
                         four lane standard in its urban/peri urban section and to two lanes with paved shoulders to cater for
                         two wheeled motorcycles/bicycles in the rural section. The paved link road that will be constructed
                         between NR3 and NR22 will follow existing rural roads/trails and will be built to a two lane standard
                         with paved shoulders to facilitate the movement of pedestrians/two wheeled vehicles. The rural roads
                         to be rehabilitated under the proposed project provide connectivity within the Donsin and the
                         Loumbila area and connect the Donsin and the Loumbila area with the paved road network. The rural
Public Disclosure Copy




                         roads currently traverse fallow and agricultural land which may become semi-urbanized in the long
                         run as an impact of induced development triggered by making the Donsin area into a transport hub
                         which will include an airport.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Antoine V. Lema (AFTCS)
                         Maman-Sani Issa (AFTN2)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes               Planned activities (rehabilitation and
                          BP 4.01                                              construction of road infrastructure and operation
                                                                               of improved road infrastructure) could have
                                                                               negative environmental impacts like: (a) pollution
                                                                               of water bodies located in the Donsin area and
                                                                               surrounding aquifers in the same watershed; (b)
                                                                               loss of vegetation and habitat for fauna and flora;
                                                                               and (c) increased physical pollution (noise, air)
                                                                               and exposure of surrounding communities to
                                                                               related sickness, etc. To mitigate these impacts,



                                                                       Page 3 of 7
                                                                         GOBF has prepared a full Environmental Impact
                                                                         Assessment (EIA) in compliance with Bank
                                                                         policies and the Burkina Faso "Code de
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         l'Environnement" (Environmental Code) and
                                                                         regulations on preparation of EIAs. Furthermore,
                                                                         GOBF has prepared an Environmental and Social
                                                                         Management Plan (ESMP), consistent with the
                                                                         EIA analysis, to implement environmental
                                                                         mitigation measures.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No              The project area shows no specific natural
                                                                         habitat or biodiversity hot spot. However, the new
                                                                         link road will be located near a permanent river
                                                                         and water reservoir, which could be hosting
                                                                         iconic species. The completed and disclosed EIA
                                                                         paid particular attention to these issues and made
                                                                         sure they were reflected in specific action plans
                                                                         as needed.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No              None of the project roads go through classified
                                                                         forests or areas with primary forest growth, and
                                                                         the project area mostly consists of low density
                                                                         degraded tree cover. Furthermore, the
                                                                         rehabilitation of NR3 and rural roads covered
                                                                         under the proposed project will have limited
                                                                         impact on existing tree cover due to the fact they
                                                                         are existing roads. Finally, the construction of
                                                                         the new road between NR3 and NR22 will
                                                                         traverse an area with limited tree cover
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No              N/A

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes            Taking into account the likely physical cultural
                         BP 4.11                                         resources impacts that the planned construction
                                                                         activities are expected to have, GOBF prepared a
                                                                         Physical Cultural Resources (PCR) study and
                                                                         PCR Management Plan (PCRMP) as part of the
                                                                         reviewed and disclosed ESIA and ESMP.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes            The road rehabilitation and construction
                         4.12                                            activities will require land acquisition and
                                                                         involuntary resettlement, and, possibly
                                                                         restrictions of access to resources. A RAP is
                                                                         prepared finalized and disclosed before appraisal.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

                         Projects on International         No
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50


                                                                 Page 4 of 7
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                The civil works of Component A (Upgrading and Construction of Road Infrastructure to connect
                              Ouagadougou to the Donsin and the Loumbila area) will induce land acquisition and the
                              resettlement of about 10 households. No irreversible adverse environmental or social impacts are
                              expected. Civil works will be limited and carried out along the existing road corridor. Potentially
                              adverse environmental and social impacts will be site-specific and limited in scope. Adverse
                              environmental impacts identified in the ESIA will include: (a) loss of potential agricultural land
                              due to the exploitation of up to 23 new/existing minor quarries and borrow pits; (b) the nuisances
                              induced by temporary air pollution due to dust and exhaust fumes (respiratory disorders, eye
                              troubles); (c) risk of water resources pollution due to inappropriate handling of the solid and liquid
                              waste; (d) temporary traffic disruption on the NR3 during the construction phase ; (e) increased
                              flood risks for the adjacent neighborhoods due to poorly constructed temporary drainage
                              structures; (f) increased accident risks due to poorly designed and organized road safety and
                              project site management. Main adverse social impacts identified in the Environmental and Social
                              Impact Assessment (ESIA) and the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) include the relocation of: 10
                              households; 262 electricity poles; 56 telephone poles; 20 tombs; 2 tree patches; 61 ha of farmland
                              and partial or temporary relocation of 327 street sheds.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                                The rehabilitation/construction of the project roads is not expected to induce long term adverse
Public Disclosure Copy




                              impacts. To the contrary, the upgrading/construction of paved roads and the upgrading of the rural
                              roads network to/in Donsin and Loumbila area will provide: improved access to public services
                              and to local markets; diversify the sources of revenues for local population and contribute to the
                              urbanization project impact area.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                                N/A
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                                During project preparation, the GOBF has put in place a sound institutional framework for the
                              managing and monitoring potential adverse environmental and social impacts that the proposed
                              project is expected to generate. The GOBF created a project implementing entity called the
                              MOAD, which reports directly to the Prime Minister’s office, and will have the necessary
                              resources and responsibility for the preparation of the social and environmental instruments
                              required by the proposed project. The MOAD established an environmental and social
                              management unit called Personne Responsable des Activités Socio-Environnementales (PRASE)
                              with the sole purpose of monitoring project safeguards compliance.

                              The GOBF also demonstrated its safeguards compliance readiness by its timely preparation and
                              disclosure of the safeguards instruments. These are: (a) Environmental and Social Impact

                                                                         Page 5 of 7
                           Assessment (ESIA); and (b) Resettlement Action Plan (RAP). GOBF plans provide about US$2
                           million in budgetary resources to enable MOAD to cover costs of preparing and implementing the
                           necessary safeguards instruments for the proposed project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           To strengthen its safeguards performance and compliance, the MOAD has signed four MoUs with
                           national research institutes to assist in the implementation of the safeguards instruments. The
                           PRASE will thus closely work with: (a) the Bureau National des Evaluations Environnementales
                           et Déchets Spéciaux (BUNEE) for the follow up of the execution of the mitigation measures by
                           the enterprises; (b) the Laboratoire de Physique et de Chimie de l’Eau (LPCE) of the Université de
                           Ouagadougou for the monitoring of water and air quality in the project influence zone; and (c) the
                           Institut de l'Environnement et de Recherches Agricoles (INERA) for the promotion of sustainable
                           high productivity techniques and practices to the benefit of affected farmers. The MOAD will
                           ensure regular reporting as well as mid-term and final audits of the implementation of environment
                           and social measures and recommendations.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Key stakeholders include: project affected persons and communities, host communities; local
                           governments (communal and regional councils); provincial government, NGOs; and local and
                           national staff of the Ministry of Agriculture and Hydraulics, and Ministry of Environment and
                           Sustainable Development. Lessons learned suggest that, when preparing major infrastructure
                           investments, the GOBF recognizes the need to engage stakeholders at various level of society.
                           Project preparation has been participatory at village level, at civil society level, as well as at local
                           and provincial administration level. The result of the public consultations, carried out in
                           conjunction with the preparation of the EIA and the RAP, confirm a solid support for the
                           implementation of the project. Project preparation included the creation of a resettlement and
                           development committee composed of: representatives of PAPs and host communities; civil
                           society; local development agents (e.g. extension workers); local and provincial administrators.
                           The committee was chaired by the governor, and will continue its work during project
Public Disclosure Copy




                           implementation.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                           15-Oct-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                        22-Oct-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Burkina Faso                                                          19-Nov-2012
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                           19-Feb-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                        19-Feb-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Burkina Faso                                                          15-Nov-2012
                           Comments:


                                                                       Page 6 of 7
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Fabio Galli
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                       Date: 02-Apr-2013
                            Coordinator:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Richard Martin Humphreys (SM)                     Date: 02-Apr-2013




                                                                        Page 7 of 7
