                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 02/26/2013                               Report No.: ISDSA233
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Afghanistan                         Project ID: P132742
Project Name: Afghanistan - Second Skills Development Project
Task Team Leader: Leopold Remi Sarr
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 12,       Estimated Board Date: March 19, 2013
2013
Managing Unit: SASED                         Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery
                                             Loan
Sector: Vocational training (100%)
Theme: Education for all (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):             55
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                           5.00
                                                                      5.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []          Repeater [X]
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [X]      No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The proposed Project Development Objective for ASDP II is 'to increase the potential for
employment and higher earnings of graduates from Vocational Education and Training
schools and institutes through improvements in the skills delivery system'.

3. Project Description
The project has the following four components:
 (a) Component 1: Strengthening of the TVET institutional system
 (b) Component 2: Improving performance of TVET Schools and Institutes
 (c) Component 3: Improving Teacher Competencies
 (d) Component 4: Project Management, Monitoring & Evaluation and Public
 Awareness

 These Components are further described below.
 Component 1: Strengthening of the TVET institutional system (US$ 11.4 million). This
component will essentially focus on (a) the formulation of a detailed TVET strategy and
plan which would also be in line with the National Priority Program 1(NPP1), the
National Education Strategy Plan-II (NESP –II), and the Interim Strategy Document
published by the Government, and an implementation program; and (b) developing
quality standards for skills delivery, (c) designing and implementing a labor market
information system and an overall MIS for the TVET system, (d) capacity building of
Monitors and Inspectors of schools and institutes under DMTVET, and (e) conducting
certification examinations for TVET graduates and related activities. Appropriate TA will
be provided for this purpose.
  Component 2: Improving the performance of TVET Schools and Institutes (US$ 24.8
million). There are 257 public and private institutions accredited by DMTVET (210
public and 47 private) and these institutions will be eligible for participation in this
component. Other institutions that are accredited over the life of the project will also be
eligible. All institutions supported under the project will need to have strong private
sector participation in the management committees vested with decision making
authority.
  This component will include a program for the recognition of schools and institutes that
have already implemented some Good Practice (GP) in terms of initiatives taken to
improve academic management, reform school administration, attempts to find
placements for students, or to establish linkages with local industries, curricular reform at
the local level, practical steps to deal with student welfare, etc. Such schools and
institutes will be given an Award of USD 30,000 in kind. The second step will consist of
Selecting a number of schools and institutes (approximately 15 over the life of the
project) who, through a detailed Business Plan (BP) demonstrate a willingness to either
replicate or scale-up these Good Practices or introduce new ones. The Selected schools
and institutions will be provided development grants. The BP will include very specific
measures for
  (a) Building robust market linkages,
  (b) Introducing curricular reform with the specific idea of making skills taught at the
school market-relevant, and also to provide non-cognitive and life skills,
  (c) broad-basing of school governing councils to ensure private sector and industry
participation in management and decision making, and
  (d) Establishing milestones for improvement in school administration.
  There will be however, a cap of 15% of the total proposal in the BP for civil works. The
Business Plan will have clear timelines and milestones to be achieved and sub-plans for
reaching those milestones. BP will also include capacity building for school and institute
administrators and staff.
  All schools and institutes that are recognized will be given TA to help them prepare
their BP. These BPs will be evaluated based on specific criteria. Schools and institutes
which satisfy the evaluation criteria will be provided funds for implementing their BP up
to a maximum of USD 400,000.
  A sub-component will fund a Voucher Program for meritorious students to pursue
further professional certification programs. The total number of vouchers proposed to be
provided will be about 600.
  Component 3: Improving Teacher Competencies (US$ 6.9 million). This component
will be specifically directed towards developing an infrastructure for in-service training
for technical teachers and to build a pool of master trainers. In this area, IDA will
collaborate closely with GIZ who are already involved in pre-service and in-service
training to ensure coordination. It is proposed to train around 750 Technical VET
teachers and develop at least 60 Master Trainers. This will help the Technical Teachers
Training Institute (3TI) to become sustainable in terms of Faculty resources by the end of
the project.
  Component 4: Project Management, Monitoring & Evaluation and Public Awareness
(US$ 6.3 million). This component will finance the costs of project staff and incremental
operating costs, as well as costs of third party M&E, and a Public Awareness Campaign.
The Public Awareness Campaign will sensitize High school graduates on the type of
training provided by various institutions as well as the quality of the training. Further,
survey has shown that even in the largest cities, SMEs are unaware of TVET in general.
The Awareness Campaign will also address this issue.
  Under the Monitoring and Evaluation sub-component, an MIS system will be developed
and institutionalized. In addition, there are several areas where the project will support
Third Party monitoring. These include (a) evaluation of learning outcomes of students,
(b) evaluation of teacher performance, (c) evaluation of Business Plan implementation,
(d) satisfaction surveys of industry representatives on school and institute Governing
Councils, and (e) Tracer studies of graduate students from project supported schools and
institutes on employment and earnings. In addition, two Impact Evaluation studies will be
carried out by external agency during the project period.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The exact location of the TVET schools and institutes selected for renovation is not
known at appraisal, therefore a framework approach is being applied to address
environmental impacts.

 The ESMF will include environmental and social guidelines and checklists for
contractors. The framework would also include the appropriate environmental and social
measures for mitigating impacts of construction activities including worker health and
safety (consistent with IFC/ World Bank Group Environment Health, and Safety
Guidelines (2007). Site- specific ESMPs will be prepared for each sub-project, to manage
construction waste disposal, minimize dust hazards for workers, staff and nearby
communities. An Environmental Focal Point will be recruited to ensure implementation
of environmental safeguards during the sub-project implementation.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Asta Olesen (SASDS)
   Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli (SASDI)
   Mr Mohammad Yasin Noori (SASDS)
   Mr Obaidullah Hidayat (SASDI)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                     X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Activities under the project should not entail significant environmental and social
impacts, provided they are designed and implemented with due consideration of
environmental and social issues. Sub-component 2.1 will finance construction and
maintenance of a number of schools sparking off the Health and Safety issues, while sub-
component 2.4 involves construction activities including hostel at the Dar-ul-Aman
campus, construction of Dining Halls and Gyms, provision of water and power for the
total complement of students to be housed within the existing campus. This may cause
limited, temporary, and localized negative impacts due to masonry work etc. if proper
environmental management is not carried out at design, implementation and operation
stages. This will be mitigated through the implementation of an appropriate site specific
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), including environmental checklist
to monitor and plan the work. Capacity building of concerned departments, including
physical and institutional management, is likely to have a positive impact on social and
physical environment of the project.
  OP/BP 4.01 is triggered because of up-gradation and construction activities. The project
will apply the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) developed for
the project. The ESMF provides guidance on the approach to be taken during
implementation for the selection and design of sub projects/proposed investments and the
planning of mitigation measures, guidelines and codes of practice for an environmental
and social mitigation measures to be incorporated in the design, contracting and
monitoring of sub-projects. Guidelines for consultation and disclosure requirements are
also included, to ensure due diligence and facilitate consistent treatment of environmental
and social issues by all participating development partners.

 The proposed project is not expected to cause significant adverse social impacts. The
project is not expected to require any land acquisition, because the business plans
primarily cover minor civil works such as building internal separation walls or electrical
installation. In case of any new buildings, these will be built within the available land
that belong to MoE. The PIU will document that the required land is free of any squatters,
encumbrances and claims.
  The ESMF includes guidelines for compensation in the rare case that negative
livelihood impact may be suffered by project affected people (PAPs).

 To adequately address the key safeguards issues, the following safeguards activities and
measures are proposed: (i) implementation of the ESMP; (ii) providing guidelines for
establishment of a Grievance Redress Mechanism in the project as well as guidelines for
public consultations; and (v) development of a set of Occupational Health and Safety
Guidelines.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
No potential indirect or long term impacts are envisaged while a number of physical
works – including construction of new building and the rehabilitation of existing may
cause limited and minor negative environmental and social impacts. The identified
adverse impacts would be localized in spatial extend and short in duration, and would be
managed by implementing proper mitigation measures. The ESMF also comprises
screening list to be used to identify such cases.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The ASDP unit in DMTVET PIU will employ social and environmental staff with
responsibility for fulfilling the safeguard requirements of the proposed project throughout
the project's duration. The safeguard staff will conduct trainings for the relevant staff of
DMTVET and contractors on implementation of ESMF. Such training will include
capacity-building of the TVET sector including TVET schools and institutes and
dormitories whose capacity on social and environmental and health safety remains
limited.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are the MoE/DMTVET, TVET schools and institutes, donors
involved in Skill Development projects, National Environmental Protection Agency
(NEPA), local community and school shuras.

 In all subprojects which require consultations with relevant stakeholders, consultations
will be conducted to elicit the views of both the male and the female population.

 The ESMF will be disclosed in Afghanistan in Dari and Pashto, in relevant places, on
the MoE website, and in English at the World Bank InfoShop
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  01/23/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              01/28/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               02/26/2013
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?           No
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)       N/A
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the       N/A
credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's    Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a    Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name                         Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Leopold Remi Sarr                         02/13/2013
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Obaidullah Hidayat                        02/10/2013
Social Development Specialist       Mr Mohammad Yasin Noori                      02/10/2013
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Sanjay Srivastava                         02/11/2013
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Amit Dar                                  02/10/2013
  Comments:
