                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                         APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                  Report No.: ISDSA4168
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-May-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 05-Jun-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            China                               Project ID:    P127033
                            Project Name:       China Renewable Energy Scale-Up Program Phase II (P127033)
                            Task Team           Xiaodong Wang
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           03-Jun-2013                         Estimated   29-Oct-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                         Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      EASCS                               Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                    Instrument:
                            GEF Focal
                                              Climate change
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):        Other Renewable Energy (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Climate change (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         71.38            Total Bank Financing: 0.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                           Financing Gap:        0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                              Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                              44.10
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                               27.28
                              Total                                                                                           71.38
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                           The objective of the CRESP program (three phases) is to enable commercial renewable electricity
                           suppliers to provide energy to the electricity market efficiently, cost-effectively and on a large scale.



                                                                          Page 1 of 6
                         The objective of CRESP Phase II is to support the ambitious RE scale-up program in China with a
                         focus on efficiency improvement and reduction of incremental costs.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed project would be comprised of the following five components: (a) policy support; (b)
                         grid integration/access and technical design; (c) technology improvement; (d) pilot demonstration;
                         and (e) capacity building and investment support, in addition to project management support.

                         It should be noted that the tasks outlined below are those urgent to be implemented during project
                         preparation and the initial-year work program, agreed between the NEA and the Bank. Other tasks
                         will be detailed and confirmed during the annual review of the work program to be carried during the
                         supervision of the project to leave flexibility during project implantation.

                         Component 1. Policy Support (indicative cost estimate: US$5 million GEF grant): CRESP II will
                         support developing and implementing RE legislations and policies to achieve cost reduction,
                         efficiency improvement, and smooth grid integration. Based on lessons learned from Phase I, it is
                         envisaged that policy studies under Phase II would cover few essential policy topics, jointly
                         determined by NEA, Project Management Office (PMO), and the World Bank, with greater
                         involvement of government selected policy institutions and world class consultants.

                         The policy support will focus on four sub-components: (a) improving the design and implementation
                         of the RE Quota Decree, and designing an RE Certificates trading scheme, in coordination with the
                         existing feed-in tariffs and envisaged carbon cap and trade to avoid conflicting policy requirements;
                         (b) developing grid access and financial incentive policies for RE distributed generation in pilot New
                         Energy Cities; (c) supporting preparation for the RE 13th FYP; and (d) if collaborating with the right
                         Chinese counterparts, engaging dialogues, building consensus, and developing potential policy
                         recommendations for power pricing reforms and incorporation of RE in power sector reform,
                         including but not limited to two-part generation tariff, transparent cost-recovery transmission tariff,
                         incorporation of environmental external costs into power pricing, and feed-in tariffs for off-shore
Public Disclosure Copy




                         wind and concentrated solar power.

                         Component 2. Grid Integration/Access and Technical Design (indicative cost estimate: US$5 million
                         GEF grant): This component will consist of targeted studies to ensure improved grid integration for
                         large-scale grid-connected RE and grid access for distributed RE; and strategic and optimal
                         deployment of key RE technologies to enhance efficiency and reduce costs. The studies would
                         include, but not limited to: (a) optimization of site layout design to decrease wake effects for GW-
                         scale Wind Power Bases to maximize outputs; (b) wind penetration development study in selected
                         provinces to provide analytical basis for improved grid integration; (c) grid access and connection
                         study for distributed generation in selected pilot New Energy Cities to establish sound technical
                         standards/specifications for grid connection of distributed generation; and (d) grid codes study to
                         evaluate Chinese grid codes and recommend cost-effective solutions to meet grid requirements for
                         wind farms to facilitate dialogues between wind developers and grid company.

                         Component 3. Technology Improvement (indicative cost estimate: US$7.28 million GEF grant): The
                         technology improvements would include, but not limited to: (a) increasing efficiency of existing
                         wind farms and improving quality and reliability and reducing costs of off-shore wind turbine
                         technologies; and (b) possibly improving concentrated solar power (CSP) domestic manufacturing
                         capacity.



                                                                      Page 2 of 6
                         Component 4. Pilot Demonstration (indicative cost estimate: US$5 million GEF grant): This
                         component will support (a) NEA/Inner Mongolia partnership to pilot and explore new ideas relating
                         to the scale-up of RE and optimization of wind in power system, primarily through technical and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         operational studies, integrated planning, and policy pilots; and (b) pilot RE distributed generation in
                         1-2 selected New Energy Cities and possibly Green Counties, primarily through planning,
                         implementation plans, policies, possibly demonstrations of RE distributed generation such as roof-
                         top solar PV, with adequate enforcement and monitoring. This component will primarily provide
                         technical assistance on twinning with selected international successful cities, the concept framework
                         of New Energy Cities, planning, business and financing models, technical design, and policies for
                         distributed generation applications in pilot New Energy Cities.

                         Component 5. Capacity Building and Investment Support (indicative cost estimate: US$5 million
                         GEF grant): This component will (a) build capacity of government officials and staff at national level
                         and at pilot provincial/municipal levels (e.g. NEA, National Development and Reform Commission
                         Pricing Bureau (for energy pricing reform), Ministry of Finance (for fiscal measures), Ministry of
                         Water Resources (for small hydro), Ministry of Agriculture (for biomass), Ocean Bureau (for off-
                         shore wind), grid companies, RE power generators, pilot provincial and municipal governments, and
                         the relevant agencies in the pilot demonstration areas); and (b) support investors by building
                         innovative RE investment pipelines. This component also covers program management costs, donor
                         coordination activities, and administration including fiduciary duties.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Research studies are applicable throughout China. Location of pilot demonstrations will be
                         determined during project implementation, based upon results of various research studies.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Youxuan Zhu (EASIN)
                         Peishen Wang (EASCS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes               The proposed project primarily consists of
                          BP 4.01                                              capacity building, policy analysis, and research
                                                                               related to renewable energy development. The
                                                                               project will finance a limited number of small-
                                                                               scale RE investments, (e.g. roof-top solar PV)
                                                                               under the pilot demonstration component, these
                                                                               activities are environmental enhancement
                                                                               measures and have little or no adverse
                                                                               environmental impacts. Therefore, the project is
                                                                               classified as Category C project according to
                                                                               OP4.01. A generic EMP (ECOPs) has been
                                                                               prepared to address potential impacts, if any, with
                                                                               regards to limited civil works and equipment
                                                                               installation, e.g. worker and community safety,
                                                                               noise nuisance, solid waste management, etc. The
                                                                               EMP will be incorporated into the bidding
                                                                               documents for the sub- project implementation



                                                                       Page 3 of 6
                                                                                entities which will ensure the implementation of
                                                                                the EMP is incorporated into construction/
                                                                                installation contracts, with adequate budget
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                allocation.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No                The project activities are confined to urban
                                                                                areas, and there are no natural habitats involved.
                                                                                This policy is not triggered.
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No                This policy is not triggered. The project will not
                                                                                involve any forests.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09            No                This policy is not triggered. The project is not
                                                                                expected to procure pesticides or impact on pest
                                                                                management practice.
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No                The project screening procedure will ensure no
                            BP 4.11                                             physical cultural resources be potentially affected
                                                                                by the project. This policy is not triggered.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No                The project will not involve any indigenous
                                                                                people. This policy is not triggered.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     No                The project screening procedure will ensure that
                            4.12                                                all project activities will be located within the
                                                                                premises of existing buildings, and there will be
                                                                                no land acquisition and resettlement.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No                The project will not involve any dams.

                            Projects on International        No                  The project will not involve any international
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  The project will not involve any disputed areas.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The CRESP II is a stand-alone GEF project, which primarily consists of capacity building, policy
                              analysis, and research related to renewable energy development. As part of renewable energy
                              demonstration, the project might finance a limited number of small-scale RE investments, (e.g.
                              roof-top solar PV) under the pilot demonstration component. Overall, the project is designed as an
                              environmental enhancement effort with positive environmental benefits. The limited physical
                              activities of renewable energy facility installation will have little or no adverse environmental
                              impacts. Therefore, the project is classified as Category C project according to OP4.01.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                               N/A
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.


                                                                        Page 4 of 6
                             The proposed activities are inherently alternatives for reducing the dependence on fossil fuel
                           energy, and will positively contribute to the renewable energy development and climate change
                           mitigation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             A generic EMP has been prepared to address potential impacts, if any, with regards to limited
                           civil works and equipment installation, e.g. worker and community safety, noise nuisance, solid
                           waste management, etc. The EMP includes screening procedures to avoid adverse impacts, and a
                           set of Environmental Code of Practice to address potential impacts. The EMP will be incorporated
                           into the bidding documents for the sub- project implementation entities which will ensure the
                           implementation of the EMP is incorporated into construction/ installation contracts, with adequate
                           budget allocation.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Not applicable for Category C project.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      20-May-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   24-May-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            23-May-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)     Yes [      ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the   Yes [      ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [      ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies




                                                                     Page 5 of 6
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Xiaodong Wang
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Mark R. Lundell (SM)                        Date: 05-Jun-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 6 of 6
