                                                                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                            APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA668
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Mar-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                       Morocco                                  Project ID:                      P121271
                              Project Name:                  Integrated Coastal Zone Management (P121271)
                              Task Team Leader:              Li Song
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 05-Mar-2012                                   Estimated Board Date:            17-May-2012
                              Managing Unit:                 MNSSD                                    Lending Instrument:              Specific Investment Loan
                              Focal Area:                    International waters
                              Sector:                        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%), General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (50%)
                              Theme:                         Biodiversity (50%), Environmental policies and institutions (30%), Climate change (20%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                      Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                        20.00
                                   Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                                                          5.18
                                   Total                                                                                                                     25.18
                              Environmental Category:        B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Global Environmental Objective(s)

                              The objective of the project is to pilot the application of integrated coastal zone management (ICZM) approach in the project areas on the eastern
                              Mediterranean coast of Morocco. ICZM implemented at local level by all users of the coastal resources will leverage rural pollution reduction and
                              protection of biodiversity and ecologically sensitive areas.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              3. Project Description

                              Rationale and linkage between components. Project investment will occur through 3 linked components. Earliest investments will come through
                              Component 1, which largely targets capacity building that enables the technical activities under Component 2 to be undertaken. Component 2
                              activities come later in the project when the Project Management Unit and the Bank are sure that the technical skills, legal basis, and community
                              involvement in support of coastal resource management are sufficiently strong to ensure implementation success. Component three supports
                              project management and project sustainability.

                              Participatory selection of activities. The activities to be implemented were selected from existing Coastal Management Plans of Action funded by
                              other donors and took into account the impact of climate change. Participatory consultative meetings, sector-based interviews, visits to proposed
                              project locations, and discussions with beneficiaries were undertaken throughout the process of activities identification.

                              Project components are summarized below.

                              Component 1: Capacity building and institutional strengthening to incorporate the ICZM approach into local development planning (Total cost:
                              $767,000, of which GEF: $630,000, government contribution: $137,000). The Ministry of Energy, Mines, Water and the Environment (MEMWE) -
                              via the Department of Environment (DE) - will be responsible for implementation of Component 1.

                              The objective of this component is to strengthen the capacity of government institutions and local communities to incorporate the ICZM approach
                              into their local development plans. Investments here will finance consultant services, training and workshops, non-consultant services, and goods
                              to be used in support of (a) promoting awareness of, and building capacity in, the application of the ICZM approach among key stakeholders
                              including government and local communities through training workshops and public education campaigns; (b) mainstreaming the ICZM approach
                              into six communal development plans; and (c) the piloting of spatial development planning in which local residents and authorities work together
                              with a GIS and map-based tool to build an improved communal development plan.

                              Expected results: The government and community participants have the awareness, tools, and background information that they need to
                              participate meaningfully in the formulation of an economic development plan at the local level. Coastal Commissions (Cellule du Littoral) acquire
                              the knowledge needed to become effective and to conduct regular meetings twice per Commission per year. Six communal development plans
                              (spatial plans) incorporating local ICZM activities will be prepared and/or revised. Public education material will be prepared and distributed for use
                              in the project areas (e.g. guides, tool kits, website for ICZM information, etc.).

                              Component 2: Investments to improve coastal resource management and livelihoods through co-management (GEF contribution: US$ 4.180 M)

                                                                                                                                                                         Page 1 of 5
                         The objective of this component is to support specific and appropriate investments which demonstrate the application of key tools available for use
                         in an ICZM approach in the project areas. It will, through its four sub-components, finance consultant services, works (including soil conservation
                         and water conservation at household level, which is carried out based on voluntary participation by stakeholders), goods, training and non-
                         consultant services needed for investments to (i) improve conservation and management of sensitive coastal areas; (ii) improve fisheries
                         management; (iii) diversify income-generating activities from agriculture; and (iv) promote the development of ecotourism.

                         The four sub-components are as follows:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2.1: Improved conservation and management of sensitive coastal areas. This sub-component will support (a) a public awareness campaign for the
                         conservation of the Moulouya SBEI; and (b) the rehabilitation and restoration of degraded wetland and coastal dune ecosystems at Moulouya. In
                         parallel, government will finance with its own resources activities complementary to the investments described above, including reforestation
                         activities at the Moulouya SBEI and restoration of walking trails, lookouts and signage at Moulouya. This sub-component will be implemented by
                         HCWFFAD.

                         Expected results: The subcomponent will result in formulation of a coordinated public awareness action plan for the Moulouya SBEI. It will also
                         include re-vegetation of 500ha of coastal dunes, restoration of water flow toward wetlands, etc.

                         2.2: Improved fisheries management. This sub-component will support (a) feasibility study including environmental impact assessment for, and
                         establishment on a pilot basis of, two small artificial reefs on the eastern Mediterranean coast between Boudinar and Saidia. This will include
                         technical support to enable co-management by the users of the resource; (b) feasibility study and establishment on a pilot basis of a small
                         seaweed farm, village-level seaweed processing and other related facilities in one community on the Eastern Mediterranean Coast (EMC); and (c)
                         feasibility study and establishment on a pilot basis of a small shellfish farm, village-level processing and other related facilities in one community on
                         the EMC. Partnerships between the cooperative and the private sector will be leveraged through the Project to improve the long-term viability of
                         the seaweed and shellfish farming activities. In parallel, government will finance with its own resources activities complementary to the
                         investments described above, including the construction of small-scale infrastructure to support artisanal fishing (e.g. kiosks for the sale of fish,
                         insulated boxes and ice, small fuelling facilities, latrines, etc.) at the port of Ras Kebdana in Nador province. This sub-component will be
                         implemented by the Department of Maritime Fisheries and the National Aquaculture Development Agency, with input from the National Fisheries
                         Research Institute. It has been clearly established that the activities under the NADA are complementary to activities under this component, but
                         are not necessary to achieve the PDO.

                         Expected results: Two artificial reefs established and managed by local users under co-management regimes; seaweed farm feasibility confirmed
                         and a small pilot farm established along with village-level processing and associated activities; shellfish farm feasibility confirmed and a small pilot
                         farm established along with village-level processing and associated activities; and pilot public and private partnership to facilitate long-term viability
                         of aquaculture activities.

                         2.3: Soil and water conservation and income-generating activity. This sub-component will support (a) soil and water conservation measures to be
                         carried out based on voluntary participation by stakeholders (e.g. terrace construction or rehabilitation, fruit tree planting, small physical works to
                         facilitate water infiltration and reduce runoff and erosion, installation of rainwater collectors and storage tanks at the level of individual households,
                         etc.); and (b) promotion of apiculture by supplying local women’s groups with materials and technical assistance. In parallel, the government will
                         finance with its own resources under the Plan Maroc Vert, activities complementary to the investments described above which also aim to support
                         subsistence agriculture and rural livelihoods. This sub-component will be executed by Agricultural Development Agency, except rainwater
                         collection work which will be executed by the Department of the Environment in collaboration with local authorities (Boards of communes).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Expected results: The subcomponent is expected to create three functioning apicultural cooperatives; restoration of soil and planting of fruit trees
                         over a total of 500 ha in two communes; and installation of 200 rainwater collection systems in households.

                         2.4: Promotion of ecotourism. This sub-component will support: (a) a feasibility study on ecotourism; (b) the rehabilitation and furnishing of up to
                         six small-scale ecolodges (bed and breakfast) in locations based on the results of the feasibility study (and a process for the voluntary participation
                         of stakeholders); and (c) training of tour guides and managers for these ecolodges. This sub-component will be executed by the Ministry of
                         Tourism.

                         Expected results: The subcomponent will help restoration up to six small-scale ecolodges; the training of 15 tour guides and 24 ecolodge
                         management staff.

                         Component 3: Project management and M&E (GEF contribution: US$ 0.370 M; Government contribution US$ 0.630 M)
                         The objective of this component is to ensure adequate management and coordination of project activities by supporting capacity building within,
                         and activities of, the Project Management Unit (PMU). This component wi ll finance consultant services, goods, training, non-consultant services
                         and incremental operating costs needed for (a) the operations of the PMU; (b) project monitoring and evaluation; and (c) coordinating and sharing
                         knowledge among the project’s various partner agencies. Incremental costs to be financed include incremental contractual staff, office equipment
                         and operations, transportation services (excluding purchase of vehicles), domestic travel, etc. It will also cover the cost of establishing and
                         operating an M&E system for the project.

                         Expected results: The PMU established and operational, a monitoring and evaluation system established and operational over the life of the
                         project, project website created, knowledge sharing and dissemination between areas, between participating ministries, and internationally.

                         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         The project’s activities will geographically cover four sites within the eastern Mediterranean coastal (EMC) areas of Morocco extending
                         administratively over three municipalities and 23 rural communes, all of which fall within the jurisdiction of three provinces: Berkane, Nador and
                         Driouech. The EMC encompasses a mix of plains, basins and mountainous areas. It is partitioned into small and diverse physical landscape units.
                         The location and geomorphologic configuration of the EMC endow the area with a variety of natural environments and ecological habitats that
                         shelter a diverse flora and fauna, with a high rate of endemism. This diversity has allowed the national study on protected areas to identify in the
                         EMC four Sites of Biological and Ecological Interest (Sites d’Intérêt Biologique et Écologique, or SIBE), which are Gourougou Mountain, the lagoon
                         of Nador, Cap des Trois Fourches and the Moulouya river estuary. These coastal ecosystems are subject to a rapid and complex evolution, given
                         their particular situation on the border between the sea and the mainland. These environments are highly vulnerable and also provide invaluable
                                                                                                                                                                        Page 2 of 5
                               resources for many economic activities, such as fisheries, tourism, urban development, harbors, etc.

                               Focused activities would be piloted at four sites:
                               (a)      The coast of Saidia-Ras El Ma (four communes), including the Ramsar site of the Moulouya River estuary;
                               (b)      The Rural commune of Beni Chiker, including the SIBE of Cap des Trois Fourches and a part of the SIBE Gourougou Mountain;
                               (c)      The lagoon of Nador and its surrounding communes (Nador, Beni Nsar, Bouareg and Kariat Arekmane); and
                               (d)      The Rural Commune of Boudinar.
Public Disclosure Copy




                               5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                               Ioana Monica Dorhoi (MNSEN)
                               Andrew Michael Losos (MNSEN)

                               6. Safeguard Policies                            Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                               Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01              Yes             An ESIA has been completed and has been disclosed prior to appraisal as
                                                                                                required by Bank guidelines.
                               Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                      Yes             This policy has been triggered as the project will involve the conservation of
                                                                                                wetlands and other natural habitats. However, no significant conversion or
                                                                                                degradation of habitat is expected. The project is intended to conserve and
                                                                                                rehabilitate these areas.
                               Forests OP/BP 4.36                               No              The project will not finance any activities impacting forests.
                               Pest Management OP 4.09                          No              Pest management measures will not be included in project activities.
                               Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11           No              Physical cultural resources are not present in project areas.
                               Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                    No              No impact on indigenous communities.
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12              No              Activities involving involuntary resettlement will not be financed under this project.
                                                                                                Any activity involving lands will only be carried out on public lands from which
                                                                                                resettlement is not required or on private lands where voluntary participation of the
                                                                                                landholder is documented in writing. The project will not involve involuntary land
                                                                                                taking resulting in relocation or loss of shelter; loss of assets or access to assets;
                                                                                                or loss of income sources or means of livelihood (whether or not the affected
                                                                                                person needs to move to another location).
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                        No              The project will not affect dams.
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP        No              The project does not involve international waters.
                               7.50
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60            No              The project does not involve disputed areas.


                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                   Concerning environmental safeguard policies, the ICZM project involves environmental interventions and therefore triggers the World Bank
                                  environmental assessment Operational Policy (OP 4.01). OP/BP 4.04 on Natural Habitats is also triggered, due to the fact that work will be
                                  undertaken to establish protected areas and co-management regimes which will include at least one Ramsar wetland site. However, the
                                  activities in question are designed to conserve these ecosystems, and no significant conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats will
                                  occur; quite the contrary. No other environmental safeguard policies are expected to be triggered by the project, considering also that Morocco
                                  has adequate environmental legislation, institutional capacity, and mechanisms to deal with environmental issues during project preparation or
                                  implementation, particularly in the area of fisheries, agriculture and climate change. There are no additional environmental issues that go
                                  beyond the ambit of the safeguard policies.

                                  OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement is not triggered by the project. Activities involving involuntary resettlement will not be financed under
                                  this project. Any activity involving lands will only be carried out on public lands from which resettlement is not required or on private lands where
                                  voluntary participation of the landholder is documented in writing. The project will not involve involuntary land taking resulting in relocation or
                                  loss of shelter; loss of assets or access to assets; or loss of income sources or means of livelihood (whether or not the affected person needs to
                                  move to another location).

                                  The ICZM project is expected to have significant positive environmental and social impacts. However, because of the nature of the activities
                                  planned under the project, it has been assigned an environmental Category B. An environmental and social impact assessment (ESIA) has
                                  therefore been prepared in French under the World Bank’s Operational Policy on environmental assessment (OP 4.01). In accordance with the
                                  World Bank’s disclosure policy and guidelines, the ESIA was disclosed at the World Bank’s Infoshop on February 16, 2012, and disclosed in-
                                  country on the website of the DE on the same day. The objective of the ESIA is to assess the expected positive and negative impacts that the
                                  project will have on the environment and on society in the affected areas, and to propose an environmental and social management plan
                                  (ESMP) to manage the risk of those negative impacts. The ESIA investigated the impact of each of the project’s activities on the environment
                                  and local society. Its results reveal that many of the expected environmental impacts will be positive.

                                  The project will not create significant or irreversible negative impacts on the environment. Most potential negative environmental impacts are
                                  expected to be minor, temporary and site-specific in nature and can be mitigated by implementation of and compliance with the ESMP. The
                                  main potential negative environmental impact of concern is the potential perverse effects on fisheries ecosystems if the recovery of fish stocks
                                  encourages the entry of commercial fishing interests which displace the artisanal fishermen targeted by the project.
                                                                                                                                                                         Page 3 of 5
                           The Environmental Impact Assessment (ESIA) has been prepared to also assess the main social impacts of the project. Possible social impact
                           incurred might refer to the fact that the livelihoods of artisanal fisherman could be threatened as an increase in fish stocks might encourage the
                           entry of commercial fishing companies which could displace the artisanal fishermen. This should be mitigated by the fact that small-scale
                           fishermen operate in a zone that is reserved for their activities and excludes other actors in the fisheries sectors, such as trawlers and
                           industrialized fishing vessels. The feasibility studies will evaluate social risks and provide specific measures to mitigate the negative social
                           impacts of the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The project will involve a series of revenue-generating activities under component 2 that will specially address the needs of vulnerable groups.
                           For example, it will promote apiculture activities by supplying local women with full hives, training them in modern beekeeping and marketing
                           techniques and teaching them how to organize within associations or cooperatives (Sites of Saidia Ras El Ma, Beni Chiker, and Boudinar). The
                           project will also target in its activities to vulnerable groups (such as poor people, women, elderly, and children) in its subcomponents on 1)
                           restoration o f degraded soils through planting of fruit trees adapted to local climatic conditions (olive, carob and almond) and without the use of
                           pesticides, and on 2) application of in-site rainwater collection by prioritizing as beneficiaries vulnerable groups in those local communities. The
                           trainings developed under the component 1 will also focus on raising awareness on how climate change might impact coastal zones and thus,
                           affect its vulnerable groups (people at poverty line, women, children and elderly) and the adaptation measu res that could be developed to
                           mitigate them.

                           As part of the project’s activities, feasibility studies will be conducted for the eventual establishment of two artificial reefs and two aquaculture
                           facilities. These feasibility studies will contain environmental assessments in accordance with applicable Moroccan law, but will also be
                           required to comply with the requirements of the ICZM project’s ESIA/ESMP. Assessment of social risks will also be included in the feasibility
                           studies for the establishment of two artificial reefs and two aquaculture facilities. Special attention will be given to the fact that the fisherman
                           and their newly formed co-operative will have to administer the reefs to ensure their livelihood. In this context, it is fundamental that open and
                           transparent consultations will be conducted with all the involved stakeholders.

                           The ESMP (Chapter 6 of the ESIA) will be incorporated into the operations manual and will guide the day-to-day implementation of the project.

                           Public consultations were carried out during the preparation of the project, and the results of the ESIA were presented to a public forum of
                           stakeholders in Nador on November 1, 2011. The record of that public consultation is included in the annexes of the ESIA.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                             As the project is intended to improve co-management regimes in the targeted areas, long-term environmental and social impacts are expected
                           to be positive.

                           As noted in the ESIA, the project will need to closely monitor possible perverse interactions with commercial fisheries if project activities to
                           restore marine ecosystems are successful in restoring fish stocks to a level which might incite commercial interest.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                             As the ICZM project strives to improve management of ecosystems for the benefit of local communities, the only project alternative considered
                           is the continuation of the status quo, which is expected to lead to substantially inferior outcomes for environmental quality and local economy
                           and livelihoods compared to the project scenario.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
Public Disclosure Copy




                            and implement the measures described.
                             The Department of the Environment (DE) within the State Secretariat for Water and the Environment (SSWE), under the Ministry of Energy,
                           Mines, Water and the Environment (MEMWE) will be responsible of implementing and overseeing the environmental and social issues on the
                           project. Given that the DE does not yet have any experience in complying with the World Bank safeguards standards, some reinforcement of
                           capacity will be required. The project will fund the hiring of a Project Coordinator, among whose primary duties will be the application of
                           environmental and social safeguards during project implementation. Further, the project will fund a monitoring and evaluation specialist to work
                           in the PMU and will enlist the assistance of the Eastern Region Environmental Observatory and National Environmental Observatory in
                           monitoring safeguards performance. Additional practical expertise is available through other departments of the Government of Morocco and
                           will be made available to DE through the National Steering Committee. The Bank has also discussed with the DE the potential to bring in
                           external technical experts for specific assistance if necessary. The Bank team will also provide close support throughout project supervision.

                           The borrower has designed an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) which will be integrated into the project operations manual
                           and will be applied to all project activities in order to safeguard the environmental and social condition of the project areas. Subsequent
                           environmental and social impact assessments will be included in the various feasibility studies to assess the impacts of project sub-
                           components.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                            on potentially affected people.
                             The Environmental and Social Impact Assessment and the separate environmental and social impact assessments to be included in the
                           feasibility studies will identify in depth the role and impact of the project on the key stakeholders.

                           A consultation plan will be devised as part of the implementation which will assess the capacity of the DE to conduct the consultations and to
                           make sure that all involved stakeholders are allowed access to and are being consulted on the project activities and thorough record keeping
                           on the scope and results of the consultations is maintained. Special attention will to be given to vulnerable groups to make sure that they have
                           fair access to express and take into account their points of view.

                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                               Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                  02-Feb-2012

                                                                                                                                                                       Page 4 of 5
                              Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                                17-Feb-2012
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                 17-Feb-2012
                              For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                              Directors
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                            disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                            C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                              Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                     Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                            OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                              If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) natural   Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              habitats, does the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?                     Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language             Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for          Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?                     Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard           Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same               Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Task Team Leader:                     Li Song
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:      Name: Alaa Ahmed Sarhan (RSA)                                                    Date: 29-Feb-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Sector Manager:                       Name Hoonae Kim (SM)                                                             Date: 02-Mar-2012




                                                                                                                                                                        Page 5 of 5
