                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA1249
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Sep-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Albania                             Project ID:   P121186
                            Project Name:     Water Resources and Irrigation Project (P121186)
                            Task Team         IJsbrand Harko de Jong
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         29-Aug-2012                         Estimated   27-Nov-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    ECSS1                               Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector:         Flood protection (50%), Irrigation and drainage (50%)
                            Theme:          Water resource management (50%), Rural services and infrastructure (50%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                               Financing Source                                                      Amount
                              Borrower                                                                     0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                       40.00
                              SWEDEN Swedish Intl. Dev. Cooperation Agency (SIDA)                          5.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Total                                                                       45.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to (i) strengthen the Government's capacity to manage
                           water resources at both the national level and in the Drin-Buna and Semani river basins and (ii)
                           sustainably improve the performance of irrigation systems in the project area.
                            3. Project Description
                           The proposed project consists of the following components:

                           (i)   Dam and I&D Systems Rehabilitation
                           (ii)   Institutional Support for Irrigation and Drainage
                           (iii)  Strategic Framework for Integrated Water Resources Management
                           (iv)   Implementation Support


                                                                       Page 1 of 12
                         Component 1: Systems Rehabilitation (total US$36.7 million, of which US$36.7 million IBRD). This
                         component will be implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Consumer Protection
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (MAFCP). The objective is to rehabilitate (and, where possible, modernize) irrigation, drainage and
                         dam infrastructure in 15 irrigation schemes. The intermediate results indicators include the area with
                         rehabilitated/modernized I&D infrastructure (ha), number of dams rehabilitated in compliance with
                         international dam safety standards, number of dams where emergency response plans have been
                         prepared and disseminated to the population.

                         The component will finance the following sub-components:

                         (a)      Dam, Irrigation and Drainage Rehabilitation. This sub-component will finance preparation of
                         all feasibility and detailed design studies, and all rehabilitation and modernization works of
                         irrigation, drainage and dam infrastructure in the 15 irrigation schemes, as well as the supervision of
                         the works. Investments will be mostly located in the Drin-Buna and Semani river basins, and will be
                         undertaken in a comprehensive way (i.e., investments will be done in dams and in associated
                         irrigation and drainage infrastructure) to maximize the returns on investments.

                         During project preparation, Feasibility Studies (FSs) have been conducted for 14 dams (13
                         reservoirs). Pre-feasibility studies have been conducted for the 14 irrigation systems associated with
                         these dams (including one Public-Private Partnership (PPP) pilot site), and for one additional PPP
                         pilot. Detailed design studies for the dams are being conducted and are expected to be completed
                         before project approval. Investments during the first year of the project will focus on dam
                         rehabilitation, and detailed design studies for the associated irrigation and drainage infrastructure will
                         be conducted upon completion of a process for stakeholder involvement to identify the preferred
                         rehabilitation (gravity irrigation) and modernization (pressurized irrigation) option. Investments in
                         irrigation system rehabilitation and modernization will be done in subsequent years. Farmers will be
                         assisted in accessing subsidies provided by the Government for installation of on-farm pressurized
                         irrigation technologies. Each irrigation scheme rehabilitated or modernized under the project will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         apply for a permit for water abstraction.

                         (b)     This sub-component will finance implementation of Environmental and Social Management
                         Plans (EMPs) and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs), and will also strengthen the framework for
                         safety of agricultural dams, including institutional support to MAFCP and LGs to address the safety
                         of agricultural dams, capacity strengthening and awareness raising, and preparation of emergency
                         preparedness and dam safety O&M plans.

                         (c)     Pipeline Preparation. This sub-component will finance all studies required to prepare a
                         pipeline of shovel-ready investments in irrigation, drainage and dam infrastructure rehabilitation in a
                         total amount of US$50m. This includes feasibility and detailed design studies, and related safeguard
                         instruments.

                         Component 2: Institutional Support for Irrigation and Drainage (total US$1.4 million, of which US
                         $1.4 million IBRD). This component will be implemented by MAFCP. The objective is to improve
                         the performance of organizations that provide irrigation services. This includes institutional reforms
                         and capacity strengthening of LGs, Drainage Boards (DBs) and WUOs, and piloting PPP in I&D
                         service delivery through recruitment of third party operators to deliv er irrigation services in three
                         I&D pilot schemes. The component will also finance preparation of a National I&D strategy. The
                         intermediate results indicators include I&D strategy prepared, operational water user organizations

                                                                       Page 2 of 12
                         created and/or strengthened, number of I&D transfer agreements signed, number of Bulk Water
                         Delivery contracts signed between DBs and WUOs, number of farmers trained, number of PPP
                         contracts signed, recovery of O&M costs as a percentage of those invoiced.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project will finance the following sub-components:

                         (a)     Institutional Reforms of Irrigation and Drainage Sector. The sub-component will define
                         responsibilities for O&M between stakeholders (including Ministry/DBs, LGs, WUOs and private
                         operators) and will, to that end, finance preparation of a National I&D strategy. Relationships
                         between stakeholders including MAFCP, DBs, LGs and WUOs will be contractualized and service
                         delivery standards will be agreed. Three pilot projects to outsource responsibility for O&M to a
                         private operator will be initiated, either through a lease or management contract.

                         (b)      Capacity Strengthening of Organizations that provide Irrigation Services. This sub-
                         component will strengthen capacities of stakeholders (including Ministry/DBs, LGs, WUOs and
                         private operators) in the delivery of I&D services. The project will train an estimated 10 civil
                         servants from MAFCP, 15 civil servants from five DBs, staff from 15 LGs, and office bearers from
                         15 WUOs in a number of areas, including contract management and outsourcing, administration,
                         financial management and procurement, water management and O&M. Decentralized WUO support
                         staff from DBs and LGs will be trained in strengthening capacities of WUOs. Some goods will be
                         procured for DBs and LGs.

                         Component 3: Strategic Framework for Integrated Water Resources Management (total US$5.0
                         million, of which US$4.5 million Sida and US$0.5 million IBRD). This component will be
                         implemented by the Ministry of Environment, Forestry and Water Administration (MEFWA). Its
                         objective is to strengthen capacities of institutions responsible for IWRM, including the National
                         Water Council (NWC) and its Technical Secretariat (TS), and the Drin-Buna and Semani River
                         Basin Councils (RBCs) and their River Basin Agencies (RBAs). Capacity strengthening activities,
                         critical for satisfactory water sector performance, will be fully integrated into each of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         subcomponents to ensure relevance and applicability of the training. During project preparation, a
                         number of activities have been undertaken, including preparation of a draft decree defining the
                         geographical coverage of river basins, preparation of TORs for developing a National IWRM
                         Strategy and establishing a Water Resources Database. The recommendations of these preparation
                         activities will be implemented once the project becomes effective. The intermediate results indicators
                         include number of staff trained in IWRM, percentage increase of budget allocation by MEFWA to
                         GDWA, and percentage increase of budget allocation by GDWA to RBAs. Throughout project
                         implementation, MEFWA is expected to increasingly demonstrate leadership in the management of
                         the country’s water resources, and to progressively show responsibility as the convener of
                         stakeholders in water resources management.

                         The project will finance the following sub-components:

                         (a)     Support for the preparation of a National IWRM Strategy. This sub-component will support
                         MEFWA in the preparation of a National IWRM strategy. In view of EU candidate status, the
                         strategy will incorporate the EU’s Water Framework Directive (WFD), as reflected in the Law on
                         Water Resources (LWR, currently under revision). The project will ensure inclusiveness of the
                         preparation process by establishing a stakeholder forum for cross-sectoral dialogue and decision
                         making under the aegis of the NWC. As part of the Strategy preparation, the project will strengthen
                         capacities of institutions responsible for IWRM, including the NWC, TS, and the RBCs and RBAs of

                                                                     Page 3 of 12
                         Drin-Buna and Semani basins.

                         (b)      Preparation of River Basin Management (RBMs) Plans. In the Drin-Buna and Semani river
Public Disclosure Copy




                         basins, the project will support preparation of RBM Plans, including the identification of structural
                         and non-structural measures to improve the quality of IWRM. The project will work closely with the
                         UNECE supported Drin dialogue and will take advantage of the river characterization that is
                         undertaken in that context.

                         (c)      Support to the Establishment of a Water Resources Database. The project will provide
                         support to MEFWA in establishing a consolidated water resources database within the General
                         Directorate of Water Administration (GDWA) as basis for national water resources planning and
                         programming. The proposed water resources database will be populated through the coordinated
                         acquisition of monitoring data from all relevant organizations involved with water resources
                         monitoring.

                         28.    Component 4: Implementation Support (total US$1.8 million, of which US$1.3 million
                         IBRD and US$0.5 million Sida). This component will be jointly implemented by MAFCP and
                         MEFWA. Its objective is to manage project resources in accordance with the project’s objectives and
                         procedures as outlined in the Project Operations Manual (POM). The intermediate results indicator is
                         the number of project monitoring reports based on the established Management Information System
                         (MIS) submitted in time.

                         The project will finance the following sub-components:

                         (a)      Project Management. Project implementation will be mainstreamed into the regular functions
                         of the implementing Ministries. Support for project implementation will include: (i) provision of
                         technical assistance, training, office equipment and vehicles, and incremental operating costs in
                         support of project management; (ii) overall project planning, quality oversight and evaluation of
                         project activities; (iii) strengthening procurement and financial management capacity at all levels;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and (iv) preparation and implementation of a communications strategy to accompany the investments
                         and the preparation of the IWRM strategy.

                         (b)      Establishment of a Monitoring and Evaluation system. The project will support the
                         establishment of a performance based MIS and arrange for data collection and reporting on key
                         performance output and impact indicators, through baseline surveys, one of which has been
                         conducted during project preparation, one prior to Mid-Term Review and one at project completion.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Albania - investments in the rehabilitation and modernization of dam and irrigation infrastructure are
                         located in 15 irrigation schemes that are located in the Drin-Buna and Semani river basins. One I&D
                         scheme is located in an area that falls within the mandate of the Vjosa river basin.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Bekim Imeri (ECSS4)
                         Nikola Ille (ECSS3)

                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)



                                                                     Page 4 of 12
                         Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes             The project encompasses rehabilitation and
                         BP 4.01                                         modernization of 13 agricultural reservoirs and
                                                                         15 I&D schemes (including three PPP pilots),
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         some of them over 50 years old. The sites are
                                                                         located throughout Albania, belonging to districts
                                                                         of Kukes, Tropoja, Korça, Berat, Fier and Vjosa,
                                                                         where agriculture remains the most important
                                                                         source of income and economic output. The
                                                                         associated I&D schemes are in very poor shape,
                                                                         with only 44 percent of the original command
                                                                         area still operational.
                                                                         The project is classified as Category B under the
                                                                         World Bank Operational Policy 4.01 due to the
                                                                         nature of project activities and the fact that there
                                                                         will be no new reservoirs or expansion of the
                                                                         irrigation schemes, compared to the originally
                                                                         designed schemes.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No              OP/BP 4.04 on Natural Habitats is not triggered
                                                                         because available information shows that there
                                                                         are no areas of natural habitat which would be
                                                                         affected by these works.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No              OP/BP 4.36 on Forests is not triggered because
                                                                         available information shows that the project-
                                                                         specific investments will go into areas of already
                                                                         altered environment, specifically designed for
                                                                         more intensive agricultural productions.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes             OP 4.09 on Pest Management is triggered, as
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         rehabilitation and modernization of the irrigation
                                                                         schemes will likely lead to growth of intensified
                                                                         agriculture, which could lead to increased use of
                                                                         agrochemicals including pesticides. The
                                                                         awareness raising activities and promotion of
                                                                         IPM approaches in pesticide handling will be part
                                                                         of the site-specific EMPs for irrigation system
                                                                         rehabilitation and modernization. Additionally,
                                                                         the project will work with MAFCP in
                                                                         strengthening its internal capacity for pest
                                                                         management.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No              The project will not affect physical cultural
                         BP 4.11                                         resources. OP/BP 4.11 will not be triggered.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No              The project will not affect indigenous peoples.
                                                                         OP/BP 4.10 will not be triggered.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes             Given the nature of civil works, OP/BP 4.12 on
                         4.12                                            Involuntary Resettlement will be triggered. Key
                                                                         project features which may necessitate permanent
                                                                         land acquisition are: temporary or permanent


                                                                 Page 5 of 12
                                                                   access roads to sub-project sites, to borrow pits /
                                                                   quarries and disposal areas; land needed to source
                                                                   borrow or quarry materials (although the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   arrangement of willing buyer-willing seller will
                                                                   be the best option in this case), and land needed
                                                                   for modifications to the layout of the irrigation
                                                                   system or reservoirs. One area of special concern
                                                                   is encroachment over and around primary
                                                                   conveyance canals. This issue may be resolved by
                                                                   re-routing or other engineering options; however
                                                                   the de facto situation of people engaged in
                                                                   commerce or residing in close proximity to canals
                                                                   necessitates remedies which are in accord with
                                                                   OP 4.12.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   Yes             OP 4.37 on Safety of Dams is triggered. All
                                                                   dams are pre-existing and hence fall under
                                                                   paragraphs 7-11 of OP 4.37 (existing dams and
                                                                   dams under construction). With the exception of
                                                                   Tregtan 2 Dam (which is 10 meters high) all other
                                                                   dams fail under classification of “large dams? as
                                                                   they are higher than 15 meters. In case of
                                                                   Koshnica 1 Dam, which needs complete
                                                                   reconstruction, it also falls under paragraph 2-6 of
                                                                   OP 4.37. Compliance with this OP is ensured
                                                                   during preparation of the feasibility and detailed
                                                                   designs for each reservoir by the independent
                                                                   consultant. For each of the dams, an Emergency
                                                                   Preparedness Plan, and O&M and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   Instrumentation Plan, and a Supervision and
                                                                   Quality Assurance Plan will be prepared before
                                                                   tendering of the dam rehabilitation works. For
                                                                   Koshnica, these plans will be prepared by
                                                                   appraisal.
                         Projects on International   Yes             OP 7.50 on International Waterways is
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      triggered, since the rivers where some of the
                                                                   reservoirs are located are international. Out of the
                                                                   14 dam rehabilitation sub-projects identified for
                                                                   implementation during the first year of WRIP,
                                                                   four sites lie within the Drini catchment, namely
                                                                   Tregtan 2, Tregtan 3, Vranisht 2 and T’Plan. The
                                                                   Drini River has two tributaries - the Black Drini
                                                                   and the White Drini. The Black Drini originates
                                                                   in Macedonia and flows into Albania, while the
                                                                   White Drini originates in Montenegro and flows
                                                                   into Albania, before joining with the Buna River,
                                                                   which flows from Shkodra Lake (an international
                                                                   lake shared between Albania and Montenegro) to


                                                           Page 6 of 12
                                                                                 the Adriatic Sea. The remaining sites all lie
                                                                                 within the Seman Basin which flows entirely
                                                                                 within Albania and exits to the Adriatic. An
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 exception to notification under OP 7.50 has been
                                                                                 obtained for all sites, as the project (i) involves
                                                                                 rehabilitation of the already existing dams and
                                                                                 reservoirs (irrigation canals and pipes are not
                                                                                 included during the first year of project
                                                                                 implementation) and (ii) does not involve works
                                                                                 and activities that would increase the original
                                                                                 command area, or change the original scheme’s
                                                                                 nature. Consequently, the project falls under the
                                                                                 exception set forth in paragraph 7 (a) of OP 7.50
                                                                                 as (i) it will not adversely affect the quality or
                                                                                 quantity of water flows to the other riparians; and
                                                                                 (ii) it will not be adversely affected by other
                                                                                 riparians’ water use.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                    The project will not be located in disputed areas.
                            7.60                                                 OP/BP7.60 will not be triggered.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential l arge scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The project will rehabilitate existing dams and irrigation systems, and potentially large-scale,
                              significant and/or irreversible impacts are minimal. Potentially irreversible impacts (and their
                              mitigation measures) include:
Public Disclosure Copy




                              1. Lowering the water table by provision of drainage to irrigation schemes with high water tables
                              adversely affects existing users of groundwater, especially at dry times of the year. A number of
                              negative consequences of a falling water table are irreversible and difficult to compensate for
                              example salt water intrusion and land subsidence, and therefore groundwater abstraction needs
                              controlling either by licensing, other legal interventions or economic disincentives.

                              In the long-term, one of the most frequent problems of irrigation schemes is the rise in the local
                              water-table (water logging). Low irrigation efficiencies (as low as 20 to 30% in some areas) are
                              one of the main causes of rise of water table. Poor water distribution systems, poor main system
                              management and archaic in-field irrigation practices are the main reason.

                              It is recognized that balancing irrigation and drainage water supply to maintain groundwater at
                              adequate levels requires enhanced management skills. In addition, those responsible for I&D
                              management need to possess the tools for improved management. The project will therefore
                              implement a number of mitigation measures to address these risks, as follows:
                              (a) improving the management of I&D water, including (i) establishment and capacity
                              strengthening of water users organizations (WUOs) and transfer to these WUOs responsibility for
                              I&D management; (ii) closer involvement of local governments (LGs) to oversee adequate O&M;
                              (iii) strengthening of capacities of Drainage Boards and contractualization of their relationship


                                                                         Page 7 of 12
                          with WUOs to improve the accountability of I&D service delivery; and (iv) recruitment, on a pilot
                          scale, of third party I&D operators on performance based contracts.
                          (b) rehabilitating I&D infrastructure, including the rehabilitation and cleaning of drainage canals
Public Disclosure Copy




                          to improve run-off, and lining selected sections of irrigation canals to reduce seepage.

                          In addition, it should be noted that, under component 3 of the project, support will be provided to
                          the Government to provide a strategic framework for integrated water resources management.
                          While this is not part of the current project, it is expected that groundwater monitoring and
                          licensing will ultimately become part of the services that will be provided by River Basin
                          Agencies.

                          2. The increased use of agro-chemicals, needed to retain productivity under intensification, can
                          introduce toxic elements that occur in fertilizers and pesticides. On irrigated lands salinization is
                          the major cause of land being lost to production and is one of the most prolific adverse
                          environmental impacts associated with irrigation. The accumulation of salts in soils can lead to
                          irreversible damage to soil structure essential for irrigation and crop production.

                           Mitigation measures include careful water management to reduce the rate of salinity build up and
                           minimize the effects on crops. Management strategies include: leaching; altering irrigation
                           methods and schedules; installing sub-surface drainage; changing tillage techniques; adjusting
                           crop patterns; and, incorporating soil ameliorates. All such actions, which may be very costly,
                           would require careful study to determine their local suitability. The project will therefore
                           implement those measures that can be undertaken in a cost-effective manner. This would include,
                           as mentioned above, installation of adequate drainage infrastructure and improved management of
                           I&D water, leaching and modifying rotation schedules and installation of water saving irrigation
                           techniques such as drip irrigation. Measures to avoid the improper use and to mitigate against the
                           negative impact of agro-chemicals will be identified in the Pest Management Plan.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                           in the project area:
                             Negative environmental impacts tend to mainly occur during the construction phase and are
                           summarized as follows:

                          •        Reduced irrigation capacity during rehabilitation works
                          •        Disposal of building/excavation materials
                          •        Human disturbance during construction from noise, dust, visual, etc
                          •        Illegal exploitation of materials (sand and gravel from rivers) or forestry
                          •        Accidents to workers or nearby residents
                          •        Uncontrolled generation of solid waste and sanitary waste
                          •        Decrease in reservoir depth due to siltation
                          •        Reduction in reservoir volume affects fish during the construction works
                          •        Inappropriate quality of irrigation waters
                          •        Accidental overflows
                          •        Danger of water logging and soil salinization

                          Negative social impacts are as follows:
                          •       Reduction in reservoir capacity during the construction limits agricultural production that
                          could lead to unemployment and financial stress
                          •       Increase in dam crest level by between 0.3 and 0.5 meters, which may have an impact on


                                                                     Page 8 of 12
                           some land surrounding these reservoirs
                           •       Conflicts between stakeholders on use of reservoir water (i.e. fisheries, irrigation or
                           hydropower)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           •       Create differences/jealousy between owners of land under irrigation and those without.
                           •       Poor quality of irrigation waters can reduce or destroy crop yields.
                           •       Danger to public safety with irrigation canals and pesticide residue
                           •       Disruption to farming practices during construction.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             The following alternatives were reviewed;
                           •       The zero option (no investment)
                           •       The delayed project option
                           •       Alternative Site relocation option.

                          Alternative sources of water and demand reduction through conservation and re-use and water
                          management and monitoring were considered but were found to be unrealistic and to have similar
                          impacts to the current project under consideration.

                          None of the above options would be suitable; the 14 dams already exist, and have been
                          periodically filled and emptied over a number of years. The I&D schemes are already in existence
                          and there is no change to their existing footprint. The intended rehabilitation works on the dams
                          for safety and on the I&D schemes will improve the reliability and efficiency of this irrigation
                          resource.

                           Further details have been provided in the project’s Environmental and Social Framework
                           Document, and will be provided in the site specific Environmental and Social Management Plans.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Public Disclosure Copy




                             The Borrower is aware of the Bank’s policies and procedures, as it has already been benefiting
                           from Bank funded projects. However, its internal implementing capacity is still limited. The
                           Project will engage environmental and social specialists as a part of the supervision team. An
                           environmental specialist will be recruited to strengthen implementation capacity of MAFCP.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The main national stakeholders are considered to be MAFCP and MEFWA. The role and
                           relevance of each national stakeholder will change depending on the issues to be consulted.

                          The main local stakeholders are considered to be Districts and the Local Governments (LGs), i.e.
                          the municipalities and communes and their urban offices, the Regional Environmental Agencies
                          and Local Environment Inspection offices. Other stakeholders may be identified in the design of
                          project components and sub-projects.

                          The main public representatives are local NGOs active in the region, social associations, business
                          community organizations such as local Chambers of Commerce, hoteliers associations, tourism
                          associations etc.

                          The responsible LG with support of MAFCP/MEFWA will consult the project affected groups and


                                                                    Page 9 of 12
                           local NGOs about the sub-project and take their views into account. This will be done according to
                           the procedures defined in the Albanian Law on EIA, as developed more precisely in the Public
                           Participation Regulations Nr.1 “On Public Participation of EIA process? issued by MEFWA, dated
Public Disclosure Copy




                           17.08.2004 (Nr 233 of Prot.). This Regulation is drafted to apply to Article 26 of the EIA law.
                           Where this process is not sufficient to meet WB policy requirements they will be enhanced.
                           Broadly these requirements are as follows:

                           The public consultation will occur when the ESMP is in a draft phase and the findings of the draft
                           ESMP will be discussed. The public and stakeholder consultation and participation will be realized
                           through:

                           •       information to public and stakeholders about a component, sub-project or activity,
                           including access to key data and indicators in hard or electronic copy;
                           •       Ensuring conditions that maximize opportunities to express opinions and participate in the
                           decision making process, though public debate and other consultative processes:
                              o    Public meetings
                              o    Workshops
                            o      Exhibitions
                            o      Individual meetings with stakeholders
                              o    Distribution of questionnaires
                              o    Advertisement, notices , media
                           •       Consideration of any proposals for improvements and ways to make them;

                           Preparing and implementing the consultation process will comprise the following steps:

                           •       Identification of national and local stakeholders and public representatives as suggested
                           above;
                           •       Preparation of the simple and adequate information of the activity/action to be displayed
                           to stakeholders and information to public;
Public Disclosure Copy




                           •       Determination and organization of the events required;
                           •       Facilitation of the events;
                           •       Recording the information and opinions and advice obtained;
                           •       Consideration of the above information in finalizing the design and the operation and
                           maintenance arrangements, etc.; and
                           •       Co-ordination of the time table/schedule for each of the above steps.

                           The public consultation process is already underway.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                         10-Aug-2012
                          Date of "in-country" disclosure                                     31-Aug-2012
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                      31-Aug-2012
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                         10-Aug-2012


                                                                    Page 10 of 12
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  31-Aug-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   31-Aug-2012
                          Pest Management Plan
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   No
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      NA
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  NA
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   NA
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         The awareness raising activities and promotion of pest management will be part of the site-specific
                         ESMPs for irrigation system rehabilitation and modernization. Additionally, the project will work
                         with MAFCP in strengthening its internal capacity for pest management.
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
                         ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                          Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                          Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?


                                                                    Page 11 of 12
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: IJsbrand Harko de Jong
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                          Date: 12-Sep-2012
                            Coordinator:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Dina Umali-Deininger (SM)                    Date: 12-Sep-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    Page 12 of 12
