                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC2416

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-May-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 28-May-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Kyrgyz Republic                  Project ID:      P132754
                            Project Name:      AGRICULTURE PRODUCTIVITY AND NUTRITION IMPROVEMENT
                                               PROJECT (P132754)
                            Task Team          Pieter David Meerbach
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       17-Jun-2013                         Estimated        19-Aug-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: ECSAR                                Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Irrigation and drainage (60%), Agricultural extension and research (20%),
                                               Health (20%)
                            Theme(s):          Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Nutrition and food security (30%),
                                               Water resource management (30%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     16.50                      Total Bank Financing:          0.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                                 Financing Gap:                 0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      0.00
                              Global Agriculture and Food Security Program                                 16.50
                              Total                                                                        16.50
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives


                           C. Project Description
                           The project will have four components: (i) rehabilitation and modernization of physical irrigation and
                         drainage (I&D) infrastructure, (ii) agricultural advisory services; (iii) nutrition interventions; and (iv)
                         project management. The project will be implemented in selected areas nationwide. The original
                         Government proposal to the GAFSP included a component on institutional development and capacity
Public Disclosure Copy




                         building, and this component will be financed through a separate trust fund financed by the Swiss
                         Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC).

                         Component 1: Rehabilitation and Modernization of I&D Infrastructure (estimated costs US$ 11.5
                         million). This component will focus on the rehabilitation and modernization of the existing command
                         area of I&D systems on 30,000 ha managed by 18 WUAs and WUA Federations and the provision of
                         essential maintenance equipment to WUAs. Works to be carried out include the rehabilitation/
                         construction of on-farm I&D canals, outlets and other hydraulic structures, and some limited
                         rehabilitation works on critical off-farm infrastructure. WUAs will be required to repay part of the
                         costs relating to their I&D system to a WUA Support Fund, dedicated to provide financial assistance
                         to other WUAs. Capacity-building for WUAs will be financed under a technical assistance project
                         under parallel-financing of SDC.

                         Component 2: Agricultural Advisory Services (estimated costs US$ 1.5 million). This component
                         will finance the provision of agricultural advisory services to enhance the impact of irrigation and
                         drainage rehabilitation. The Project will build the capacity of water user associations, farmer
                         cooperatives or community-based organizations such as or farmer koshuuns (established in all Aiyl
                         Okmotus under the Bank-funded Agricultural Investments and Services Project) to undertake an
                         assessment of their rural advisory needs building on existing efforts to build demand led advisory
                         services. Services will include: (i) participatory rural appraisal to determine available resources and
                         market opportunities; (ii) preparation of agricultural development priorities and plans for each
                         community; (iii) preparation of terms of reference for advisory services to support communities in
                         implementing agricultural development plans; (iv) provision of advisory services, which may include
                         support in accessing finance and inputs, marketing support, and provision of technical advice and
                         demonstrations on topics such as on-farm planning and management, agronomy, crop production,
                         farm diversification, livestock husbandry, water resources management, soil protection, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         integrated pest management.

                         Component 3: Scaling-up Nutrition Interventions (estimated costs US$2.5 million). The purpose of
                         this component is to improve the nutrition levels of beneficiaries, especially women and children, to
                         provide more sustainable solutions to malnutrition and stunting. There are five key areas of
                         intervention identified in the GAFSP proposal which will be considered for inclusion during
                         preparation: (i) Supplemental feeding, through providing pregnant women with daily supplements of
                         vitamins and minerals to meet their substantially increased nutritional requirements and children
                         aged 6-24 months with micronutrients; (ii) Nutrition education program on breastfeeding and on
                         water sanitation and hygiene; (iii) Social protection, making communities aware of the eligibility
                         criteria and requirements for accessing social protection via the government’s social payments; (iv)
                         Dietary diversification, working with household plots commonly cultivated by women, to improve
                         dietary intake by increasing the production and adequate consumption of micro-nutrient rich foods;
                         (v) Technical assistance will be provided to work with multi-agency working groups to facilitate the
                         preparation of food security, nutrition and sector strategies to ensure the linkages and effects of
                         health, nutrition and agriculture are properly incorporated. Special emphasis of this TA will be on
                         evaluating options for enforcing mandatory salt iodinization and flour fortification. Project
                         preparation will carefully consider each of the proposed areas of intervention in order to identify the
                         most suitable activities for inclusion under the project.
                         Component 4 – Project Management (estimated costs US$ 1.0 million). This component will provide
                         the technical assistance, capacity building and day-to-day management, including administration,
                         project coordination, procurement, financial management and monitoring and evaluation in line with
Public Disclosure Copy




                         World Bank procedures. In order to maximize cost effectiveness, qualified existing staff within the
                         OIP-2 PIU will be used to the extent possible, with the core team comprising a project manager, one
                         engineer based in Bishkek, two regional engineers, an M&E team with two specialists, a financial
                         manager, two procurement specialists, institutional specialist and policy/strategy specialist.
                         Appropriate staffing and technical assistance for all components will be identified during
                         preparation. The Department of Water Resources (DWR) within the Ministry of Agriculture and
                         Land Improvement (MOALI) will be the executing agency for the Project. Project preparation and
                         implementation will be monitored by a working group comprising key project stakeholders. As the
                         secretariat to the Food Security Council, MOALI is well placed to provide the essential coordination
                         role of these stakeholders in the multi-sector approach being adopted.

                         The geographical scope is determined by the raions where the WUAs are selected, according to
                         selection criteria used under the OIP-2. To align with ongoing efforts for inclusion and enhanced
                         participation, the WUAs selected under the project will reflect demographic and geographic balance.
                         This will ensure a balanced beneficiary population with equitable representation of various
                         demographic groups. The WUAs will provide the initial target for the agricultural advisory services
                         and nutrition intervention components. Both components will be aimed at WUA members but will be
                         extended appropriately to include household plot owners, vulnerable groups, and Village Health
                         Committees (VHCs) to identify women, children and vulnerable groups.

                         The project does not introduce new interventions, but expands or builds on activities under on-going
                         or successfully completed projects. Component 1, Irrigation Rehabilitation, expands WUA
                         rehabilitation financed by the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank (ADB). Component 2,
                         Agricultural Advisory Services, builds on experiences with the Rural Advisory Services supported
                         by the World Bank, International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) and the SDC.
                         Component 3 builds on established VHCs and nutrition interventions supported through projects
Public Disclosure Copy




                         financed or implemented by the World Bank, ADB, UNICEF and the Global Alliance for Improved
                         Nutrition (GAIN). This component further contributes to better targeting of the most vulnerable
                         population using a community-based approach.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed project will likely target a number of irrigation systems that draw water from rivers
                         that are international waterways as defined by of OP 7.50. The exact locations of these irrigation
                         systems are not known at this point. Nevertheless, as with OIP-2, the most likely rivers to be affected
                         by the project include the Naryn River and its tributaries, the Talas River and its tributaries, and the
                         Chui River and its tributaries.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The Implementing Agency for the proposed project will be the Project Implementation Unit (PIU)
                         established under the Department of Water Resources of the Ministry of Agriculture and Land
                         Improvement. The PIU has proven its technical and managerial capacity, basedon experience with
                         OIP-1 and OIP-2, to effectively address any safeguard policy issues raised by the proposed project
                         and to implement any preventive actions/mitigation measures that may be recommended by the
                         project’s Environmental Management Plan. As it did under OIP-1 and OIP-2, the PIU will employ a
                         national environmental specialist on a part-time basis to supervise project impacts during and after
                           construction activities, perform environmental monitoring of soil conditions and water quality, and
                           provide capacity building in environmental monitoring and management.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Alexei Slenzak (ECSEN)
                           Aly Zulficar Rahim (ECSSO)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             The project has been classified as Category 'B'
                           BP 4.01                                             for purposes of OP 4.01 on Environmental
                                                                               Assessment because it is not expected to involve
                                                                               any large scale, significant or irreversible
                                                                               adverse environmental impacts. Experience with
                                                                               both OIP-1 and OIP-2 to date has shown this to
                                                                               be the case. The project will not involve the
                                                                               construction of new irrigation systems. Any
                                                                               potential adverse environmental impacts are not
                                                                               expected to be significant and can be effectively
                                                                               prevented or minimized by application of
                                                                               appropriate preventive actions and/or mitigation
                                                                               measures. These measures are identified in the
                                                                               Environmental Management Plan (EMP), of
                                                                               which a draft has been prepared, based on the
                                                                               EMP of the OIP-2 AF. Since the original EMP
                                                                               of the OIP-2 AF was disclosed and subject to
                                                                               public consultation at the national level, the
                                                                               EMP for this project will be disclosed and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               consulted with WUAs and project areas which
                                                                               will directly benefit from the project activities,
                                                                               during project implementation. It was agreed
                                                                               that the updated EMP should be disclosed prior
                                                                               to Appraisal. There will be formal public
                                                                               consultation meeting prior to Appraisal because
                                                                               this was done for the current version of the EMP
                                                                               recently, and no substantive changes to the EMP
                                                                               were made. It was agreed that the Team will
                                                                               share the draft TOR for the Advisory Services
                                                                               component with the RSA when it is available.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                           Pest Management OP 4.09             Yes             Training on Integrated Pest Management will be
                                                                               provided under the project by the Rural
                                                                               Advisory Services (RAS). The RAS are well
                                                                               experienced in this kind of training.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
                         BP 4.11
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   Resettlement impact is expected at the
                         4.12                                    rehabilitation site of Shakaftar headworks and
                                                                 canal that supplies irrigation water to 1,500 ha
                                                                 of agricultural lands owned by farmers. A basin
                                                                 for settling sediments in the canal is expected to
                                                                 be partially situated on private land and will
                                                                 require land acquisition. A Resettlement Action
                                                                 Plan is being prepared for the site and will be
                                                                 consulted, finalized and disclosed prior to
                                                                 appraisal. No other resettlement is foreseen at
                                                                 this time, but should the need arise, appropriate
                                                                 measures will be taken under the triggered
                                                                 policy.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         Yes   As did OIP-2 before it, the project will follow a
                                                                 program approach, with the WUA-managed
                                                                 irrigation systems eligible for rehabilitation to
                                                                 be selected during the first years of AF
                                                                 implementation. Therefore, it is not yet known
                                                                 whether there are any systems with water
                                                                 storage reservoirs implicated in the project.
                                                                 However, experience under OIP-1 and OIP-2
                                                                 indicates that it is likely that several systems
                                                                 will be selected that have small (less than 15 m
                                                                 in height) dams. Once this has been determined,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 appropriate actions to ensure dam safety,
                                                                 including more detailed inspections and safety
                                                                 measures, will be taken. In the case of small-
                                                                 scale irrigation dams and night storage
                                                                 reservoirs that may be part of a selected
                                                                 irrigation system, special guidelines governing
                                                                 this situation will prepared and included in the
                                                                 EMP.
                                                                 Before any rehabilitation activities can take
                                                                 place at an irrigation system to which these
                                                                 guidelines apply, the PIU will contract a
                                                                 qualified national design firm to make an
                                                                 engineering and safety assessment of the
                                                                 irrigation dam or storage reservoir in question,
                                                                 and prepare designs for the recommended
                                                                 measures. The consultants who will carry out
                                                                 the safety assessment will also look into the
                                                                 potential consequences of dam failure, including
                                                                 such principal criteria as the number of people
                                                               at risk, and economic assets downstream that
                                                               should be used to prioritize any intervention
                                                               aimed at improving dam safety. The design
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                               engineers will also be retained to provide
                                                               construction supervision of the rehabilitation
                                                               works.
                                                               The PIU will contract a qualified engineering
                                                               contractor, one that has experience with small
                                                               earthen dams and/or small storage reservoir
                                                               systems, to perform the remedial measures
                                                               recommended in the engineering and safety
                                                               assessment. The PIU, through the engineering
                                                               team, will oversee the implementation of any
                                                               remedial measures performed at irrigation dams
                                                               or storage reservoirs under the project. This
                                                               procedure has worked satisfactorily under
                                                               OIP-1.
                         Projects on International       Yes   The irrigation systems that will be rehabilitated
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                  under the project draw water from rivers that are
                                                               international waterways shared by the Kyrgyz
                                                               Republic with neighboring Kazakhstan,
                                                               Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan. Potential changes in
                                                               water flow or deterioration in water quality
                                                               during the construction works will be mitigated
                                                               through implementation of the EMP. As there
                                                               will not be any enlargement of existing
                                                               irrigation systems or development of any new
                                                               irrigation areas, project interventions are not
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                               expected to adversely affect the quality or
                                                               quantity of water flows to downstream riparian
                                                               states. The rehabilitation and modernization of
                                                               infrastructure and improvements in water
                                                               management should result in an increase in
                                                               system efficiency, thereby generating water
                                                               savings and providing reliable water supply to
                                                               the users. Considering all this, the project falls
                                                               under the exception to the notification
                                                               requirement contained in the safeguard policy,
                                                               approved by the Vice President for Europe and
                                                               Central Asia Region for OIP-2 on March 20,
                                                               2007. The task team will submit a request for a
                                                               similar exception to the notification for this
                                                               project, since the planned interventions are
                                                               identical.
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                         7.60
                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Apr-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Update to EMP - March 10, 2013
                                      EMP finalized - April 28, 2013
                                      Update to RAP for Shakaftar - March 4, 2013

                                      Original EMP disclosed during preparation of the OIP-2 AF. Updated EMP will be disclosed and
                                      consulted with WUAs selected for rehabilitation during project implementation.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Pieter David Meerbach

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name:                                                                                                                      Date:
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Dina Umali-Deininger (SM)                                                                                            Date: 28-May-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
