                                                                     INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                              CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC101
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Dec-2011

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                       India                                    Project ID:                      P114827
                              Project Name:                  GUJARAT STATE HIGHWAY PROJECT II (P114827)
                              Task Team Leader:              Arnab Bandyopadhyay
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 18-Aug-2012                                   Estimated Board Date:            13-Dec-2012
                              Managing Unit:                 SASDT                                    Lending Instrument:              Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                        Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (98%), Central government administration (2%)
                              Theme:                         Other rural development (67%), Pollution management and environmental health (33%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                       Amount
                                   Borrower                                                                                                                 141.00
                                   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                                    375.00
                                   Special Financing                                                                                                        225.00
                                   Financing Gap                                                                                                              0.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                    741.00
                              Environmental Category:        A - Full Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              B. Project Objectives

                              The project development objective is to improve the efficiency and safety of the core state highway network and strengthen institutional
                              effectiveness towards improved service delivery and financing strategies.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              In order to achieve the objective, the proposed project will comprise the following components (a) Highway Improvement Component, (b) Sector
                              Policy and Institutional Development Component, and (c) Road Safety Improvement.

                              C. Project Description

                              The project development objective is to improve the efficiency and safety of the core state highway network and strengthen institutional
                              effectiveness of road sector agencies towards improved service delivery and financing strategies. In order to achieve the objective, the proposed
                              project will comprise the following components (a) Highway Improvement Component, (b) Sector Policy and Institutional Development Component,
                              and (c) and (d) Road Safety Improvement.

                              The Project Description are as follows:

                              Component 1: Highway Improvement Component
                              About 1072 Km road upgradation and 505 km road rehabilitation works is proposed to be included under this component. The project selection
                              was carried out following an economic prioritization model with an objective to facilitate fulfillment of the state's overarching goal of maintaining a
                              level of service B (Volume / capacity ratio < 0.5) and average satisfactory (i.e. IRI <4.0) condition of the highway network as stated in the Gujarat
                              Infrastructure Vision 2020. The selection process is also fully coherent with the state's medium term objective of improving the accessibility of the
                              relatively backward tribal areas in eastern Gujarat as well as accelerating the development of the secondary transport network in the high growth
                              potential Delhi - Mumbai Industrial Corridor. The selected project sections constitute 21 corridors of average 75 km length and 40 percent of the
                              corridors are interlinked with each other. This corridor approach would provide opportunity for streamlined project administration, introduction of
                              demonstration safety and environmental enhancement measures (green highways) and application of a blended financing (PPP and public
                              financing) model. The works will be undertaken through a blend of traditional item rate, EPC, performance based and PPP contracts. The
                              appropriate mix of contracting will be developed based on the final recommendations of the financing option study and keeping in view the
                              objective of leveraging the Bank financing to the maximum possible. This component also envisages developing a pilot corridor on the principles of
                              development of Green Highways. The efforts on green corridors will be to integrate the concepts of community partnering and environmental
                              stewardship.

                              Component 2: Sector Policy and Institutional Development Component
                              This component would assist developing a possible next-stage 5-6 years program of policy enhancement, governance and institutional
                              development measures for the road sector in the state. In that perspective, likely major fields of the new IS program would be:

                              - Comprehensive GRMS-based Asset Management & Development;
                           - Program Management (covering Project Development & Management, Activity Monitoring & Evaluation, Performance Reporting);
                           - Quality Management in R&BD works (framework, policies, resources);
                           - IT-ICT Systems, Databases & Assets (integration and enhancement);
                           - Human Resources (HR) Management & Development;
                           - Road Network Planning & Multi-modal / Inter-modal Transport Planning;
                           - Roads Financing Strategy & Roads Revenue Leveraging;
                           - Capacity development in the state-level Construction Industry;
Public Disclosure Copy




                           - Fostering Centre(s) of Excellence in Construction, Quality &/or Asset Management;
                           - Industry Capacity Development and Industry Liaison / Outreach (state-level); and
                           - Public Information and Communication Strategy.

                           Component 3: Road Safety Improvement Component
                           A multi-sector road safety plan was prepared as part of th e Bank assisted first GSHP program. However, except for the post-crash management
                           interventions the plan remained a non-starter. On the other hand, the road safety crisis is assuming serious proportions with about 7000 fatalities
                           and about 30-35,000 major injuries every year in Gujarat. Against this background, a road safety component is included under the proposed
                           project. The project will support the development of a Safe Corridor demonstration intervention that could provide a useful start for developing a
                           comprehensive state-wide road safety strategy. A road safety capacity assessment, funded by GRSF, is currently being undertaken to inform the
                           design of the safety component. The main elements of the road safety component would comprise the development, implementation and
                           monitoring of a variety interventions on the selected corridors as follows:

                           - Improving the institutional arrangements for road safety interventions, including the establishment of a lead agency for road safety, improving
                           inter-agency coordination and road safety financing mechanism;
                           - Improving safety of road infrastructure;
                           - Improving safety enforcement by stricter compliance of safety rules Improving vehicle safety on the corridor; and
                           - Improving appropriate aspects of the emergency medical system e.g. emergency response, first responder training.

                            D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                           The project will be implemented in different parts of Gujarat spread across several districts in South, Central, North and Saurashtra parts of the
                           state.

                            E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

                           The PIU was established under first GSHIP and will continue to design, coordinate and implement this project. As part of the Implementation of the
                           first project, the borrower was exposed to the World Bank safeguard policies and is familiar with the safeguards procedures and the requirements.
                           The overall safeguards Implementation under the first project was satisfactory and the borrower has demonstrated their willingness to implement
                           the sound environmental and social safeguards practices. In the context of the preparation of this project, there is a need mobilize Environment
                           and Social Specialists (including forest officer) in PIU to oversee the various preparatory studies, coordinate with the Engineering studies and
                           guide the consultants. Based on the Preparatory study assessment and recommendations, the PIU will be strengthened adequately by appraisal.

                            F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

                           I. U. B. Reddy (SASDS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Sita Ramakrishna Addepalli (SASDI)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

                            Safeguard Policies Triggered                     Yes        No        TBD                                 Explanation
                            Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                ✖                          As observed during the project identification missions, the potential
                                                                                                          environmental concerns in the project, depending on the finally
                                                                                                          proposed project alignments are expected to include: (a) loss of
                                                                                                          road side trees, which are under declared forest in Gujarat; (b)
                                                                                                          possible impact of road improvements/upgradation on reserve forest
                                                                                                          and social forestry areas and (c) impacts on water bodies and
                                                                                                          natural drainage areas. The project implementation also would lead
                                                                                                          to temporary environmental impacts during construction stage. Thus
                                                                                                          OP 4.01 is triggered.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                             ✖     The presence of natural habitats along the project corridors and
                                                                                                          impact on such natural resources depends on the final choice of
                                                                                                          corridors and proposed alignments. The applicability of OP 4.04 will
                                                                                                          be determined during project preparation.
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                                           ✖
                            Pest Management OP 4.09                                      ✖
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11             ✖                          The project implementation could lead to potential impacts on
                                                                                                          religious structures, historical and archeological sites. Thus the
                                                                                                          applicability of OP 4.11 on Physical and cultural resources.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                      ✖                          Gujarat has substantial tribal population (about 15 percent),
                                                                                                          concentrated in the eastern part of the state. The tribal populations
                                                                                                          are mainly spread across 12 districts consisting of 43 Talukas,
                                                                                                          dominated by the Schedule Tribes. These tribal speak different
                                                                                                          languages and have different faiths and rituals. Some of the project
                                                                                                          roads are proposed in these tribal areas to improve the accessibility
                            Safeguard Policies Triggered                                      Yes           No           TBD                                             Explanation
                                                                                                                                    with the rest of Gujarat. Therefore, the Bank Policy on Indigenous
                                                                                                                                    People (OP 4.10) will be triggered. As part of the proposed
                                                                                                                                    preparatory studies, consultations will be held with the tribal people
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                    along those villages of the proposed roads in these districts to
                                                                                                                                    ascertain the people views and determine the approach to be
                                                                                                                                    followed for preparing Tribal Development Plan to mitigate the
                                                                                                                                    adverse impacts and enhance the positive benefits due to the
                                                                                                                                    proposed roads in these areas.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                                 ✖                                   The proposed roads to be included in the project are expected to
                                                                                                                                    involve substantial land acquisition and other associated impacts
                                                                                                                                    such as loss of houses, petty shops, common properties such as
                                                                                                                                    worship places, drinking water sources, etc. Some non-title holders
                                                                                                                                    are also likely to be affected especially for junction improvements.
                                                                                                                                    As part of project preparation, social impact assessment (SIA) would
                                                                                                                                    be carried out to determine the nature of impacts and undertake
                                                                                                                                    stakeholder consultations to seek their views and suggestions on
                                                                                                                                    the project impacts. The Entitlement Framework for different type of
                                                                                                                                    land acquisition related impacts will be prepared consistent with the
                                                                                                                                    Bank operational Policy on Involuntary Resettlement and the local
                                                                                                                                    laws that are applicable for the project. The SIA findings will provide
                                                                                                                                    basis for preparation of RAP.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                                        ✖
                            Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                                        ✖
                            7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                                            ✖

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                           A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Mar-2012
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
                              should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                The safeguard studies that would be undertaken as part of project will include: Environmental Assessment on Environment side, on social side
                                the study would include: Social Impact Assessment, Resettlement Action Plan, and Tribal Development Plan.

                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Signed and submitted by:
                            Task Team Leader:                                Name: Comfort Onyeje Olatunji                                                                         Date: 07-Dec-2011
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                 Name: Sanjay Srivastava (RSA)                                                                         Date: 07-Dec-2011
                            Comments:          cleared. Please see email dated 12/06/2011 for details.
                            Sector Manager:                                  Name: Michel Audige (SM)                                                                              Date: 09-Dec-2011
                            Comments:          Approved.




                            1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                             form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
