                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA3102
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Apr-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-Apr-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           South Asia                         Project ID:    P144335
                            Project Name:      Nepal-India Trade And Transport Facilitation Project (P144335)
                            Task Team          Diep Nguyen-Van Houtte
                            Leader:
                            Estimated                                             Estimated   27-Jun-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASDT                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General transportation sector (40%), General industry and trade sector (15%),
                                              Other domestic and international trade (15%), Agro-ind ustry, marketing, and
                                              trade (15%), Public administration- Industry and trade (15%)
                            Theme(s):         Trade facilitation and market access (25%), Regional integration (25%), Export
                                              development and competitiveness (25%), Other trade an d integration (25%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     101.00           Total Bank Financing:                  99.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                       Financing Gap:                          0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                99.00
                              International Finance Corporation (IFC)                                                     2.00
                              Total                                                                                     101.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           The proposed Project Development Objective is to decrease transport time and logistics costs for


                                                                       Page 1 of 18
                         bilateral trade between Nepal and India and transit trade along the Kathmandu-Kolkata corridor for
                         the benefit of traders. This will be achieved by reducing key infrastructure bottlenecks in Nepal and
                         by supporting the adoption of modern approaches to border management.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Project Description
                         29.      Enhancing trade competitiveness is one of six priorities of the Government of Nepal’s
                         development plan. The Nepal Trade Integration Strategy (NTIS) 2010 seeks to enable inclusive
                         growth in Nepal through enhancing the competitiveness of Nepal’s exports and reducing the cost of
                         trade. The priorities of this strategy include: (i) reducing the time and cost of trade-related
                         transactions through efforts at simplification, harmonization, and automation; (ii) building the
                         capacity of domestic trade-related institutions including for sanitary and phytosanitary inspections,
                         trade negotiations, trade facilitation and logistics, and monitoring and regulating trade-related
                         sectors; and, (iii) enhancing the Government’s ability to coordinate trade-related institutions and
                         development partners.

                         30.      The components of the proposed Project represent a subset of the Government’s plan to
                         facilitate regional trade and transport. Due to IDA financing constraints and implementation capacity
                         considerations, this first regional project for trade and transport facilitation in SAR will not finance
                         all of the sub-projects and activities submitted by Government to the World Bank Group. Instead,
                         this project has been selective and is focusing on those areas that have the most potential to improve
                         trade competitiveness and export performance. The project should therefore be considered as an
                         entry project for the sector, and follow-on projects can be expected following successful
                         implementation of this project. Alternatives or sub-projects considered but rejected for this project
                         are discussed in Section VI- Technical Appraisal Summary.

                         Component 1: Modernize transport and transit arrangements between Nepal and India (US$9m: US
                         $2m IFC, US$7m IDA):
                         The project seeks to improve the efficiency of the systems used to manage and control the movement
                         of Nepal’s and India’s international trade by providing technical assistance to introduce a modern
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and effective transit regime between the two countries including assistance to:
                         (a)      Prepare evidence-based amendments to bilateral agreements for transit and trade in order to
                         expedite the movement of third-country trade passing through the two countries, including
                         identifying and reviewing existing non-tariff measures (NTMs) in Nepal and in key export markets in
                         order to reduce the administrative burden faced by traders in meeting regulatory requirements.
                         (b)      Customs authorities in both countries to simplify and harmonize customs and border
                         management procedures, processes and systems, especially to provide for electronic interchange of
                         transit data;
                         (c)      the road transport regulatory authority in Nepal to strengthen and modernize the regulation
                         of international trucking services including axle load control and road safety from a transport
                         management perspective; and

                         Component 2: Strengthen Trade-Related Institutional Capacity in Nepal (US$20m):
                         (a)      Trade Portal and Single Window System Development (US$17.35m):
                         The project will finance the design, development an d implementation of two closely interrelated
                         information and communication technology (ICT) systems and related business process
                         improvements to improve transparency and integrity, lower trade transaction costs, improve inter-
                         agency coordination and reduce the time taken to clear goods. These systems will also assist Nepal
                         to comply with current and future WTO requirements (GATT Article X) dealing with publication of
                         trade rules and transparency. The Nepal Trade Information Portal (NTIP) will provide a single user-


                                                                      Page 2 of 18
                         friendly website where comprehensive and up to date information on all tariff and non-tariff
                         measures (including all relevant rules, regulations, procedures and fee schedules) applied at the time
                         of import, export or transit is readily accessible to traders. The Nepal Single Window System (NSW)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will allow traders to submit and have processed all required import, export and transit documentation
                         electronically via a single gateway instead of submitting essentially the same information numerous
                         times to different government entities. A significant amount of preparatory work for the component
                         has already been undertaken under the Bank-managed NLTA program including an assessment of
                         the legal and regulatory framework, preparation of options for the most effective governance and
                         operational models, preparation of the technical and functional architecture for the NSW, preliminary
                         work on business process simplification, change management and communication as well as capacity
                         building for officials and the trading community. Lessons from successful Trade Portal and National
                         Single Window systems elsewhere in the world (such as Lao PDR for the Trade Portal and
                         Singapore, Philippines, and Indonesia for the Single Window) have been incorporated into the
                         project design.

                         (b)      Institutional strengthening for Interagency Coordination including financing of Project
                         Coordination Office (PCO) (US$2.65m): Coordinating the multiple trade-related agencies in any
                         country is a complex resource-intensive task, and Nepal currently does not have sufficient capacity to
                         manage this task and ensure active and sustainable cooperation between multiple stakeholders. As
                         such, the focus of this sub-component will be on strengthening Nepal’s National Trade and Transport
                         Facilitation Committee and the capacity of the Ministry of Commerce and Supplies (MoCS) to
                         coordinate the trade-related agencies. Since the PCO is established within MoCS, its capacity will be
                         strengthened to coordinate the implementation of the different activities and components of the
                         project. Technical advisors will be hired for every sub-project, as well as skills for procurement,
                         financial management, environmental and social safeguards, and monitoring and evaluation (M&E).

                         Component 3: Improve Select Trade-Related Infrastructure (US$72m)
                         (a)      Expand and upgrade the Narayanghat-Mugling road section and implement measures for
                         improvement of entire Birgunj-Kathmandu Corridor (US$48m): Upgrade and expand 33km of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Narayanghat-Mugling road section to Asian Highway Standard and address road safety, axle load
                         control and environmental sustainability issues along the trade corridor. The N-M road section
                         experiences the heaviest traffic load carrying 90 percent of Nepal’s international trade traffic (about
                         6000 vehicles per day). Since the improvement of border post infrastructure is expected to increase
                         traffic along the entire Corridor from Birgunj to Kathmandu, the Project will finance studies for
                         environmental sustainability, road safety and Corridor improvement.
                         (b)      Build a Container Freight Station (CFS) or ICD in Kathmandu (US$15.5m). To facilitate the
                         loading and distribution of goods in the Kathmandu Valley, a CFS or ICD will be built in the
                         Kathmandu Valley. The facility will contain a parking lot and warehousing facility, and possibly
                         Customs clearance. Government will acquire the required land. Five possible sites were reviewed
                         with ease of land acquisition and minimal environmental and social impact among the key criteria.
                         The facility is also expected to provide a capacity for exporters to consolidate shipments to take
                         advantage of lower transport costs.
                         (c)      Improve the infrastructure at Birgunj and Bhairahawa ICDs (US$5.5m). Improvements are
                         needed at these two key ICDs to facilitate further trade and to improve the efficiency of current trade.
                         At the Birgunj ICD, the existing warehouse shed covers only 40 meters of the total 70 meters of the
                         length of a train. During the rainy season, the goods not stored in the shed due to insufficient space
                         are exposed to the elements and perishable goods would rot or suffer damage. There is also
                         insufficient space for the loading and unloading of existing and ant icipated future goods trade, which
                         prolongs the queue/idle time and clearance/border crossing time. Disabling of a set of unused tracks

                                                                      Page 3 of 18
                         would create additional space for loading and unloading of Nepal’s international goods trade which
                         would also speed up these processes. The new extra space is especially needed for edible oils. At the
                         Bhairahawa ICD, heavy rains and usage have caused severe damage to the surface of the ICD
Public Disclosure Copy




                         pavement including the access road and parking lot. Resurfacing is needed to restore the ICD to a
                         useable state. A maintenance plan will also be prepared to prevent such damage in the future.
                         (d)      Improvement of SPS Laboratories (US$3m) (including for Customs and SPS testing
                         including food, plant, and animal quarantine): i) Provide capacity and change management support to
                         agencies and stakeholders involved in the SPS testing and certification process to agree to simplify
                         and harmonize their procedures within Nepal, and to draft a work plan towards upgrading standards
                         and mutual recognition of certifications between Nepal and India. If co-located multi-agency
                         laboratories are deemed necessary to facilitate the clearance process, a work plan with the input and
                         agreement of stakeholders will be drafted which will include a governance plan, HRD plan, and
                         operational procedures. Particular emphasis will be given to strengthening Nepal’s capacity to certify
                         that products meet the export quality standards required by India and other trading partners. The
                         agencies and stakeholders involved in this initiative/working group include the Ministry of
                         Commerce and Supplies, Department of Customs, Department of Agriculture, Department of
                         Livestock Services, Department of Food Technology and Quality Control, and the Chamber of
                         Commerce. (ii) Finance the provision of equipment, IT systems and connectivity, technical
                         assistance, staffing and human resources capacity development, and change management support to
                         improve existing laboratories for international accreditation or pilot one or two new multi-agency,
                         joint analysis laboratories at locations to be determined by stakeholders.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed project is located in Nepal, a geographically small landlocked country. Nestled
                         between China and India, the two most populous and among the world’s most rapidly growing
                         economies, Nepal’s territory is mostly mountainous/hilly and its transport infrastructure is poor,
                         leaving many communities with limited access to local and international markets. The country is
                         located in the central part of the Himalayan arc and occupies nearly one third of the mountain range.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         In terms of physiography, 83 percent of the country’s geographical area is mountainous terrain and
                         the remaining 17 percent lies in the northern edge of the alluvial plains of the great Gangetic Basin.

                         Transport costs are high and the country near-completely depends on India for transit routes. Sharing
                         about a 1,800 km long border and 26 border points, India is often considered Nepal’s ‘natural’
                         trading partner. The port of Kolkata in India particularly has been serving as Nepal’s access to the
                         sea and is a major transit point for Nepal’s third-country trade. India also provides a large market for
                         Nepali goods and services, and is Nepal's largest trading partner, with about two-thirds of Nepal's
                         trade going to or coming from India.
                         Despite its proximity and deep economic relations with India as well as China, Nepal’s trade
                         outcomes have been poor. Since 2007, exports have been stagnant while imports have increased by
                         more than 50 percent. Nepal is lacking key logistics or trade-related infrastructure including
                         internationally-accredited laboratories for sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) inspections, clearance/
                         distribution centers in Kathmandu where most of Nepal’s trade is on-loaded and off-loaded, and
                         agro-processing facilities. Congestion at Custom Yards is also an impediment to Nepalese exports.
                         The Customs system and related infrastructure need to be automated and modernized, with processes
                         and procedures simplified and harmonized with that of India.

                         The transport sector in Nepal is dominated by road transport, which accounts for almost all domestic
                         passenger and freight movements. Nepal does not have an operational domestic railway system,


                                                                      Page 4 of 18
                         except for a short stretch at Birgunj that connects to the Indian system. Waterways and ropeways
                         transport are also practically non-existent in Nepal. Road transport is therefore the only dominant
                         mode of transport within the country and between the country and its neighbors. Road congestion is
Public Disclosure Copy




                         increasing at Nepal’s borders because of higher traffic volumes and because transit is constrained by
                         the poor condition of roads.
                         All of these constraints and the country’s difficult terrain conspire to make Nepal’s transport costs
                         among the highest in the world and second highest in South Asia after Afghanistan. If GoN does not
                         address the constraints within Nepal, GoI’s investments both on the Indian side and on the Nepali
                         side would not realize their intended benefits of increasing bilateral and international trade.

                         In terms of road infrastructure for trade, the 276 km stretch of road from Birgunj to Kathmandu,
                         which forms part of the SAARC Regional Road Network (SAARC Road Corridor 2), is the most
                         important trade route in Nepal. Yet, sections of this road, including the 33 km of the Narayanghat-
                         Mugling section and the 50 km Birgunj-ICD-Pathlaiya-Ratomate-Hetauda section, are too narrow to
                         accommodate existing (and projected) traffic passing through them. Moreover, once construction of
                         the Integrated Check Posts (ICPs) is completed by India, more traffic is expected to pass through the
                         Raxaul-Birgunj border post at a faster rate, causing even greater congestion than at present along the
                         Birgunj to Kathmandu route.
                         The heaviest traffic load is on the Narayanghat-Mugling-Kathmandu road section, parts of which are
                         neither in good condition, nor safe. Traffic from Birgunj, Biratnagar and Bhairahawa converges near
                         Narayanghat. The approximately 144 km stretch of road between Narayanghat and Kathmandu
                         therefore carries the heaviest traffic load in Nepal dominated by trucks carrying domestic and
                         international trade traffic, and has been identified by the private sector as the most important stretch
                         of road for trade traffic in Nepal.
                         The Narayanghat –Mugling (N-M) road starts at Narayanghat (km. 0+000). However, the proposed
                         improvements under the project will start from Aptari (km 2+425) (junction where bypass road to
                         Bharatpur meets the N-M road) and end at Mugling (km 35+677). The road lies in Chitwan district of
                         Central Development Region of Nepal. The road was constructed initially as a single lane road.
                         Later, it was widened to intermediate lane with additional structures. Traffic movement is around
Public Disclosure Copy




                         6000 vehicles per day. The road traverses along the left bank of the Trishuli River. The project road
                         has bridge crossings over 18 tributaries of this river. Major settlements along the road alignment are
                         Aptari, Ramnagar, Jugedi, Dasdhunga, Ghumaune, Simaltar, Khahare, Syauli Bazar and Mugling.
                         The road passes through forest area, settlements and cultivated land. Presently, the width of the road
                         is 6 to 10 meters. The width of the road is intended to be widened to 11 meters. up to km 16 and from
                         there to Mugling to 9 meters.

                         The topographical setting of the road alignment corridor is characterized by hill and river basin. It is
                         largely a rugged terrain consisting of northwest to southeast and north to south trending ridges. The
                         traffic movement on the road also gets constrained by landslides/land slips, particularly during the
                         monsoons. As a result, culverts get blocked and the debris flows cause extensive damage downhill by
                         overtopping the road bench and/or or cause ways.

                         A small section of the Narayanghat-Mugling road (about 6 km, from chainage 2+425 to 8+ 500) falls
                         within the Barandabhar Forest Corridor (BFC) that has been gazetted as a Protected Forest by Govt.
                         of Nepal in February 2012. Within this zone, a stretch of about 4 km or less remains free from human
                         habitation.

                         Barandabhar Protected Forest is a 29 km long forest patch, extending from Mahabharata range in the
                         north to Chitwan National Park to the south. Major tree species are Sal at the Terai and mixed

                                                                      Page 5 of 18
                         Sissoo-khair forest at the hill side. It is rich in biological diversity both in terms of the plant and
                         animal species found here. This forest is also an important corridor for the one-horned rhinoceros, a
                         globally threatened species. The rich biological diversity of BFC has witnessed severe pressure from
Public Disclosure Copy




                         human interferences, leading to forest clearance and adverse impact on wildlife. The forest is
                         bisected by many roads, including the east-west Mahendra Highway, which has fragmented the
                         natural habitat creating a barrier to the free movement of wildlife.

                         The Narayanghat-Mugling road traverses in a north-south direction through the BFC’s western
                         fringe. While a part of the BFC lies within the buffer zone of Chitwan National Park (CNP), the
                         proposed project road is entirely located outside this ecologically sensitive buffer zone of CNP.
                         Wildlife such as Bandel (Sus scrofa cristatus), Syal (Canis aureus), Hanuman Langur
                         (Semenopithecus), Rato Bandar (Macaca mulatta), Chituwa (Panthera pardus), Jarayo (Cervus
                         unicolor), Chital (Axis axis), Harin (Muntiacus muntijac), Ghoral (Naemorhedus goral), Nilgai
                         (Boselapus tragacamelus), Monkey (Macaca mulatta) and Ban Biralo (Felis chaus), are known to
                         move across the existing road, particularly in the night. Other environmental concerns on this road
                         include slope stability (landslides, erosion, toe cutting by river), disposal of debris, traffic safety and
                         management during construction.
                         The Narayanghat-Mugling road links Bharatpur Municipality with Kabilash, Dahakhani,
                         Chandibhanjyang and Darechock VDCs of Chitwan district. The right of way (RoW) for this road
                         was declared in 1977 and deemed to be acquired and owned by the government. All the road
                         improvement work is confined within the existing RoW and therefore additional land acquisition is
                         not required for the proposed upgrading works of this sub-project. The present detailed design
                         requires 11 meters widening up to km 16+400 where the road passes through flat land. After km16
                         +400, the rocky hill area begins where widening is proposed to be limited to 9 meters. In both
                         sections, the existing Right of Way is 25 meters on either side of the road and so there is no need for
                         additional land acquisition requirement.

                         The Narayanghat-Mugling road links Bharatpur Municipality with Kabilash, Dahakhani,
                         Chandibhanjyang and Darechock VDCs of Chitwan district. The right of way (RoW) for this road
Public Disclosure Copy




                         was declared in 1977 and deemed to be acquired and owned by the government. All the road
                         improvement work is confined within the existing RoW and therefore additional land acquisition is
                         not required for the proposed upgrading works of this sub-project. The present detailed design
                         requires 11 meters widening up to km 16+400 where the road passes through flat land. After km16
                         +400, the rocky hill area begins where widening is proposed to be limited to 9 meters. In both
                         sections, the existing Right of Way is 25 meters on either side of the road and so there is no need for
                         additional land acquisition requirement.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Neha Pravash Kumar Mishra (SASDI)
                         Parthapriya Ghosh (SASDS)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                 Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes               Specific interventions envisaged under the
                         BP 4.01                                                project such as widening and upgrade of the
                                                                                Narayanghat-Mugling road may have some
                                                                                potential adverse environmental impacts in its
                                                                                area of influence. Even though this is an existing
                                                                                road with considerable traffic, planning and


                                                                        Page 6 of 18
                                                                     construction of this road corridor would require
                                                                     avoidance/ mitigation measures to ensure that
                                                                     adverse environmental impacts are minimized
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     and properly managed. Impacts pertaining to road
                                                                     design (landslides/slips; drainage); work site
                                                                     safety management, including occupational health
                                                                     and safety of construction workers; soil erosion
                                                                     would require attention.
                                                                     On other project interventions such as (a)
                                                                     development of multi-functional joint analysis
                                                                     laboratories; (b) construction of selected Inland
                                                                     Container/Clearance Depots (ICDs); (c)
                                                                     strengthening the Department of Transport
                                                                     Management to better manage or regulate the
                                                                     road transport sector, the anticipated
                                                                     environmental impacts are not likely to cause any
                                                                     significant or serious damage to the natural and
                                                                     physical environment. However, the information
                                                                     about nature, scale and magnitude of
                                                                     environmental impacts from such activities/
                                                                     interventions will emerge once the on-going
                                                                     feasibility and other studies are concluded and
                                                                     screening exercises are completed.
                                                                     OP 4.01 has been triggered to ensure that all
                                                                     major (like road) and minor (other trade-related
                                                                     infrastructure) investments are planned and
                                                                     designed to be environmentally sound by
                                                                     integrating appropriate principles and approaches
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     into the overall decision making process.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes             A small section of the Narayanghat-Mugling
                                                                     road (about 6 km) from Aaptari (chainage 2+400)
                                                                     to Jugedi (chainage 8+500) falls within the
                                                                     Barandabhar Forest Corridor (BFC) that has been
                                                                     gazetted as a Protected Forest in February 2012.
                                                                     Within this zone (of about 6 km), a stretch of
                                                                     about 4 km or less remains free from human
                                                                     habitation and has forest cover on both sides of
                                                                     the road, necessary for wildlife connectivity.
                                                                     Even though there is continuous high volume
                                                                     traffic flow causing congestion on the road in
                                                                     addition to presence of a small town (Rampur),
                                                                     institutions, sites of religious importance, fuel
                                                                     stations and other factors of anthropogenic
                                                                     disturbance along and close to the road,
                                                                     recognizing the importance of BFC, it is
                                                                     necessary to reduce impingement to the integrity
                                                                     of the said forest corridor on account of proposed



                                                             Page 7 of 18
                                                                         project activities. While the proposed project
                                                                         interventions are not likely to cause significant
                                                                         conversion or damage to BFC, OP 4.04 is being
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         triggered as the forest corridor is a declared
                                                                         protected area and qualifies the definition of a
                                                                         critical natural habitat under the policy.
                                                                         Management measures would be required for
                                                                         avoiding/minimizing disturbances, particularly
                                                                         during the construction stage.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes             The Narayanghat-Mugling road traverses
                                                                         through a small part of the Barandabhar Forest
                                                                         Corridor’s western fringe. To ensure that the
                                                                         health and quality of the forest is not adversely
                                                                         impacted by the proposed works of the said road,
                                                                         the required measures will be made a part of the
                                                                         sub-project specific environment management
                                                                         plan.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No              OP 4.09 is not being triggered for this project as
                                                                         biological/environmental control methods or
                                                                         reliance on synthetic chemical pesticides is not
                                                                         envisaged.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes             Since some civil works are involved, ‘chance
                         BP 4.11                                         finds’ at work sites is a likely impact that would
                                                                         have to be managed. Adverse impacts on any
                                                                         locally important cultural property would be
                                                                         examined, if any, for appropriate mitigation
                                                                         during planning and implementation stages.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes             There are indigenous and other vulnerable
                                                                         groups in the project area. Consultations are
                                                                         being carried out with them for information
                                                                         dissemination of the proposed project, impact
                                                                         identification, design of mitigation measures and
                                                                         the positive impacts of the project.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes             The right of way (RoW) for the Narayanghat-
                         4.12                                            Mugling road was declared in 1977 and deemed
                                                                         to be acquired and owned by the government. All
                                                                         the road improvement works are confined within
                                                                         the existing RoW and therefore additional land
                                                                         acquisition is not required for the up-grading
                                                                         works. However, the project will displace a
                                                                         number of squatters and encroachers and that
                                                                         would lead to loss of shelter, livelihood or
                                                                         sources of livelihood.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No              OP 4.37 is not being triggered for this project as
                                                                         there is no construction of new dams or activities




                                                                 Page 8 of 18
                                                                                that are concerned with safe functioning of
                                                                                existing dams.
                            Projects on International           No               OP 7.50 will not be triggered for this project as
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                there are no interventions planned/proposed over
                                                                                or around an international waterway that could
                                                                                cause a potential conflict. There are also no
                                                                                activities that may affect the use or pollute such a
                                                                                waterway.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  OP 7.60 will not be triggered for this project.
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The proposed project will contribute to positive economic growth both locally in the project area
                              and at the regional level between Nepal and India by removing barriers to trade and transportation
                              created due to poor condition of road infrastructure. The main beneficiaries from the Project will
                              be traders and businesses in Nepal and India who will benefit from reduced time and cost of
                              exporting and importing goods. Consumers will also benefit from lower prices on imported goods.
                              The proposed improvement and upgrading of the Narayanghat-Mugling (N-M) road, one of the
                              key interventions planned under the project will also result in positive benefits. The expected
                              positive outcomes of this sub-project include improved connectivity between the terai districts and
                              Kathmandu enhancing access to economic opportunities, administrative centres, health services,
                              higher education facilities and savings in travel time and transportation costs for the local
                              population using the road. Beneficiaries will also include road users as well as households and
                              shopkeepers near the road, who will benefit from safer road conditions.
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Environmental Issues/Impacts. Specific interventions envisaged under the project such as
                             widening and upgrade of the Narayanghat-Mugling road may have some potential adverse
                             environmental impacts in its area of influence. Even though this is an existing road with
                             considerable traffic, planning and construction of this road corridor would require avoidance/
                             mitigation measures to ensure that adverse environmental impacts are minimized and properly
                             managed.

                             Though the civil works for the N-M road have been planned within the existing Right of Way
                             (RoW), the fragile ecosystem in this hilly/mountainous country poses greater than average
                             environmental risks. The key environmental issue of concern is the existing and likely impact of
                             the road on biodiversity/wildlife. A small section of the Narayanghat-Mugling road (about 6 km)
                             from Aaptari (chainage 2+400) to Jugedi (chainage 8+500) falls within the Barandabhar Forest
                             Corridor (BFC) that has been gazetted as a Protected Forest in February 2012. Within this zone (of
                             about 6 km), a stretch of about 4 km or less remains free from human habitation and has forest
                             cover on both sides of the road, necessary for wildlife connectivity. Even though there is
                             continuous high volume traffic flow causing congestion on the road in addition to presence of a
                             small town (Rampur), institutions, sites of religious importance, fuel stations and other factors of
                             anthropogenic disturbance along and close to the road, recognizing the importance of BFC, it is
                             necessary to reduce impingement to the integrity of the said forest corridor on account of proposed

                                                                        Page 9 of 18
                         project activities.

                         The interventions for road improvement may cause undesirable impacts on the biodiversity found
Public Disclosure Copy




                         in adjoining areas of the alignment. Typical direct impacts that may adversely affect plants and
                         animals include loss of habitat, pressure on already fragmented habitats, movement zone
                         restrictions, threat from increased risk of collision with vehicles and pollution of habitat zone and
                         water sources from various construction activities. Commonly encountered indirect impacts may
                         include altered hydrology, biota contamination and transmission of diseases. While the proposed
                         project interventions are not likely to cause significant conversion or damage to BFC, OP 4.04 and
                         OP 4.36 is being triggered as the forest corridor is a declared protected area and qualifies the
                         definition of a critical natural habitat under the policy. Management measures would be required
                         for avoiding/minimizing disturbances such as those mentioned above, particularly during the
                         construction stage.

                         More so, the terrain through which the road traverses is vulnerable to slope failures and instability
                         risks. Therefore, some other environmental issues associated with the proposed civil works of the
                         N-M road include likely impacts pertaining to road design (slope stability and drainage issues);
                         work site safety management (including occupational health and safety of construction workers)
                         and; soil erosion. More specifically, the likely impacts include: (i) felling of limited number of
                         roadside trees (estimated to be 266); (ii) destabilization of slopes (including landslides, mud slips,
                         soil erosion) with consequent damage to forests, water sources, properties, and farmlands; (iii)
                         improper management and disposal of debris and other wastes arising from construction activities;
                         (iv) impacts on water resources used by the people such as springs, river/streams and hand pumps;
                         (v) impairment to or worsening of the local drainage; (vi) road safety concerns due to increased
                         traffic speeds; (vii) the potential for poorly planned or managed development induced by the
                         improved highway; (viii) moderate impacts on sensitive sites including community assets and
                         religious places; (ix) improper identification and management of material sources (sand, water,
                         earth, aggregate); and (x) construction phase impacts including those related to camp site
                         operation, dust generation and pollution from plants & construction machinery/vehicles.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         On other project interventions such as (a) development of multi-functional joint analysis
                         laboratories; (b) construction of selected Inland Container/Clearance Depots (ICDs); (c)
                         strengthening the Department of Transport Management to better manage or regulate the road
                         transport sector, the anticipated environmental impacts are not likely to cause any significant,
                         irreversible or long-term damage to the natural and physical environment. However, the
                         information about nature, scale and magnitude of environmental impacts from such activities/
                         interventions will emerge once the on-going feasibility and other studies are concluded. All such
                         sub-projects that would be identified for financing under the project will under-go an
                         environmental screening - based on the results/findings from this exercise, further decisions about
                         their inclusion would be made, which may also include requirement for detailed impact
                         assessment for case/s for which significant impacts are likely to occur.

                         Keeping the over-all impacts of the project in mind and in particular the issues associated with the
                         civil works of N-M road, NITTFP has been identified as a category ‘A’ project. OP 4.01 has been
                         triggered to ensure that all major (like road) and minor (other trade-related infrastructure)
                         investments are planned and designed to be environmentally sound by integrating appropriate
                         principles and approaches into the overall decision making process.

                         Social Issues/Impacts. The right of way (RoW) for the Narayanghat-Mugling road was declared in
                         1977 and deemed to be acquired and owned by the government. All the road improvement works

                                                                   Page 10 of 18
                          are confined within the existing RoW and therefore additional private land acquisition is not
                          required for the up-grading works. The present detailed design requires 11 meters widening up to
                          km 5+500 (Jugedi/ Bhateri) where the road passes through flat land. After Bhateri, the rocky hill
Public Disclosure Copy




                          area begins where widening is proposed to be limited to 9 meters. In both sections, the existing
                          Right of Way is 25 meters on either side of the road and so there is no need for additional land
                          acquisition requirement. The project has triggered OP 4.12 as project will displace some squatters
                          and encroachers and that would lead to loss of shelter, livelihood or sources of livelihood. Also,
                          there are indigenous and other vulnerable groups in the project area and therefore OP 4.10 has
                          been triggered.

                           Additionally, the project includes building of a distribution/warehousing/logistics center or ICD in
                           Kathmandu and improvement in the infrastructure at Birgunj and Bhairawa ICDs. Though this
                           component of the project does not entail large scale adverse social impact, all sub-projects will
                           require social screening and sub-projects with significant impacts will require further impact
                           assessment and mitigation plans.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            No significant, irreversible, indirect and/or long term adverse environmental and social impacts
                           are currently envisaged. On the whole, the project would benefit trade and transport between
                           Nepal and India, which is particularly important as Nepal is a land-locked country and its
                           economy and growth (even sustenance for items not produced within the country) substantially
                           depends on the trade with its neighboring countries. In addition, access and use of various social
                           services is expected to increase with an improvement in the mobility of people living close to or
                           using the N-M road.

                          The right of way (RoW) for the Narayanghat-Mugling road was declared in 1977 and deemed to
                          be acquired and owned by the government. All the road improvement works have been designed
                          such that the widening activities remain confined to the existing RoW. Therefore additional
Public Disclosure Copy




                          private land acquisition is not required for the up-grading works and the requirement for forest
                          land diversion has remained confined to a small section of the road. The project however will
                          displace some squatters and encroachers and that would lead to loss of shelter, livelihood or
                          sources of livelihood.

                          Land-use change is a long-term impact that is likely to be induced by a road improvement
                          program/project in the hills. Development of road-side settlements (local markets) in specific areas
                          is a common form of land-use change likely to occur along a road. Intensification of agricultural
                          land-uses, and change in cropping pattern (shift from subsistence agriculture to production of cash
                          crops e.g. vegetables) is another form of road induced impacts.
                          On the environment side, with the integration of EA findings in the engineering design, bidding
                          documents and with proper implementation of ESMF/EMP, even the existing issues of habitat
                          fragmentation, biodiversity management, road safety and slope instability are expected to decrease
                          with the execution of the project.

                          The other trade-related infrastructure supported as part of the project does not entail any adverse or
                          significant environmental and social impacts. To ensure that such sub projects do not cause any
                          significant adverse impacts, the identified propositions will undergo an environment and social
                          screening process. In case significant impacts are likely to occur, the sub-project/s in question will
                          require environmental and social assessment and preparation of mitigation/management plans as


                                                                     Page 11 of 18
                           per the agreed Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) prepared for the
                           project.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
Public Disclosure Copy




                           impacts.
                            Despite the fact that the N-M road is already in existence and operational for years and the likely
                           impacts from the project can be mitigated/managed to a substantial extent through proper
                           implementation of the EMP, the environmental assessment process explored options and analyzed
                           alternatives for the road alignment, particularly for the six (6) kilometer section traversing through
                           the Barandabhar Protected Forest. The purpose of this exercise was to minimize any adverse
                           environmental impacts arising on account of the planned project interventions and to resolve
                           existing problems of habitat fragmentation/wildlife habitat connectivity issues in the Barandabhar
                           Protected Forest area. An intensive exercise for analyzing alternatives was carried out, which also
                           included analysis of a non-project alternative. Major considerations used for this exercise
                           included: (i) possible options for avoiding the Barandabhar Forest Corridor; (ii) use the existing
                           alignment as much as possible in the other sections; (iii) avoiding of fragile/instable/steep slopes
                           and; (iv) avoiding impact on the river/drainage channels, including areas affected by toe-cutting.

                           Further, a site specific adjustment as well as careful selection between alternatives available is
                           needed to avoid or minimize the adverse impacts on natural and physical environment. This
                           includes proper selection of alternatives for: (a) materials sources (such as water sources to be
                           used for construction and quarry sites); (b) waste-disposal sites and; (c) construction camp/plant
                           sites. The mechanism to do so has been built into the environmental assessment and management
                           process.

                           For all other project interventions, the requirement for analyzing alternatives has been provided for
                           in the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). The ESMF prepared for
                           effective safeguards management in the project, especially for selecting sites for the trade related
                           facilities, requires analysis of various alternatives as part of the environment and social screening
Public Disclosure Copy




                           process. As per the agreed ESMF, the screening results and analysis of alternatives, as needed on a
                           case-to-case basis, will be reviewed and cleared by the Bank prior to approving the sub-project/s
                           for implementation.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             Over-all Safeguards Management. Two specific instruments have been designed/developed for
                           the project for effectively addressing the various identified environment and social issues: (i)
                           preparation of an Environment and Social Management Framework dealing with avoidance and
                           minimization of the likely adverse impacts for the project as a whole and; (ii) Environment and
                           social assessment and preparation of corridor-specific management plans for the Narayanghat-
                           Mugling road, which has been identified as a key sub-project under Component 3 of the project.
                           Both these instruments include measures to minimize and mitigate environment and social impacts
                           through all stages of the project. Proper integration of findings from the safeguard studies and
                           public consultation process into the planning/decision-making process and engineering outputs
                           (design and bidding documents) would help in avoiding/reducing the environmental and social
                           issues that may arise due to the project.

                           The ESMF developed for the project covers all components/interventions. Given that there are
                           several small sub-projects (other than the N-M road, which is a major investment) and locations/
                           sites for most are not known at this stage, the ESMF was chosen as an instrument to guide the

                                                                      Page 12 of 18
                         management of safeguard aspects. The ESMF includes an environmental and social screening tool
                         to guide the identification of appropriate sites/locations for sub-projects. It identifies the potential
                         issues and provides possible/required mitigation/management measures to deal with them. It will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         enable potential environmental and social concerns of the proposed sub-projects to be thoroughly
                         assessed in planning phase and design phases. It will also guide selection of appropriate measures
                         to be considered for project implementation. This framework will serve as a tool to guide the
                         decision-makers and project implementers to select the optimal project intervention based on
                         screening results; prepare specific mitigation plan/s, as and if required and; guide the supervision,
                         monitoring, reporting and institutional arrangements for the project components/activities.
                         Environment Management. For the Narayanghat-Mugling road, an Initial Environment
                         Examination (IEE) report prepared in 2010 by DoR has been revised to the level of an EA and
                         EMP in line with the requirements of the Bank’s operational policies, with specific attention to
                         concerns related to biodiversity management.

                         Also, a corridor specific EMP has been prepared to address issues related to biodiversity
                         management and slope stability. Measures include: (i) arrangements to facilitate wildlife
                         movement (provision of civil structure/underpass and traffic calming); (ii) use of bio-engineering
                         techniques; (iii) minimization of tree cutting and forest land diversion requirements through
                         appropriate engineering interventions; (iv) restoration of natural drainage; (v) provision of
                         signage; (vi) identification of material sources and waste disposal sites such that disturbances to
                         natural habitat are avoided; and (vii) support habitat improvement measures within BFC and dove-
                         tailing efforts with other on-going schemes of Forest Department/other donors/partners.

                         The EMP also addresses construction-stage impacts such as (a) air and noise pollution, dust from
                         material transport, crushers and asphalt plants; (b) water and soil pollution from spills of fuel,
                         lubricants and construction camp wastes; (d) operation and rehabilitation of borrow pits, quarries
                         and construction camps/plant sites; (e) traffic safety and management; and (f) worker's health and
                         safety. The management plan provides for relocation/shifting of impacted community resources in
                         as good or better condition, with local communities encouraged to commit to their maintenance.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The EMP also includes a monitoring plan for construction and operation-stage impacts. For
                         effective implementation of EMPs, management measures have been appropriately cross-
                         referenced in the design drawings, contract conditions and Bills of Quantities (BOQs).
                         Further, to better appreciate environmental concerns at the regional level, particularly for those
                         road links/trade corridors that have fragmented natural habitats/wildlife areas in the past (such as
                         the Mahendra Highway and the Birgunj-Hetauda road section), a study with a focus on
                         biodiversity management issues will be carried out in the first year of project execution. These
                         existing road sections are not being funded for improvement under the project but form a crucial
                         part of the trade and transport corridor between Birgunj and Kathmandu. The study will inform the
                         decision-making process about the need, approach and interventions required to balance out the
                         trade and transport infrastructure demands in the near future on the one hand and the
                         environmental/wildlife protection requirements on the other. The findings/ outcomes of this study
                         would be available for the use of GoN irrespective of the source of funding used for road
                         widening/improvement/maintenance of the trade corridor in future.

                         Social Aspects. The Social Assessment (SA) and Social Impact Assessment (SIA) for the
                         Narayanghat Mugling Road have been completed. Based on SA, SIA and consultations, the
                         project has prepared Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) and Vulnerable Community Development
                         Plan (VCDP). The RAP and VCDP provide for mitigation measures for the identified adverse
                         social impacts. During the preparation stage, community was extensively consulted. There is

                                                                    Page 13 of 18
                         presence of indigenous people and other vulnerable community. Free and pre-informed
                         consultations were carried out with them during the preparation stage for information
                         dissemination about the proposed project, impact identification, design of mitigation measures and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         to share information on the positive impacts of the project. The consultation process with IPs and
                         other vulnerable groups will be carried out during the implementation stage as well.
                         Project will also establish a grievance redress mechanism that will allow project affected persons
                         (PAPs) to appeal any disagreeable decisions, practices and activities arising compensation for
                         assets, and technical and general project-related disputes. As specified in the ESMF and RAP,
                         PAPs will be made fully aware of their rights and the procedures for doing so verbally and in
                         writing during compensation, survey, and time of compensation. The PAPs will have access to
                         both locally constructed grievances redress committees specified under ESMF and RAP i.e. Local
                         Consultative Forum (LCF) and formal courts of appeal. In this project eight LCF will be formed in
                         road covering affected VDCs to handle initial grievances of the project-affected people. The PAPs
                         will have unhindered access to the grievance redress office to forward and file their complaints.
                         The provision of Local Community Liaison Assistant (LCLA) in the project implementation is
                         good practices in this regard. LCLA can be mobilized in order to help PAPs to file the complaints
                         to the concerned agency.

                         Under the later system, every PAP can appeal to the court if they feel that their grievances have
                         not been addressed appropriately. They may appeal to appellate court within 35 days of the public
                         notice given to them. PAPs will be exempted from all administrative fees incurred, pursuant to the
                         grievance redress procedures except for cases filed in court. Grievance recording register will also
                         be placed at PIC office and Consultant's RE office. Project affected people as well as local people
                         can lodge their complaints and feedback at these offices related to assets acquisition and
                         construction related activities.

                         Social sustainability will be assured by building stakeholder ownership through enhanced
                         participation of project affected persons (PAPs) and road users in project design, implementation,
                         monitoring and evaluation. The Suggestion and Complaint Mechanism will allow stakeholders to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         address grievances, a key contributor to project sustainability.

                         Assessment of Borrower Capacity to plan and implement the Environment and Social Safeguard
                         Measures: The most significant issues with regard to safeguards are associated with Component 3
                         of the proposed project, namely expansion and upgrade of the Narayanghat-Mugling road section.
                         The Department of Roads (DoR), which will be the implementing agency for this component, is
                         familiar with the Bank's safeguard requirements, through its involvement in two other Bank
                         funded projects, namely Road Sector Development Project and Rural Access Improvement and
                         Decentralization Project. On the social and environmental management aspects, the department
                         has gained basic familiarity and experiences with regard to the Bank's safeguard requirements
                         through the said on-going projects.

                         The staff in Department of Roads is generally aware of environmental issues and management
                         requirements. Staff in the Geo Environment and Social Unit (GESU) of the DoR has basic
                         knowledg e and experience in environmental and social fields gained through other projects
                         financed by the Bank and other donors. GESU’s knowledge regarding environmental and social
                         aspects has been enhanced by their role in preparing and implementing ESMFs, EMPs, RAPs and
                         VCDPs. There are some examples of effective implementation of RAP in Bank funded Road
                         Sector Development Project. Similarly there are examples of good environmental practices such as
                         bio-engineering and various guidance documents. However, the extent of their use is limited.

                                                                   Page 14 of 18
                          Works of the GESU in the past have been hampered by frequent transfer of staff, lack of financial
                          and logistical resources, and deficiency in coordination with other units/agencies. However, given
                          the overall past experiences in preparing and implementing externally-funded projects, GESU has
Public Disclosure Copy




                          the potential to strengthen its knowledge base and capacity and put them together into practice in
                          the proposed project.

                           Specific capacity strengthening support is necessary, as assessed during the Environmental and
                           Social Assessment studies, particularly on issues pertaining to biodiversity management. In this
                           regard, early in project implementation, suitable orientation and training programs will be
                           conducted for GESU and DoR staff. GESU in its business plan has indicated hiring of additional
                           social and environmental staff. The Project will also hire Social Mobilizers and there will be full
                           time environment and social staff working with Project Supervision Consultants.
                           For the other components/activities, MoCS/NITDB will be responsible for project co-ordination,
                           including the required safeguards management. MoCS/NITDB does not have any experience of
                           managing environmental and social safeguard issues. External experts from the market are being
                           hired to assist the safeguards management and implementation of the Environmental and Social
                           Management Framework (ESMF) in particular. The PCO will also get capacity support for
                           enhancing environmental and social management skills.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Stakeholders: The primary stakeholders related to this project include: (i) the road-side shop
                           owners/vendors, road users and community (including Forest User Groups) residing along the N-
                           M sub-project/road and; (ii) traders, suppliers, truck owners and other workers at the trade
                           facilities. The secondary stakeholders include officials from Ministry of Commerce, Customs
                           Department, Land Administration, National Parks, Forests, District Administration, Wildlife
                           Experts, Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) and other Community Based Organizations
                           (CBOs).
                           Consultations: The project preparation has benefitted from inputs derived from a wide spectrum of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           stakeholder consultations and opinions. All safeguard documents, including the IEE, EA, RAP and
                           VCDP, were prepared based on a consultation process that sought feedback from key stakeholders.
                           The public consultation carried out during the preparation of the said environment and social
                           safeguard instruments includes personal interviews, village meetings, focus group discussions,
                           consultations with experts and NGOs.

                          The consultations were designed such that: (i) links between communities and their natural
                          resource base adjacent to project locations were explored; (ii) public awareness and information
                          sharing on the project process was promoted and; (iii) views/opinions of the communities on local
                          issues were solicited. The objective of the local level consultations was to inform the community
                          about the proposed project and its activities, expected benefits from the project, likely adverse
                          impacts and possible mitigation/management measures, including options for relocation, new
                          livelihood opportunities and dealing with loss of common property resources.

                          The environment and social assessment process included a total of eleven (11) community
                          consultations were held in two phases (March and December 2012). Additionally, consultations
                          were carried out between May and December 2012 with Govt. Officials/ Departments and
                          agencies working at the national level such as WWF-Nepal and NTNC. These consultations
                          helped in incorporating community and expert opinions in the project design process.
                          The ESMF prepared for the project as a whole and the RAP and VCDP prepared for the


                                                                    Page 15 of 18
                           Narayanghat-Mugling sub-project provide guidelines and procedures for further consultations
                           during project implementation, in particular in defining and designing the specific works/activities.
                           Dialogue and disclosure actions during the assessment and implementation of the project are
Public Disclosure Copy




                           designed to ensure that those stakeholders, irrespective of whether they benefit from or are
                           adversely affected by the project interventions, are well informed and can participate in the
                           decision-making process.

                           Disclosure: All safeguard documents, including the draft Environment and Social Management
                           Framework (ESMF) for the over-all project and the draft environment and social reports (EA,
                           EMP, RAP and VCDP) for the Narayanghat-Mugling sub-project proposed to be taken-up in the
                           first year have been disclosed in the Bank’s InfoShop and GoN’s website, followed by discussions
                           with the affected community (including any individual adversely impacted by the intervention).
                           The draft safeguard documents were disclosed in-country and submitted to Bank's InfoShop on
                           02/27/2013. Final versions of these documents will also be disclosed after incorporating any
                           further feasible and relevant comments/suggestions that may be received from the communities or
                           other interested stakeholders.

                           The copies of the ESMF, EA, EMP, RAP and VCDP documents and the executive summaries of
                           the said documents in vernacular language (Nepali) are being placed at the offices of
                           implementing agencies, enabling easy access of any community or individual/s to the project/sub-
                           project information. The executive summaries, which are currently being translated in local
                           language, will be placed in the office of local self-government body (VDCs) and contractors’
                           office/s, when the agencies come on-board. The list of affected persons will be pasted at
                           conspicuous/prominent place/s in the affected VDCs. With the consultations being a continuous
                           process, updating of environment and social safeguard instruments, if any, during project
                           implementation stage will also follow similar disclosure requirements.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         25-Feb-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      27-Feb-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive         28-Mar-2013
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Nepal                                                               27-Feb-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         25-Feb-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      27-Feb-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Nepal                                                               27-Feb-2013
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         25-Feb-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      27-Feb-2013


                                                                     Page 16 of 18
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Nepal                                                            27-Feb-2013
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?




                                                                    Page 17 of 18
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Diep Nguyen-Van Houtte
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name:                                              Date:
                            Coordinator:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Benedictus Eijbergen (SM)                    Date: 09-Apr-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 18 of 18
