                                                                     INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                              CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSC549
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Mar-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                         Ghana                                 Project ID:                      P129381
                              Project Name:                    Ghana Education For All GPEF (P129381)
                              Task Team Leader:                Deborah Newitter Mikesell
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 10-May-2012                                  Estimated Board Date:            02-Aug-2012
                              Managing Unit:                   AFTED                                 Lending Instrument:              Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                          Primary education (80%), General education sector (20%)
                              Theme:                           Education for all (100%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                      Amount
                                   Borrower                                                                                                                  0.00
                                   Education for All - Fast Track Initiative                                                                                75.50
                                   Total                                                                                                                    75.50
                              Environmental Category:          B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              B. Project Objectives

                              The PDO of the Global Partnership for Education is to improve the quality of basic education, particularly in deprived districts. Within the overall
                              program, the GPEF Grant’s objective will be to strengthen capacities to improve the learning environment through district and school grants and
                              through in-service teacher training. The grant will be implemented over 3 years. The grant builds on previous experience decentralizing funding to
                              the district and school levels and provides a next generation of support with enhancements and improvements to how education services are
                              delivered as well as a means for coordinating interventions among government and development partners.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Furthermore, the program aims to be mainstreamed as on-budget financing to ensure sustainability of the resource flows and mechanism. The
                              design of the GPE program incorporates significant engagement and harmonized funding from the lead education development partners in Ghana.
                              The documentation will specify areas where various development partners are focusing financing and/or technical assistance areas where pooling
                              is likely and where leveraging is possible. This alignment is critical to the aid effectiveness principles of the Accra and Paris harmonization
                              agreements and to ensuring that, where possible, common systems, reporting, and FM arrangements are used.

                              In terms of improvements in quality, the ultimate objective of the program is improvements in students’ learning achievements and outcome.
                              However, it needs to be noted that a three year time horizon might not be sufficient to significantly impact student performance in standardized
                              tests. In light of this and in order to truly capture the pathways of change, PDO indicators will include measurable outcomes that are predictive or
                              proxies of education quality. Student learning outcomes will, nevertheless, be monitored throughout the program.

                              C. Project Description

                              The proposed program is is based on the Education Strategic Plan 2010-2020 (ESP) and informed by the 2011 Ghana Education Report
                              Improving Equity, Efficiency and Accountability of Education Service Delivery, the Joint Review of Public Expenditure and Financial Management
                              2011, the National Education Sector Annual Review (June 2011) and the lessons learned from the Education Sector Development Project (IDA
                              Cr.) which closed October 31, 2011, Strategic Objective Assistance to Ghana (SOAG, USAID Ghana), Support to Education Strategic Plan (DFID),
                              Country Programme Action Plan (CPAP, UNICEF Ghana), Support to Education Implementation (JICA) and the Development of Senior Secondary
                              Education Programme (AfDB).

                              The notional allocation for the GPEF grant is US$75.5million. The Bank is the supervising entity and as such Bank procedures apply to
                              preparation and implementation of the project.

                              The GPEF grant is being developed as part of a larger program of donor support to the Ghana education sector. The program supports areas that
                              complement the government’s expenditures as well as other sources of financing to the sector. Despite the large education budget, investments
                              are inadequate to sustain a dynamic and equitable quality education system. Salary expenditures crowd out investment in learning materials,
                              infrastructure and pedagogic support. The models for increasing investments through district planning and expenditures were implemented under
                              the previous Bank supported program and other donor sponsored district interventions (e.g., PPS, DFID budget support to districts). Therefore,
                              the proposed GPEF grant will focus on strengthening these mechanisms in line with the decentralization mandate, for improving the quality of
                              basic education in deprived districts. Detailed project components will be finalized during the preparation phase, based on additional project
                              preparation analysis, other donor activities and the results from the recently negotiated 2012 budget. However, the GPEF program components
                         have so far been developed around the following areas:

                         Component 1: Grants to Deprived Districts to support key education objectives.

                         The objective of the district grant is to provide supplemental non-salary resources to those districts identified as most deprived in the country
                         (measured through key social and economic indicators and poverty level) using transparent and agreed criteria. This categorization will be aligned
                         with the development of the common targeting mechanism for other services and poverty targeting interventions. The grant would focus on
Public Disclosure Copy




                         earmarked allocation of resources to districts based on their annual programs of work and government strategic priorities identified under the ESP
                         and AESOP. A comprehensive set of guidelines would be developed to guide the district planning process (e.g., operational manual). These
                         guidelines will assist districts to select the most needy schools and apply additional resources to solving their problems.

                         Targeted support would focus on four key areas corresponding to the policy areas identified in the ESP and AESOP: equitable access and
                         participation in quality education; bridging the gender gap; improving quality of teaching and learning; and improving management of education
                         service delivery. These would be measured by age appropriate admission (particularly for girls), early grade reading and numeracy capacity,
                         higher survival rate to fourth grade and increasing availability of trained teachers.

                         The district grant mechanism is already being implemented by the government through its ADEOP, Pilot Programmatic Scheme (PPS) and other
                         donor funded initiatives. Building on this experience, enhancements to strengthen the district grant could include: (a) capacity building for DEDs,
                         DAs, SMCs, head teachers, circuit supervisors, GEOs, etc.; (b) more facilitation and knowledge sharing by central and regional government for
                         targeted policy implementation and results focus; (c) routine funding of more robust and relevant monitoring and evaluation including better
                         monitoring of expenditures; and (d) continuous sensitization activities.

                         Interventions proposed will be based on the district work program and would correspond to the ESP focus areas. These activities could include but
                         are not limited to the proposed measures listed below.

                         Improved access and participation (particularly for girls) in quality education

                         District-level initiatives will focus on both supply and demand–based initiativesto support enrolment in primary education at appropriate age,
                         incentives for students to stay in school and attend classes regularly and move on to upper levels of education successfully. Surveys in the
                         Northern regions show that all of the children dropping out of school are overage. Nearly half of them drop out in the first three grades and another
                         third in grades 4 to 6. The reasons include poverty, child labor, poor performance; lack of parental interest, pregnancy, teacher attitudes (such as
                         absenteeism), low education quality, etc. Thus, reducing the indirect costs of schooling and increasing the pro-poor targeting of subsidies and
                         programs could help to continue deterring some children from entry into child labor.

                         This risk of overage enrollment and early drop out is higher for girls than for boys. There are both supply and demand factors, some of which
                         district education directorates can effectively address. Among the demand side options, there are outreach campaigns to make sure that children
                         enrol at appropriate age and that they regularly attend. Other demand measures may include school feeding and supplementary take home
                         rations, transportation or uniforms. On the supply side, remedial support to children with learning constraints, adequate learning materials (and in
                         mother tongue), appropriate school facilities also make a difference. In addition, teachers need sensitization and training to deal with gender-
                         specific issues. The program will complement the planned scale up support to the implementation of complementary education, which is based on
                         the School for Life initiative and consists of accelerated learning for young people to complete primary education (supported by UNICEF and DFID)
                         and support to primary education (through school meals) and girls’ education through take home rations and scholarship scheme by WFP. District
Public Disclosure Copy




                         grants could support the following types of measures:

                         •         Outreach/sensitization campaigns on importance of education
                         •         uniforms for JHS1 girls in schools in the most deprived areas
                         •         Safe transportation of girls to school (means depend on the location)
                         •         Scholarships (Bursaries)
                         •         Take Home Rations
                         •         Rehabilitation of schools
                         •         Recruiting an adequate supply of teachers (UTDBE, tutors, volunteers)
                         •         Training for special needs screening
                         •         Girl friendly school environment (e.g., separate sanitary facilities for girls and boys with access to water, safety and security)
                         •         Tutoring, mentoring and gender focused remedial support
                         •         Capacity building for the GEU at head quarters and decentralized levels
                         •         Support Girls Education Officers at the district to monitor interventions

                         Improving Quality of Teaching and Learning and management of education service delivery

                         District level initiatives will focus on measures to improve the qualification of teachers, particularly through support for teachers on the UTDBE, as
                         well as their attendance and performance, the quality of inputs, and better materials and pedagogical approaches to improve literacy and
                         numeracy from early grades. Effective reading has proven to be a critical skill for children especially those coming from poor families and attending
                         school in poor areas. It has also shown to be a strong predictor of learning outcomes including performance in assessments in other subjects as
                         well as successful completion of primary and basic education. Certain supply factors, including the availability of trained teachers, better school
                         facilities, longer school days and time on task, better supervision and strong community support are all playing important roles in improving
                         learning outcomes. Also, improvements in early grades appear to have strong impact on performance in later grades, higher percentage of
                         completion and in transition to higher levels of education, particularly for girls.

                         •         Establishing early grade assessments in both reading and in numeracy and ensure that teachers understa nd how to use the information
                         to improve their own teaching.
                         •         Support to School Education Assessments
                         •         Provide evidence and performance based teacher and school incentives
                         •         Intensify Inset on Pedagogy in literacy and numeracy for teachers in deprived areas
                         •         Set reading standards to inform assessments (NIB) and train teachers based on standards (e.g., grade 1 and 2 teachers for reading)
                         •          Organize reading clinics for circuits in deprived areas annually
                         •         INSET for gender awareness
                         •         Establishment of quality kindergarten education through package of teacher training, designated child-friendly environment and
                         furnishings and appropriate learning materials (e.g., SABRE model)
                         •         Provision of teaching and learning materials to improve the quality and relevance of basic and secondary schools.
                         •         Remedial classes, study sessions for catch up
                         •         Teacher aides
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •         Teacher accommodations on school grounds
                         •         Support SPAM and circuit supervisors using information from School Report Card
                         •         Teacher training, INSET, continuous professional development training.

                         Component 2: School Grants

                         The elimination of school fees in 1992 and additional reforms in 1996 contributed to the dramatic basic education enrolment increase of 50% over
                         the last decade. However, during this period, in the context of flagging public expenditures on education beyond salaries, many schools were
                         forced to impose indirect fees to cover a range of schooling expenditures including lunch, uniforms, textbooks, examination fees and
                         transportation.

                         In response, the government introduced a capitation grant for public primary and junior high schools in 40 deprived districts in 2004 and in 2005
                         extended this grant to the whole country. The grants amounts to GH¢4.50 (US$2.25) per student per academic year with a view to encourage
                         enrollment and empower local schools management. The amount a school receives is based on projected enrollments at the start of the academic
                         year. This estimate is the basis for the transfer of 50 percent of the funds, at the start of the first term. Subsequent transfers are dependent on the
                         submission of data on actual enrolments. Funds for the second and third terms are based on that confirmation and are supposed to be paid at the
                         start of term.

                         Although these funds have been helpful in many schools as a much needed source of financing, some schools have not received the full amount
                         of the grant and the amount received remains too small to support schools’ basic operational needs, particularly in small rural schools in deprived
                         districts. Many of the indirect fees (books, uniforms, PTA) add up to a much larger amount than the capitation grant. These factors as well as
                         disparities in other inputs negatively affect school performance in terms of keeping teachers and children in school, providing adequate instruction,
                         educational support and leading to a better school climate that in turn helps learning outcomes. Head-teachers, parents and SMC’s are keen on
                         using the capitation grant to address some of these issues but the decisions about the use of the grant are difficult given the scope of the problem
                         and the limited size of the grant.

                         Therefore, the objective of this component is to provide a supplement to the existing capitation grant initially to schools in the identified deprived
                         districts with an explicit focus on improving access to and quality of education services as priority needs are defined at the school level. The
                         existing operational guidelines for capitation grants would be applied with the expectation that the incremental funding would be used in line with
                         the ongoing capitation grant areas. This component would aim to further empower and support nascent SMCs to better plan for and improve
                         teaching, learning and participation in their schools. Given the lack of rigorous evaluation of the ongoing capitation grant, this component would
                         finance a proper evaluation/assessment to better understand the impact of the grant, issues or challenges, and sustainability of financing basic
                         school expenditures through capitation/school grants. One possibility is to conduct an impact evaluation looking at different sized grants and how
                         they influence better educational outcomes. In addition, grants may be graded so that schools with severe access and teacher supply problems
                         get greater per-capita resources than schools in better served areas.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The grant could augment schools’ operating costs and non-salary expenditures regardless of population size to ensure that key policies can be
                         implemented (teacher training/mentoring, learning materials, girl-friendly interventions, etc.). Therefore, the additional “base? grants would ensure
                         that at least minimal levels of discretionary resources are available to schools selected by the districts to all public basic education schools in
                         deprived districts, but in exchange for improved standards of reporting and accountability. Grants may be conditioned on implementation
                         performance, particularly in areas such as monitoring of teacher attendance/time on task.

                         The original capitation grants were expected to finance school development activities (ranging from provision of latrines to remedial classes in core
                         subjects) designed and prepared jointly by parents, teachers and school principals. The base grant would extend such activities and could include:
                         (a) instructional materials and learning inputs; (b) mentoring opportunities; (c) training related to identified local skills needs, especially in math and
                         science, (d) participation in teacher development and support programs, including UTDBE or head teacher training; (e) mechanisms for improving
                         the enrollment of girls in JHS and reducing failure and drop-out rates; (f) equipment or tools (ICT) to improve teaching and learning; and (g) minor
                         works. To access the grants, a pre-requisite is the training and capacity building of SMCs which would be funded by district grants, to prepare
                         school development plans to improve teaching, learning and participation of their schools in this program.

                         The SMCs will also be trained on record keeping and will be required to report school grant receipt and expenditure to parents and communities by
                         posting this information on school bulletin boards, in school report cards and through other dissemination strategies depending on the local
                         context. This is expected to improve the effectiveness of school grant use and help create a culture of transparency, accountability, and greater
                         parental and community participation in school management.

                         School grants may be used by the schools to support training for untrained teachers such as study circles, travel to training courses, etc.. By tying
                         teacher training opportunities to school level funding in deprived districts, incentives will be created for untrained teachers to remain with the
                         schools for the duration of the training period. This is expected to help reduce the problem of high teacher turnover in the remote and under-
                         resourced schools within deprived districts.

                         Component 3: Teacher Development and upgrading

                         While the ESP envisages that not more than 5% of teachers should be unqualified, the proportion of trained teachers in primary schools has
                         deteriorated since 2003/04, when 65% of male teachers and 91% of female teachers were trained, to 48% and 77% respectively in 2009/10.
                         Deprived districts have a proportion of untrained teachers significantly higher than the national average. Para 24 describes the UTDBE program
                         introduced by Government to address this. However, the number of teachers participating in the UTDBE program will have to be increased if the
                         target of 95% trained teachers is to be achieved by 2015 or soon thereafter.
                           Therefore, one of the objectives of this component is to support the upgrading through UTDBE of at least 8,000 untrained teachers, in deprived
                           districts. This is also a trigger for budget support funding under the Multi-Donor Budget Support Program in Ghana. The GPEF program could
                           also support capacity building to selected institutions delivering the courses. Other activities include the finalization and implementation of the
                           Teacher Professional Development Policy; improved system for continuous professional teacher development and ongoing performance
                           evaluation and accountability; technical assistance to the newly created National Teacher Council; guidelines on enhanced supervision,
                           monitoring and mentoring support for teachers with funding provided through district grants; and extension of activity-based learning programs to
Public Disclosure Copy




                           enhance skills in reading, arithmetic and the other skills that are taught in the kindergarten and lower primary curriculum. This component would
                           also focus on head teacher training and circuit supervisor support for improved supervision and monitoring.

                           It is proposed that this component will include an impact evaluation of some innovative models of teacher training to rigorously measure the impact
                           of different pedagogical approaches on student learning outcomes in the Ghanaian context.


                           Component 4: Improve Capacity for School Supervision and Accountability

                           This component will aim to strengthen government systems for the supervision of education services in order to improve school monitoring,
                           accountability and transparency for ultimately improved learning outcomes. Possible areas for support could include: (i) financing for quarterly
                           supervision for every school; (ii) review of circuit supervisors (CS) reporting template and provision of training for the effective use and evaluation;
                           (iii) piloting of award schemes as an incentive for head teachers and circuit supervisors in schools in deprived districts (e.g., based on teacher
                           attendance); (iv) awareness and sensitization campaigns to support monitoring and supervision of schools at community level (e.g., SMCs); (v)
                           capacity building for Heads of Basic Schools and School Management Committees in deprived areas; (vi) support incorporation of School Report
                           Cards, School-based Assessments and EMIS reporting for school improvement planning; and (vi) support for the National Inspectorate Board to
                           conduct 4000 school visits annually and provide recommendations to improve learning outcomes.

                           This component would aim to improve the quality of decision making and strengthening of accountability relationships at the school level. In the
                           past few years, the GOG in collaboration with USAID have launched a large scale program of school report cards. This component could support
                           the school report card program, in collaboration with USAID, with a particular emphasis on monitoring their effective dissemination and use (both
                           as an input for decision making and forward planning, but also as an instrument for engendering accountability and parental awareness).

                           Program Management and Institutional Arrangements

                           The program will be implemented by the Ministry of Education at the central, regional, district and school level in close collaboration with all
                           relevant education agencies (e.g., GES, NIB) and district authorities. The program will be supported by the development partners operating in the
                           education sector, including DFID, UNICEF, JICA, USAID and WFP. The program coordination will be led by the GES with support for monitoring
                           from the PBME to ensure continued streamlined coordination and management of all donor-financed activities in Ghana. Some capacity building
                           support will be required to ensure that both central management and district management are strengthened appropriately. The capacity building
                           support builds on the activities already ongoing under several donor-sponsored programs (e.g., JICA, USAID, DFID, UNICEF). Additional
                           technical support for the implementation of the program may include some specialized consultants such as teacher policy, financial management,
                           etc., that could be financed under the GPEF grant. However, significant additional technical support is likely to be provided directly through
                           established TA programs supported by USAID, DFID and JICA. The GPEF grant would finance annual financial audits, qualitative audits, and
                           agreed impact evaluations. The grant could also be used to hire an Independent Monitoring Firm to undertake M&E activities and/or carry out the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           data collection and analysis necessary to measure implementation performance and impact of grant activities over the three-year period.

                            D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                           The project will be implemented in deprived districts identified by Ministry of Education using specific education and poverty data. The main
                           assumption for these districts is that many if not most, would be located in the Northern regions. Most of the planned activities would be located at
                           the district and school level.

                            E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

                           The Government of Ghana through the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has significant experience and capacity in implementing safeguard
                           policies. For this trust fund, Bank guidelines will be followed, and therefore, the project appraisal will review the capacity of the implementing
                           agencies including the Ministry of Education to ensure compliance with safeguard policies and appropriate safeguards reports and instruments.
                           After the assessment and where required, capacity support will be given to implementing agencies.

                            F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

                           Moses Yao Duphey (AFTEN)
                           Beatrix Allah-Mensah (AFTCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

                            Safeguard Policies                                Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01               Yes               Grants to districts and schools might involve minor rehabilitation/works,
                                                                                               although use of grants is not predetermined. An Environmental and Social
                                                                                               Management Framework (ESMF) which was revised and re-disclosed in January
                                                                                               2011 in connection with an IDA operation in the education sector and covers all
                                                                                               of the expected activities under this project already sets forth the basic principles
                                                                                               and operational guidelines to be followed. This ESMF will be updated to address
                                                                                               any remaining environmental and social impacts in the new project. The
                                                                                                                        updated ESMF will be disclosed in-country and at the infoshop prior to project
                                                                                                                        appraisal.
                                Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                        No

                                Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                 No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                Pest Management OP 4.09                                            No

                                Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                             No

                                Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                      No

                                Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                                No                     The involuntary resettlement policy is not triggered. The project does not
                                                                                                                        involve activities that will require land take, impacts on livelihoods or restriction
                                                                                                                        of access and disturbances that may lead to resettlement or relocation. Minor
                                                                                                                        works on existing schoolstructures may be required but these are very much
                                                                                                                        contained within the school compounds and are not likely to lead to
                                                                                                                        displacement or any form of resettlement and disturbances. The project does not
                                                                                                                        envisage a change in this level of minor works. However, in case of any changes
                                                                                                                        beyond these minor works, (since the use of the grant is not predetermined)
                                                                                                                        which may entail involuntary resettlement, the Bank will be informed and proper
                                                                                                                        assessment will be done and the policy will be triggered and the appropriate
                                                                                                                        instruments will be prepared and disclosed.
                                Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                          No

                                Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                          No
                                7.50
                                Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                              No



                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 26-Mar-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
                                  should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                    The recently re-disclosed ESMF will be updated to cover this project’s anticipated activities. The ESMF will be re-disclosed by the Ministry of
                                    Education by appraisal.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         IV. APPROVALS
                                Task Team Leader:                                Name: Deborah Newitter Mikesell
                                Approved By:
                                Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                 Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                     Date: 27-Mar-2012
                                Sector Manager:                                  Name: Nathalie Lahire (SM)                                                                            Date: 16-Mar-2012




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
