                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC3392

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-May-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 22-May-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Haiti                            Project ID:      P144614
                            Project Name:       Heritage and Sustainable Tourism in the North Region of Haiti (P144614)
                            Task Team           Sylvie Debomy
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           00-undefined-0000                Estimated        26-Sep-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      LCSDU                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          General public administration sector (50%), Other domestic and international
                                                trade (35%), General water, sanitation and flood protec tion sector (15%)
                            Theme(s):           Cultural Heritage (60%), Urban services and housing for the poor (15%), Other
                                                urban development (10%), Micro, Small and Medium Enter prise support
                                                (10%), Other public sector governance (5%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     45.00                      Total Bank Financing:         45.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                                 Financing Gap:                  0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                             0.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                     45.00
                              Total                                                                         45.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives


                           C. Project Description
                           The Project’s activities in this region will focus on investing in conserving and managing existing
                         cultural and natural sites that can drive and service high potential tourist demand. The Project will
                         support restoration of the historic buildings that constitute the National Historic Park (PNH)
                         (Buildings include: Citadelle Lafferiere, Palais Sans Souci and its Chapel, Site Ramiers ) and the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         gardens on the PNH , a World Heritage Site. These restoration works will enhance and diversify the
                         attractiveness of the destination, while reducing pressure on fragile assets such as the Citadelle, one
                         of the most remarkable historic buildings, with a truly sustainable approach to tourism development.
                         It will also support a program of local investments in the 5 communes surrounding the PNH (called
                         the Micro region) and in Cap Haitien poor neighborhoods as well as local initiatives to promote
                         tourism attraction and services. In parallel, the enabling business environment for the private sector
                         involvement in tourism will be improved and targeted sector investment opportunities will be
                         promoted and facilitated through other operations supported by the World Bank and the American
                         Development Bank.

                         The Project will take a phased and programmatic approach, focusing first on activities with the
                         prospect of a quick impact to protect and restore assets while the groundwork for interventions that
                         need further preparation is laid. The first phase of implementation will last 24 months after which a
                         midterm review will define the expansion of activities and the introduction of new activities in the
                         second half of the project.

                         Component 1 – Developing touristic sites and circuits through selected investments in the National
                         Historic Park (PNH) and Cap Haitien.

                         This component will provide support to the Government to restore, conserve and manage existing
                         cultural and natural sites that can drive and service potential tourist demand. The Project is largely
                         focused on supporting the restorations of historic buildings and other landmarks, which will enhance
                         and diversify the attractiveness of the destination while reducing tourist pressure on fragile assets
                         such as the Citadelle, within a sustainable approach to tourism development.

                         A Business/ Management Plan will be developed for the PNH as well as a baseline environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and social study of the Park. It is important to note that this plan is not a conservation or biodiversity
                         plan but focuses more on the business aspects of the creating greater tourism, while ensuring that this
                         development is green. Therefore, the Business/Management Planning process will finance and use a
                         baseline environmental and social study of the PNH as a filter to determine how best to develop the
                         PNH paying attention to both environmental and social considerations. A draft business/
                         management plan has already been completed by another agency, but the Project will build on this
                         and fund (i) a more detailed plan and (ii) implementation of some of the aspects of this plan. Other
                         parts of the plan will be funded by Government, and other donors. For example, the Government
                         will constitute a Park Management Authority who, among other functions, will work to ensure that
                         the World Heritage Site remains intact. However, the project will fund its establishment-- some
                         capacity building, staff, office supplies, etc on this Management Authority. The baseline study will
                         be completed prior to the Business/Management Planning. Please refer to the Project's appraisal
                         PAD for more details on this aspect. The TOR for the baseline study will be developed prior to
                         appraisal and will focus on plant and animal species and key natural habitats in and around the PNH,
                         where development should not occur or must be limited. The consultant will develop maps of the
                         area to ensure their use during park planning.

                         Investments supported by this component will focus on the National Historic Park (PNH), Milot
                         entrance as well as the City of Cap Haïtien. Other locations in the North may be added during the
                         Project’s second phase. The Project will involve local communities of these areas in the design and
                         implementation of activities related to tourism in order to ensure that the local population benefits
                         from opportunities created by the increased economic activity.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         In the National Historic Park and Entrance of Milot (a small community just bordering the Park),
                         beginning in Phase I, the Project will support emergency works to deal with the imminent risks to the
                         integrity of the Citadelle and the Palace of Sans Souci as determined by UNESCO in April 2012.
                         These emergency works include, inter alia, strengthening the foundation and wall and protecting the
                         buildings against water infiltration. In parallel hereto, ongoing efforts to establish a financially
                         sustainable Park Authority and to develop a business/ management plan will be financed under the
                         project. The Park Authority is to be established according to Haitian law. Key provisions for the legal
                         instrument have already been drafted. A Park business/management plan will be completed in
                         coordination with a broad range of stakeholders. The business/management plan will include an
                         assessment of the carrying capacity of the NHP. Once the sites in the Park are improved and
                         operating on a sustainable manner, the Project will help identify an incipient network of viable
                         tourism destinations which could be supported in phase 2 of the Project.The Project will fund the
                         costs of the plan of the Park Authority structure on a decreasing basis. Once the Park Authority is
                         established, additional investments will be made for conservation works, restoration of gardens,
                         general beautification, presentation to the public, improved sanitation, and improved visitor
                         experience. This will result in a Park which can support more tourists and provides attractions of
                         various types to a broader range of tourists and expanding access to a larger portion of the Park (site
                         Ramiers for example). The PAD offers more details on the precise details of the project as well as its
                         phasing.

                         The Project objective in Cap Haïtien is to help conserve and upgrade the city’s picturesque historic
                         core beyond the PNH. For this it will use a blend of financing and technical assistance instruments to
                         promote a circuit-oriented approach, focusing on some squares and main sites. Activities will focus
                         on promising compact areas including landmark buildings located in the historic center, inter alia: (i)
                         historic buildings such as the Maison Anthenor Firmin in the vicinity of the central square ; (ii)
                         former prison, which could house a number of cultural, memorial and touristic related activities; (iii)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the waterfront. Improvements will unveil unique assets that are currently closed, underutilized, or
                         close to collapse. Conservation and rehabilitation works will also focus on the streets connecting
                         these assets, enhancing the livability of a city core. The project will support the preparation of
                         updated building regulation for the city center.

                         Component 2. Support to inclusive local investments in the micro-region and Cap Haitian

                         To insure inclusive growth, the Project will also support investments in the adjacent communes of
                         the PNH and in particular in Milot and Dondon (core of the area (called micro-region) which
                         includes the 5 communes around the PNH) to develop their infrastructures and facilities as needed
                         for tourism development and to promote the tourist value chain (e.g. artisan market, access, water
                         and sanitation and lighting and support to local services, such as handicrafts, food products,
                         supplying hospitality and guiding services in the micro-region). These two towns are gateways to the
                         Park, and tourists will go through them to access the sites that the Project will conserve and upgrade.
                         The project will also includes local investments in neighborhoods outside the city core in Cap
                         Haitien. The implementation of these investments will be done following a participatory
                         programmatic approach developed under two previous projects: the Territorial Development project
                         and the Urban CDD project. Pre-identified potential eligible investments include: a small bridge in
                         Dondon, street lighting, paving of streets, sidewalks, relocation of the traditional brick furnace to the
                         artisan zone in Milot, school and health services, cleaning of the rivers, relocation of the small
                         market (2ne phase), public square, facades embellishment, trees planting, water network extension,
                         sanitation and drainage, embellishment of the artisan market close to the palace, sanitation of cultural
                         sites and improvement of access, and studies for the solid waste management plan in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         communities.

                         Component 3 – Support to development of touristic activities and services

                         The objective of the Component is to provide support to enhance attractiveness and management of
                         the North as a touristic destination. It will support:
                         (1)      Technical assistance to the newly created Destination Management Organization to serve the
                         tourism value chain and to support local cultural and tourism initiatives, enhancing attractiveness and
                         management of touristic destinations, outreach and promotion activities. This will include the
                         financing of specialized consultants e.g. in tourism promotion and management, finance specialist,
                         training specialist.
                         (2)      Matching grants to local organizations, individuals and small entrepreneurs to support (a)
                         activities requiring strict adherence to conservation and city & regional development standards, e.g.,
                         renovation of ‘historically-classified’ houses in historic perimeters, for the purpose of creating “bed
                         and breakfast?, small restaurant or shop capacities.; and (b) income generating activities relating to
                         the tourism value chain in the larger sense, e.g., support to the organization of cultural events (Fetes
                         Champêtres, fêtes de la mer, historic shows) and renovation of non-historic houses dedicated to
                         developing B&Bs, restaurants, curio shops, conditioning of local products etc.
                         (3)      Capacity building and training for tourism services to complement the capacity building
                         program financed by AIDB in the region
                         (4)      Tourism survey and studies.

                         Component 4 – Risk and emergency response contingency reserve

                         This component will support public and private entities involved in the Project if a natural hazard.
                         Given that this Project area is exposed to several hazards, particularly geotechnical (earthquakes,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         tsunamis, soil liquefaction, landslides), hydro-meteorological (wind/hurricanes, cyclone, tsunami),
                         and climate-change effects (sea level rise, coastal erosion), the government may request a re-
                         allocation of Project funds to support response efforts, including reconstruction of public and private
                         buildings. This component will support the carrying out of emergency recovery and rehabilitation
                         sub-projects or the implementation of a subsidy scheme for eligible beneficiaries affected by the
                         emergency. Additional funds may also be made available through this window for the same purpose.

                         If this component is triggered, all expenditures and safeguards will be in accordance with BP/
                         OP10.00 and will be appraised, reviewed, and found to be acceptable to the Bank before any
                         disbursement is made. If not disbursed 24 months before the closing date, the currently allocated
                         amount of US$1 million can be made available to finance activities under the other Project
                         components.

                         Component 5 – Project implementation, evaluation and monitoring

                         The Project will be implemented by the (Unite Technique d’Execution) at the Ministry o f Economy
                         and Finance (MEF). This component will finance goods, operating costs, and services needed to
                         ensure effective Project implementation, supervision, and financial management, as well as needed
                         expenses to ensure proper monitoring and supervision. This component will strengthen management
                         capacity in the areas of management, procuremen t, and financial management. In addition, the
                         Project will support some of the institutions and agencies involved in the different Project activities,
                         such as ISPAN.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Project will involve local partners including the Ministry of Tourism, the Ministry of Culture,
                         the Haitian Cultural Heritage Institute (ISPAN), the local governments of Cap Haïtien, Milot,
                         Dondon, Chambers of Commerce, the private sector (e.g., heritage buildings owners, local hotels,
                         restaurants and tour operators, and MSMEs), local Destination Management Organizations and local
                         communities and associations. IADB has welcomed the Bank’s support for these initiatives in the
                         North, as the investments under this Project will complement and create a critical mass with those
                         they are planning to finance in tourist reception facilities and roads to the natural and cultural
                         heritage assets, and the establishment of a Northern Region Tourism Management Organization.
                         Comprehensive consultations during Project design have been carried out with UNESCO and
                         ICOMOS, which have expressed their interest in following a joint approach to implement the Project.
                         Additional Project partners include the City of Suresnes in France, along with AFD and the City of
                         New Orleans, universities in Paris, and New Orleans.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project activities and investments will take place in the North of the country, mainly in the
                         National Historic Park and the adjacent communes and in Cap Haitien. These investments will be
                         coordinated with the Haiti Business Development and Investment project which includes a
                         component on Business Development Services for MSME in the North and with the Infrastructure &
                         Institutions Emergency Recovery which includes local road rehabilitation to touristic areas and
                         investments in the Cap Haitien airport.

                         The area around the Citadelle and the Citadelle itself is known to be one of the few natural habitats
                         left in Haiti, and the National Historic Park qualifies as a critical natural habitat under OP 4.04. At
                         least 15 species of plants and animals listed as critically endangered, endangered, or vulnerable on
                         the IUCN Red List have been recorded in the area. Birdlife International formally recognizes the site
Public Disclosure Copy




                         as an Important Bird Area (Citadelle-Sans Souci-Ramiers). This area is surrounded by largely
                         secondary forest with some primary forest, but people have settled along the roads through the park
                         as well as within the forest itself. Direct negative impacts from the project to the forest are unlikely
                         since the project does not intend to cut any trees in this vicinity and the works will occur on buildings
                         that have few to no trees around them. Indirect negative impacts could occur if tourist development
                         in the area attracts crowds to the area and without legal protection of the vicinity; people may attempt
                         to build structures in this vicinity which may then lead to further development such as roads,
                         pavements, etc. The development of a Park Business Plan and the establishment of a Park Authority
                         include provisions to avoid or mitigate these indirect negative impacts and contribute to the
                         sustainable protection of the forest. These mitigation measures may include restrictions on the
                         access to and use of the park’s natural resources and result in direct negative social impacts such as
                         loss of assets, temporary or permanent income generation and involuntary resettlement of residents.

                         Citadel Laferriere and the Palais du Sans Souci are World Cultural Heritage Sites and may be
                         impacted by the upgrading investments in the zone, increasing visitation to the site, an influx of new
                         residents to the area, negative esthetic impacts, more residential construction close the areas, and a
                         potential increase in vandalism and erosion of the sites.

                         The socially inclusive investments in Milot and Dondon, two communities at the entrances to the
                         National Historic Park may result in limited involuntary resettlement and potential temporary loss of
                           income.

                           The historic core of Cap Haitien is occupied by a vibrant community of different social and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           economic backgrounds and can be heavily congested in terms of traffic. No direct negative impacts
                           are expected from the project, but indirect negative impacts may include temporary loss of income
                           for the market sellers and traders on the Malecom, social tension with potential former inmates of the
                           prison, often victims of the Duvalier regime, increased congestion on the roads from increased tourist
                           numbers, busses etc. with reduced air quality, increase in crime, violence and negative social
                           behavior.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Borrower capacity is weak in Haiti in terms of environmental or social management. MEF is the
                           executing counterpart, coordinating the activities of all involved public and private entities and will
                           be responsible for the project’s safeguard supervision. UTE, the MEF implementing agency, will
                           recruit a environmental specialist who will manage the safeguards aspects in coordination with the
                           Park Management Authority. This specialist will be located in the North.
                           A social specialist with specific expertise in cultural heritage and experience with Process
                           Frameworks will also be recruited to support the supervision of project safeguards.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Nyaneba E. Nkrumah (LCSEN)
                           Peter F. B. A. Lafere (LCSSO)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
                           BP 4.01                                               policy is triggered due to the potential for
                                                                                 adverse social and environmental impacts under
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 the project main components. Based on the
                                                                                 proposed scope of the project activities, the
                                                                                 project is proposed as an environmental risk
                                                                                 category B. Investments which would normally
                                                                                 be considered as A-type investments will not be
                                                                                 eligible for financing.

                                                                                 Under Component 1, different types of negative
                                                                                 environmental impacts are possible relating to
                                                                                 infrastructure investments that will be supported
                                                                                 by this project:(i) impacts from civil works
                                                                                 associated with restoration and excavation of
                                                                                 historical monuments in Cap Haitian (ii)
                                                                                 impacts from new construction; (iii)impacts
                                                                                 associated with occupational health and safety
                                                                                 (e.g., noise, changes in traffic patterns, dust,
                                                                                 possible contaminants in the dust, etc (iv)
                                                                                 assessment of other social impacts not
                                                                                 associated with resettlement or land acquisition.
                         The environmental impacts associated with
                         construction works are likely to be limited in
                         time and space, and actions to minimize and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         mitigate have been included in the project's
                         ESMF and EMP.

                         Under component 2 and 3, there will be a
                         number of local level investments. These are
                         locally driven investments and currently their
                         location and exact nature are not yet known.
                         The ESMF will be applied to those works or
                         activities not yet agreed to be financed under the
                         project. These may include under component 2
                         investments to promote tourist value chains
                         (artisan market, water and sanitation, lighting,
                         handicrafts, food products, small bridges, street
                         lighting, river cleaning, etc) and under
                         component 3 matching grant activities such as
                         small restaurants, renovation of historical
                         homes, etc. The ESMF will screen each of
                         these activities, and an EMP will be developed
                         for them where necessary. In addition, a
                         manual of procedures will be developed for
                         screening matching grant applications similar to
                         those developed for small grant programs in
                         Haiti. This is to ensure that the environmental
                         and social screening process is a key part of the
                         grant selection process. Component 4 is not
Public Disclosure Copy




                         likely to trigger safeguards and component 5
                         will be developed under O.P 10.0 and is
                         currently undefined. It therefore does not
                         require any safeguard instruments at this time.

                         A draft ESMF has been prepared for the project,
                         and particularly for components 2 and 3, since
                         these activities are not defined and will not be
                         until implementation. The ESMF details the
                         process for screening any proposed project
                         activities that are currently still undefined under
                         each of the components. The screening will
                         determine which activities are eligible for Bank
                         financing, and the type of environmental and
                         social analysis and the particularly safeguard
                         instruments (e.g., EIA, EMP, RPF, etc.)
                         required for each activity or cluster of activities.
                         These instruments will be developed prior to
                         construction and alternatives fully considered to
                                                             minimize any social or environmental risk. The
                                                             ESMF includes: (i) eligibility criteria and a
                                                             process for subproject screening and for
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             determining the appropriate safeguard
                                                             instrument to apply to each subproject; (ii)
                                                             standard environmental management plans for
                                                             common subproject types; (iii) a matrix of
                                                             potential impacts and mitigation measures; (iv)
                                                             a monitoring and evaluation section for
                                                             determining responsibilities for supervising the
                                                             implementation of any mitigation measures; (v)
                                                             implementation arrangements for safeguards;
                                                             (vi) cost implications; (vii) capacity building
                                                             required to ensure implementation and
                                                             supervision of the ESMF.

                                                             For activities that are known already, such as
                                                             the archaeological and restoration works under
                                                             component 1, the Client has produced an
                                                             Environmental Management Plans (EMP) for
                                                             renovation activities. It takes into account
                                                             environmental risks related to construction,
                                                             health and public safety, waste and debris
                                                             management, etc. It also assesses social risks.
                                                             Other environmental and social impacts may be
                                                             associated with the long term operation of the
                                                             park especially with regard to management of
                                                             small business and commercial activities;
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             increased tourist access to sensitive sites and the
                                                             management of solid was the from visitors to
                                                             the NHP and Cap Haitien tourist sites. The EMP
                                                             will include measures to ensure proper
                                                             management of the operational risks associated
                                                             with the project investments.

                                                             For urgent activities that are already identified
                                                             and agreed for financing in a PPA under the
                                                             project, such as some of the archaeological and
                                                             restoration works, the Client will use the
                                                             Environmental Management Plan (EMPs) that
                                                             has been prepared.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   The Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) policy is
                                                             triggered because the area around the PNH is
                                                             known to be one of the few remaining natural
                                                             habitats left in Haiti. The area surrounding the
                                                             PNH qualifies as a critical natural habitat under
                                                             OP 4.04. At least 15 species of plants and
                         animals are listed as critically endangered,
                         endangered, or vulnerable on the IUCN Red
                         List have been recorded in the area. Birdlife
Public Disclosure Copy




                         International formally recognizes the site as an
                         Important Bird Area (Citadelle-Sans Souci-
                         Ramiers). However, despite this, the project
                         mainly finances works specific historical
                         buildings in the PNH as well as renovates
                         existing small roads and does not intervene
                         directly in the natural habitat areas around the
                         historic buildings. In fact, the work sites have
                         few or no trees. It is therefore expected that the
                         project impact on the natural habitat will be
                         limited. Any negative impacts will be greatly
                         reduced by mitigation measures proposed in the
                         ESMF and subsequent EMPs. The main impact
                         on the Natural Habitat, therefore, will be
                         indirect. The project hopes to increase tourism
                         to the area. This increased tourism will impact
                         the natural surroundings if vendors and others
                         either relocate closer to the PHN to gain access
                         to tourists or if they begin to unsustainably use
                         natural resources and forest products for crafts.
                         To ensure that these possible impacts do not
                         happen, the project will work to ensure that the
                         business/management planning for the parks
                         takes into account these possible impacts. As a
                         first step, the project will finance an
Public Disclosure Copy




                         environmental and social baseline study of the
                         park that will be completed in the first year of
                         the project. The baseline study will help guide
                         and green the business planning (and later,
                         implementation of the plan) for the National
                         Historic Park. Essentially, the baseline study
                         will guide where development under the project
                         can occur, and where it cannot. The output of
                         the baseline environmental study will therefore
                         be an assessment of the biodiversity around the
                         park and will include maps signaling important
                         areas of biodiversity, opportunities for
                         conservation, biodiversity that requires
                         additional protection (i.e., endangered species),
                         etc. As a second step, the baseline study will be
                         reviewed by UNESCO, the community and
                         other stakeholders and approved. As a third
                         step, the approved study will serve as an input
                         into the business/management plan for the PHN.
                                                                 Finally, the project will ensure that this is
                                                                 carried through into implementation of the plan.
                                                                 A TOR for the baseline study will be developed
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 prior to appraisal and implemented in the first
                                                                 year of the project.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes   The Forests (OP/BP 4.36) policy is triggered
                                                                 because of the baseline study which will
                                                                 influence the manner in which forests are
                                                                 managed around the PNH but also because
                                                                 forests could directly be negatively impacted by
                                                                 an increase in tourists to the area (see section on
                                                                 OP 4.04). As mentioned previously, the
                                                                 baseline study will serve as an input into the
                                                                 park business/management plan and will impact
                                                                 where and how development occurs in these
                                                                 touristic sites.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes   It is possible that herbicides and biocides will be
                                                                 used to clean the walls of the Citadelle. A Pest
                                                                 Management Plan (PMP) is not required at this
                                                                 stage because the work will largely be done
                                                                 manually, with only small quantities of
                                                                 herbicides and biocides, if needed. While a PMP
                                                                 is not needed, the ESMF (Annex 4) contains a
                                                                 pesticide screening tool that, as per Bank
                                                                 guidance, will "screen pest control products to
                                                                 establish a list of pesticides authorized for
                                                                 procurement under the project." According to
                                                                 Bank guidelines, screening is appropriate when
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 expected quantities are not significant from a
                                                                 health or environmental standpoint, there are not
                                                                 significant environmental or health concerns, no
                                                                 hazardous products will be introduced and the
                                                                 project will not introduce pesticide use into an
                                                                 area where there has been no use or significantly
                                                                 increase the level of pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   The Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)
                         BP 4.11                                 policy is triggered because of the planned
                                                                 catalytic investments in the Northern Zone to
                                                                 upgrade the tourism infrastructure at the
                                                                 National History Park, a UNESCO World
                                                                 Heritage Site which includes the Citadelle
                                                                 Laferriere and the Palais du Sans Souci. The
                                                                 ESMF screens out activities that may negatively
                                                                 impact the site, as well as details criteria for
                                                                 identifying and managing all other social and
                                                                 environmental impacts to the site, including
                                                                 those arising from increasing visitation to the
                                                                site, an influx of new residents to the area,
                                                                negative aesthetic impacts, and a potential
                                                                increase in crime and violence.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                A Physical and Cultural Resources Plan has
                                                                been drafted but will be further be elaborated
                                                                prior to appraisal to ensure that there is adequate
                                                                assessment of physical and cultural resources
                                                                and that any residual impacts are appropriately
                                                                mitigated. In addition, the Physical and Cultural
                                                                Resources Plan will elaborate the type of
                                                                consultation necessary to ensure that there is
                                                                sufficient consultation with international
                                                                (including UNESCO), national and local
                                                                stakeholders regarding these Historic sites.
                                                                Finally, chance finds procedures will be
                                                                described in the Plan to safeguard any cultural
                                                                resources that may be discovered during works
                                                                or services performed under the project under
                                                                any of its components.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    No    The policy is not triggered since there are no
                                                                indigenous people in this area. The ESMF will
                                                                also include a specific capacity assessment and
                                                                training program to be applied to the relevant
                                                                agencies involved in managing the site.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes   This policy is triggered because the inclusive
                         4.12                                   local investments of component 2 may result in
                                                                limited temporary or permanent involuntary
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                resettlement or land acquisition and because the
                                                                Park Management Plan for the National Historic
                                                                Park may include restrictions on the access and
                                                                use of natural resources within the boundaries of
                                                                the Park and have direct negative social impacts
                                                                such as loss of assets, temporary or permanent
                                                                income generation and involuntary resettlement
                                                                of residents.

                                                                The socially inclusive investments in Milot and
                                                                Dondon, the communities at the entrances of the
                                                                National Historic Park may result in limited
                                                                involuntary resettlement and potential
                                                                temporary loss of income. It is unlikely that the
                                                                investments in Cap Haitien will result in
                                                                involuntary resettlement, but indirect negative
                                                                impacts may include temporary loss of income
                                                                for the market sellers and traders on the
                                                                Malecom.
                         Three instruments will be prepared and
                         disclosed during project preparation in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         compliance with the policy: a Resettlement
                         Policy Framework, a Social Assessment, and a
                         Resettlement Process Framework.

                         Because the activities to support inclusive local
                         investments will only be identified using a
                         participatory approach during project
                         implementation, a Resettlement Policy
                         Framework (RPF) will be prepared in
                         accordance with OP4.12 to ensure application of
                         the appropriate safeguard policies that will
                         reflect the following principles:
                          - Prior to the approval of sub-projects, the
                         client will need to ensure that the sites,
                         boundaries and ownerships of the relevant land
                         plots are clearly identified and confirmed using
                         a community-based mapping exercise that goes
                         beyond simply checking for legal title.
                          - In case there is resettlement, agreement on the
                         compensation scheme and its payment or
                         realization will be settled prior to the
                         commencement of that particular sub-project.
                          - In cases where there are disputed claims to
                         eligibility to compensation or to land ownership
                         or use, conflict resolution will be facilitated by
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the client, and though works may begin, proper
                         compensation will be kept in escrow until the
                         conflicts are resolved. In cases where this does
                         happen, the client will remain in constant
                         contact with the affected people and apply the
                         best available dispute resolution mechanisms in
                         the country.

                         Given the objective to spur regional
                         development, all upstream support that may
                         spur downstream impacts on resettlement, as
                         defined by the policy (e.g. through the
                         preparation of bidding documents, etc.) will
                         include reference to the principles of OP 4.12 in
                         terms of, among other things, eligibility for
                         compensation, asset valuation methodologies,
                         and consultation and participation.

                         For the National History Park, a Social
                                                                                                                                 Assessment will identify key stakeholders who
                                                                                                                                 live in and around the park and/or who depend
                                                                                                                                 on the park resources, how these people will
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 potentially be affected positively and/or
                                                                                                                                 negatively, and what measures need to be in
                                                                                                                                 place to ensure that their wellbeing is given
                                                                                                                                 utmost priority and that compensation options
                                                                                                                                 are consulted. The Social Assessment will also
                                                                                                                                 spell out the measures for consultation and
                                                                                                                                 participation of these communities in the design
                                                                                                                                 of the Park Management Plan. Finally, the SA
                                                                                                                                 will assess the cumulative impacts from the
                                                                                                                                 influx of tourists and range of IDB/WB/Other
                                                                                                                                 donor investments in the area.

                                                                                                                                 Based on the SA, a Process Framework (PF)
                                                                                                                                 will be developed to safeguard potentially
                                                                                                                                 affected populations from restrictions to access
                                                                                                                                 and use of natural resources in the park. The PF
                                                                                                                                 will describe the anticipated new restrictions
                                                                                                                                 and the process by which potentially affected
                                                                                                                                 populations can participate in the design and
                                                                                                                                 implementation of these restrictions. It will
                                                                                                                                 establish criteria to identify affected persons and
                                                                                                                                 the measures to assist them in improving or
                                                                                                                                 restoring their livelihoods while maintaining the
                                                                                                                                 sustainability of the Park. The PF will inform
                                                                                                                                 the development of the Park Management Plan
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 and its recommendations will be included in it.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The policy is not triggered since project will not
                                                                                                                                 invest in dams nor will any project activities
                                                                                                                                 rely on the operations of existing dams.
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            The policy is not triggered since project
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            activities will not affect any known
                                                                                                                                 International Waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The policy is not triggered since project
                                 7.60                                                                                            activities will not affect any known disputed
                                                                                                                                 areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 28-Jun-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             All safeguard related-studies are under preparation, and the first draft of required safeguard
                             instruments should be ready by end of May 2013 except for (1) the draft Resettlement Process
                             Framework which is being reworked and will be consulted again with stakeholders and affected
Public Disclosure Copy




                             population by end June 2013, (2) the Physical and Cultural Heritage Plan which will be finalized
                             prior to appraisal and (3) the in-depth social assessment which should be finalized prior to
                             appraisal.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:      Name: Sylvie Debomy

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name:                                                   Date:
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Anna Wellenstein (SM)                             Date: 22-May-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
