                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC4328

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Jul-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 29-Jul-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Congo, Democratic Republic                    P144712
                                                                           Project ID:
                                              of
                            Project Name:     Strengthening Hydro-Meteorological and Climate Services in DRC (P144712)
                            Task Team       Louise E. M. Croneborg
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       10-Feb-2014                       Estimated        15-Jul-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: AFTN1                              Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                              Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (75%), Ports, waterways
                                              and shipping (25%)
                            Theme(s):         Climate change (50%), Water resource management (50%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     45.00                   Total Bank Financing:            0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                              Financing Gap:                39.00
                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          0.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                   0.00
                              GEF Secretariat as Implementing Agency                                      6.00
                              Total                                                                       6.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve the quality of the Government of
                           DRC’s hydro-meteorological and climate services.

                           The PDO would be achieved by supporting the Government's hydro-met services (particularly
                         MettelSat) in: optimising the collection, management and sharing of data on water and weather
                         conditions based on agreed realistic criteria and resources; integrating resources provided through
                         remote sensing and regional/global forecasting centers; improving the skills and motivation of staff
Public Disclosure Copy




                         in the implementing agencies; and ability to absorb new technologies and solutions for delivering
                         relevant hydro-met information to users in relevant sectors.

                         The PDO could be achieved and sustained through tailoring the project to ‘core’ needs of prioritised
                         sectors. Thereby, the project can serve as a foundation for building climate resilience and economic
                         growth in these sectors.
                         C. Project Description
                         The proposed Project would have the following component structure to support achievement of the
                         PDO:

                         Component A. Institutional and regulatory strengthening, capacity building and implementation
                         support.
                         Component A would invest in the human and institutional resources that can implement and sustain
                         observation and forecasting of weather and water. Considering the need to address the current
                         challenges in staffing and policy mandates, the Component would invest in: i) reinforcing the legal
                         and regulatory framework of MettelSat and other agencies (including Standard Operating Procedures
                         – SOP); ii) Quality Management Systems to raise standards and quality control/verification
                         procedures across the institutions; iii) long-term and on-demand capacity building and training of
                         staff to build the human skills needed to sustain modernised hydro-met services (both national and
                         international-level training) ; iv) institutional mechanisms to build cooperation between the hydro-
                         met agencies and their major users through protocols on data sharing and workshops etc.; and, v)
                         additional operational support to MettelSat and other agencies through technical assistance and, if
                         optimal, “twinning” arrangements with advanced NHMS (under the guidance by WMO for example).

                         Component B. Modernisation of capacity, facilities and infrastructure for observation and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         forecasting.
                         Component B will invest in the reinforcement and rebuilding of the basic networks for observation
                         and forecasting capacity. A highly focused approach to investments is required in DRC considering
                         the current status of hydro-met services, and allocation of investment will have to be made based on
                         priority sectors/user-groups being served, core-capacity for observation and forecasting and the long-
                         term ability to operate and maintain the services. Investments will focus on the following key areas:
                         i) strengthening the physical hydrological and meteorological monitoring networks through
                         rehabilitation of existing stations and installation of new equipment (suitable to the context and
                         capacity-levels – i.e., the ‘core’ network based on prioritised users) with selected observation at key
                         locations for surface water and weather conditions in particular, and to the extent possible, water
                         quality and groundwater; ii) a long-term calibration, operations and maintenance programme of the
                         network; iii) improved transmission, management and accessibility of hydro-met data whilst
                         capitalising on future mobile tools/e-services and wireless Internet protocols; iv) refurbishment of
                         facilities needed to support the services including offices and ICT infrastructure (including central
                         and regional operating centers), Internet connectivity, data storage and processing at MettelSat, RVF
                         and RVA in Kinshasa and selected regional forecasting centers; and, v) strengthening the technical
                         systems/softwares used for performing hydrological and meteorological modelling and forecasting
                         and integration of improved predictions into products, decision support- and early warning systems
                         (with parallel training of staff under Component A).
                         Improving the capacity to predict and analyse hydro-meteorology in MettelSat, RVF and RVA, will
                         be essential to secure the intended social and economic benefits. Also, climate change is creating
                         additional uncertainty and risks for development in DRC. Improved climate modelling and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         forecasting capacity would therefore strengthen the Government’s adaptation capacity. Financing
                         from the Least Developed Countries Fund for Adaptation (LDCF) will be suitable for these activities
                         under Component B.

                         Component C. Improvement of hydro-met information service delivery.
                         Component C will focus on the delivery of more accurate, timely and relevant information to users
                         and decision-makers. Through pilots and tailored information for target audience, the hydro-met
                         agencies would trial, modify and develop appropriate format and timing of hydro-met information –
                         especially for river-transportation agencies, hydropower operators, disaster reduction and civil
                         protection agencies, farmers and agricultural actors, aviation, the media and public. The expected
                         outcomes include economic gains and prevention of losses, and importantly, improved adaptation
                         capacity within sectors having to adapt to the negative impacts of climate change and variability.
                         Therefore, LDCF would suitably finance these adaptation-activities under Component C; reflecting
                         the value added provided in improving adaptive capacity in sectors such as navigation/river-
                         transport, water resources management and hydropower, among others.

                         Co-financing with the Least Developed Countries Fund (LDCF).
                         Under the framework of the UNFCC, the LDCF was established recognising that LDCs do not have
                         the means to deal with problems associated with adaptation to climate change. In COP7 (2001), an
                         LDC-work programme was agreed that specifically included: “Strengthening of the capacity of
                         meteorological and hydrological services to collect, analyse, interpret and disseminate weather and
                         climate information to support implementation of NAPAs [National Adaptation Programmes of
                         Action]”. The NAPA for DRC was completed in 2006 and prioritises strengthening the national
                         meteorological services, management of reservoirs and navigable waterways as options for
                         adaptation. The added value of the LDCF funds will specifically be achieved through improving the
                         implementing agencies’ technical and human capacity to model and forecast water, weather and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         climate change. With the knowledge gained from better climate foresight, these agencies can provide
                         information that can increase the adaptation capacity in key economic and social sectors – thereby
                         adding value to baseline investments (e.g., for hydropower or river-transport). The LDCF support
                         would be complimentary to the IDA baseline project that focus resources on the human and
                         infrastructure resources needed to modernise the hydro-met services, and in addition coordinated
                         alongside efforts of other donors such as EU and WMO (planning expansion of the HYCOS system
                         to the Congo River Basin). The proposed Project would also be coordinated with other approved
                         LDCF-financed projects in DRC where shared knowledge can be explored. These include (UNDP as
                         Implementing Agency): Building the capacity of the agriculture sector to plan for and respond to the
                         additional threats posed by climate change on food production and security (US$3.4m); Building the
                         resilience and ability to adapt of women and children to changing climate (US$5.3); and, Resilience
                         of Muanda’s communities from coastal erosion (US$6.0). Sustainability is a challenge to hydro-met
                         services globally and presents risks to both the LDCF and IDA investments. To mitigate these risks,
                         the proposed Project is intended as a long-term engagement (possibly through a series of projects).
                         Also, attention will be given to: optimal use of hydro-met equipment that can be maintained; long-
                         term programme for consolidating institutional, human and ICT capacity for modelling, forecasting
                         and decision support systems; and, developing solutions to avoid the financial voids hindering hydro-
                         met services. Finally, greater public participation will help improve the hydro-met services; for
                         example, tailoring forecasts to media or providing timely and understandable information to
                         vulnerable communities in times of severe weather events.
                         Integrating new initiatives and opportunities.
                         During preparation, the design of the Project will explore ways in which new opportunities can be
Public Disclosure Copy




                         best integrated either as part of the above components or additional. These include:

                         •        Creation of a National Framework for Climate Services (NFCS). Through the WMO, the
                         concept of the Global Framework of Climate Services (GFCS) was recently adopted. The GFCS rests
                         on the development of NFCS at country-level, as an important step to improve global standards,
                         quality and collaboration among hydro-met services.

                         •       Strengthened partnerships with international and regional hydro-met programs. The proposed
                         Project would support DRC in benefitting from regional and global programs: the Africa Monitoring
                         of the Environment for Sustainable Development in SADC (AMESD), Congo-Hydrological
                         Observation System (HYCOS), the Meteorological Association of Southern Africa (MASA), African
                         Centre of Meteorological Applications for Development (ACMAD), and Climate Prediction and
                         Application Center of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development.

                         •        Satellite and remote sensing resources. For the past three decades, remote sensing has
                         developed into a crucial resource for data-collecting and forecasting. Not only do satellites offer
                         additional sources of data (complementary to in-situ data), but with better spatial coverage and
                         distributed measurements. In the next ten years, a number of satellite missions are planned by
                         agencies such as the European Space Agency and NASA that will provide even greater capabilities
                         (e.g., NASA’s CNES SWOT mission 2019 and the ESA’s Meteosat Third Generation in 2020).
                         Because of the complex limitations facing the hydro-met agencies in DRC, the proposed Project will
                         allocate specific resources on building their capacity to access, understand and make use of the
                         remotely sensed data. The range of relevant uses include: water storage (large river basin
                         hydrological processes), optimising river-gauge stations (altimetry to measure river dynamics where
                         in situ data is not available and assessing the value of such locations), wetlands (dynamics of
                         seasonally flooded wetland that are poorly quantified), navigation (observation and anticipation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         river conditions by monitoring spatial dynamics of water levels, discharge and timing of low waters),
                         hydropower (discharge measurement, monitoring of seasonal and inter-annual variation of reservoir
                         storage), flood risk mapping (combining precipitation forecasts with digital elevation models), and
                         severe weather warnings (analysis of extreme events build-up, rainfall structure, storm, cyclones and
                         lightning tracking) and much more.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The exact locations where either old observation stations will be rehabilitated or new stations will be
                         installed, is not yet known. The choice of locations across DRC will take place during
                         implementation and will require a careful balancing of the need for data and analysis, accessibility
                         and ability to sustain the station through operations and maintenance.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The capacity of the implementing agency MettelSat is considered low. The agency is a new partner
                         to the Bank and as such, has not been exposed to safeguard policies. The project will include
                         measures to ensure the agency is familiar with best practice safeguards measures, and will comply
                         with World Bank policies.
                         F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Douglas J. Graham (AFTN2)
                           Antoine V. Lema (AFTCS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes          The rehabilitation and installation of monitoring
                           BP 4.01                                        stations (for collecting information on water and
                                                                          weather) involves small-scale civil works with
                                                                          some localized environmental and social
                                                                          impacts. In certain cases, it will be necessary to
                                                                          construct cost-efficient access paths or gravel-
                                                                          roads. In many cases, however, observation
                                                                          stations will be located where there is easy and
                                                                          existing access such as near bridges or on
                                                                          government-owned property. Other civil works
                                                                          associated with the Project could include
                                                                          refurbishment of facilities used by the hydro-
                                                                          met agencies. The negative environmental and
                                                                          social impacts associated with these civil works
                                                                          are expected to be minimal in scale but will
                                                                          need evaluation. An Environmental and Social
                                                                          Management Framework (ESMF) will be
                                                                          developed to enable staff in the implementing
                                                                          agency to do adequate screening of the civil
                                                                          works and implement necessary remedial
                                                                          actions to mitigate negative impacts. It will be
                                                                          consulted upon and disclosed before appraisal.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No           Any possible disturbance to natural habitats
                                                                          would be insignificant and certainly no critical
                                                                          natural habitats will be affected in any way.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                No           The policy is not triggered as the project
                                                                          envisions no investments in management of
                                                                          natural forests or plantations.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09           No           The policy is not triggered as the project will
                                                                          not procure pesticides nor result in their use.
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes          During project preparation efforts will be made
                           BP 4.11                                        to determine if any known physical cultural
                                                                          resources would be affected by the project; in
                                                                          any event a Chance Finds procedure will be
                                                                          included in the ESMF.
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     TBD          Unknown at the concept stage.

                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes          Component B (Modernisation of capacity,
                           4.12                                           facilities and infrastructure) could trigger land
                                                                          acquisition, although the project will seek to use
                                                                          government owned land and properties. If it
                                                                                                                                 were determined that land acquisition was
                                                                                                                                 necessary, the Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                                                                                                 would provide guidance for the preparation of a
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 Resettlement Action Plan to address
                                                                                                                                 compensation/rehabilitation issues, as needed.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            No construction/rehabilitation or use of
                                                                                                                                 irrigation waters from a dam is envisioned in
                                                                                                                                 this project.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             Not applicable.
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             No project activity will be implemented in
                                 7.60                                                                                            disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 07-Feb-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The safeguards tools, such as an ESMF and RPF will be developed, consulted and disclosed prior
                                      to completion of Appraisal.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Louise E. M. Croneborg

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name:                                                                                                                      Date:
                                 Coordinator:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Benoit Bosquet (SM)                                                                                                  Date: 29-Jul-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
