                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC3594

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Sep-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 02-Oct-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Niger                           Project ID:       P145268
                            Project Name:     Niger Disaster Risk Management and Urban Development Project (P145268)
                            Task Team         Richard James
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         21-Oct-2013                     Estimated         12-Dec-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    AFTN2                           Lending           Specific Investment Loan
                                                                              Instrument:
                            GEF Focal         Multi-focal area
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):        General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (40%), Irrigation and
                                              drainage (30%), Flood protection (30%)
                            Theme(s):         Natural disaster management (40%), Municipal governance and institution
                                              building (30%), Rural services and infrastructure (30%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    106.64                    Total Bank Financing:        100.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                100.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                            6.64
                              Total                                                                      106.64
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Development Objective(s) / Global Environmental Objective(s)
                             1. Project Development Objective(s)
                           Strengthening government's disaster risk management capacity by improving urban and rural
                           infrastructure; reducing vulnerability to natural disasters by strengthening local institutional
                           capacities; and improving government's capacity to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible
Public Disclosure Copy




                           crisis or emergency.
                           2. Global Environmental Objective(s)


                         C. Project Description
                         The proposed components are: (i) flood protection infrastructure; (ii) support to local governance;
                         (iii) contingency component; and (iv) project management. The LDCF resources are expected to
                         contribute mainly to components 1 and 2. Details are as follows:

                         Component 1: Flood Protection Infrastructure – This component will finance a wide range of
                         infrastructure investments, mostly rehabilitation works of existing infrastructure, to mitigate effects
                         of floods and heavy rains in the urban and rural areas of Niamey, Dosso and Tillabéry. These three
                         regions were selected because of their location along Niger River and the large number of
                         beneficiaries in these areas. The concentration of investments in this limited area will increase their
                         positive impact and avoid dispersion of limited resources. Most activities under this component fall
                         under the following categories: rehabilitation of watersheds; priority drainage infrastructure; and
                         flood protection infrastructure. For rehabilitation of watersheds, priority will be given to upstream
                         water retention infrastructures. This goal will be achieved through sustainable land management
                         measures that will enable soil and water conservation as well as enhance infiltration and regulated
                         water flow, including: (i) land and water management activities in the catchment watersheds that
                         include earthworks, creating terraces, half-moon structures and re-vegetation through planting; (ii)
                         construction of storage facilities for inputs and crops; (iii) control of invasive plants which clog
                         rivers and drainage structures; (iv) stabilization of river banks and beds of koris – land erosion prone
                         areas; and (v) cross-cutting prevention activities in connection with adaptation to climate change and
                         sustainable development. Priority drainage infrastructures include: (i) widening of ravines; (ii)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         construction work for storm water retention in upstream urban areas; (iii) construction of concrete
                         sanitation infrastructures; (iv) maintenance activities of sewerage system; (v) improvement of solid
                         waste collection and disposal structures; and (vi) development of urban green spaces. Flood
                         protection infrastructure includes: (i) construction of small (approximately 1 meter height) flood
                         control dykes over tributaries of Niger River, in Sirba; (ii) construction of clipping thresholds on
                         ‘koris’; (iii) rehabilitation of irrigation projects affected by the floods, to be identified; and (iv)
                         recalibration and strengthening of vulnerable dikes for irrigated areas and dwellings along Niger
                         River. The added value of LDCF towards specific investments will be developed during project
                         preparation.

                         Component 2: Support to Local Governance - This component will support improved governance
                         through local investments and serve as an incentive to building capacity in the targeted cities in terms
                         of municipal and urban management. The LDCF could complement the IDA resources to potentially
                         provide support to activities as they relate to climate change adaptation, including: (i) support to
                         elected officials, municipal services and civil society to strengthen cities’ capacity for rehabilitation,
                         maintenance and operation of infrastructure to protect against flooding; and (ii) capacity building in
                         risk prevention and disaster risk management, to improve capacities especially in flood prone areas
                         through putting in place and equipping vulnerability monitoring centers; establishing community’s
                         early warning system; producing maps of risk prone areas; and specific good practices for disaster
                         prevention and strengthening overall early warning system. This component will support
                         rehabilitation of infrastructure damaged by the recent floods and build infrastructure that is disaster
                         resilient.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 3: Contingency Component - supports preparedness and rapid response in the event of a
                         disaster, and once an emergency is declared at the Prime Minister’s Office. The government,
                         depending on the type of emergency, will set up appropriate mechanism in accordance with the
                         national policy on disaster response, including staffing and resources to carry out early response
                         activities. Two options are available as follows: The first option allows rapid reallocation of available
                         funds from other components within the project to address emergency situation. If this component is
                         activated then simplified procurement procedures, under rapid response OP/BP 8.00 would apply. A
                         project implementation manual will be prepared identifying distribution of roles among involved
                         institutions, including fund flow mechanism, and simplified procurement procedures for equipment,
                         works and consultant services. The second option involves rapid restructuring of project and getting
                         access of up to 5% of the aggregate undisbursed balance of the country’s portfolio by using
                         ‘Immediate Response Mechanism’ (IRM) to cover emergency response expenses in the event of a
                         crisis.

                         Component 4: Project Management: The project will build essential institutional capacity to promote
                         sustainable development and greater integration using country’s existing institutions and systems.
                         This component will cover all eligible expenditures including strengthening institutional capacity;
                         procurement of office furniture and equipment; hiring of essential staff, including technical and
                         financial audits; and all recurrent costs.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The specific sites for infrastructure investments and their scope will be determined during project
                         preparation based on the government’s detailed assessments of priority needs within the target
                         regions. The general areas and types of interventions include: (i) rehabilitation of existing sanitation
                         infrastructure works in Bagabana and Saga in Niamey, and Birni N'Gaouré in Dosso; (ii)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         rehabilitation of irrigation infrastructure works along the Niger River in the Dosso and Tillabery
                         regions. In addition, non-structural watershed management activities will be implemented in the
                         basin of the Sirba, in the Tillaberi region; and left bank of the Niamey region.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The Government of Niger has previously successfully implemented Bank-financed projects for
                         which Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs), Environmental and Social
                         Management Frameworks (ESMF), and Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) were prepared and
                         approved by the Bank. This will be a Category ‘B’ project since anticipated impacts will be small-
                         scale and site specific. Five safeguard policies are triggered: (i) Environmental Assessment (OP/BP
                         4.01), largely because of the localized impact of rehabilitating flood protection and sanitation
                         infrastructure; (ii) Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) because the proposed project may cause
                         some minor land acquisition, loss of assets or restrictions of access to resources due to some civil
                         works; (iii) Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09), as a result of water retention and land use planning for
                         crop production purposes which may lead to an increased use of pesticides; (iv) Physical Cultural
                         Resources (OP/BP 4.11) because Niger is known for its rich cultural heritage and as the exact sites
                         are not known as of yet, a chance finds procedure would be necessary; and(v) Projects on
                         International waterways (OP/BP 7.50) is triggered because planned flood prevention infrastructure
                         rehabilitation/construction along the Niger River, an international waterway serving 9 riparian
                         countries, may affect water flow into the Niger river.
                           At this stage only the general locations where most works will be conducted is known; specific sites
                           are yet to be determined. Accordingly, the following safeguard documents will be prepared by the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           government and submitted for the World Bank’s approval: (i) Environmental and Social
                           Management Framework (ESMF) for investments that are not yet fully identified; (ii) Pest
                           Management Plan (PMP); and (iii) Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). Once specific sites and
                           corresponding impacts are identified, the Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs),
                           Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) will
                           be prepared as part of project implementation as necessary before any infrastructure is put in place.

                           Even though a large number of infrastructure works will be performed, this will mostly be
                           rehabilitation of existing infrastructure in areas where negative environmental impact of the
                           interventions is expected to be temporary and limited to the immediate area surrounding the
                           respective construction sites. No civil works will take place without prior approval and disclosure of
                           a RAP or ESIA/ESMP in the country and the Bank’s Infoshop. In addition, specific environmental
                           and social clauses will be incorporated into relevant bidding documents and contracts to ensure
                           compliance with the respective safeguard guidelines.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Liba C. Strengerowski-Feldblyum (AFTN2)
                           Amadou Konare (AFTN1)
                           Paivi Koskinen-Lewis (AFTCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             The project will rehabilitate and upgrade
                           BP 4.01                                              sanitation and infrastructure works in several
                                                                                locations. As the sites and works are not yet
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                finalized, an ESMF will be prepared, consulted
                                                                                upon, and disclosed both in-country and at the
                                                                                InfoShop before appraisal. The ESMF will
                                                                                formulate standard methods and procedures,
                                                                                along with clear institutional arrangements for
                                                                                screening, review, approval, implementation
                                                                                and monitoring of sub-project-specific
                                                                                safeguards instruments (ESMPs, ESIAs and/or
                                                                                RAPs) as necessary. These instruments will also
                                                                                be disclosed in-country and at InfoShop.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No              Due to the location of interventions in urban
                                                                                areas, or in areas were infrastructure and/or
                                                                                productive activities were already in place, no
                                                                                negative impacts to critical or sensitive natural
                                                                                habitats are expected.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No              No interventions are financed in forest areas,
                                                                                nor do they involve forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes   Although procurement of pesticides is not
                                                                 envisaged under the project, it is expected that
                                                                 intensification of agricultural production and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 productivity, as a result of water retention and
                                                                 land use planning for crop production purposes,
                                                                 will likely lead to an increased use of pesticides.
                                                                 The Government of Niger has recently
                                                                 developed a Pest Management Plan for the
                                                                 PRODEX and the Emergency Food Security
                                                                 Projects. The project will update the existing
                                                                 PMP and submit it to the Bank for clearance and
                                                                 then disclosure in-country and at Bank
                                                                 InfoShop, prior to appraisal.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   The Physical Cultural Resources Policy (OP
                         BP 4.11                                 4.11) is triggered because Niger is viewed as a
                                                                 rich cultural heritage area. Though it is
                                                                 unknown at this time which sites may contain
                                                                 such resources, due to the lack of specifics on
                                                                 the locations, size, scale of planned investments
                                                                 under the project, it was judged prudent to use
                                                                 caution when implementing the productive
                                                                 investments, especially with the civil works for
                                                                 water retention and drainage infrastructures.

                                                                 Dispositions taken for subsequent sub-project-
                                                                 specific safeguards instruments will entail
                                                                 ensuring that ESIAs/ESMPs consultants and
                                                                 contractors are able to do the due diligence, or
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 are teamed up with Physical Cultural Resources
                                                                 (PCR) experts to ensure that impacts on PCR
                                                                 are assessed and mitigation measures
                                                                 commensurate to those impacts, including
                                                                 proper handling of chance finds are
                                                                 implemented in the design, in accordance with
                                                                 national and World Bank policies.

                                                                 The Project team and implementers shall ensure
                                                                 that the proposed mitigation measures are
                                                                 derived from Projects and subproject specific
                                                                 ESIAs/ESMPs, and more specifically: (i) have
                                                                 been discussed and agreed upon by concerned
                                                                 parties; (ii) include an assessment of the
                                                                 capacity to implement the measures; and (iii)
                                                                 are acceptable within the national regulatory and
                                                                 legal framework, including laws and regulations
                                                                 concerning cultural heritage and the antiquities.
                                                                These and other dispositions related to PCR will
                                                                be discussed in the ESMF.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    No    There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                area
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes   OP 4.12 is triggered due to the potential impacts
                         4.12                                   related to civil works, which may lead to minor
                                                                land acquisition, loss of assets and/or access to
                                                                resources. A Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                                will be prepared, consulted upon, approved and
                                                                disclosed in-country and at the InfoShop prior to
                                                                appraisal. Potential legacy issues/perceptional
                                                                risk issues arising from resettlement already
                                                                conducted by the UN and GoN will be
                                                                addressed through a social assessment during
                                                                project preparation once the exact intervention
                                                                areas have been identified. The project team will
                                                                consider cost effective ways to assist the
                                                                resettled populations.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No    The project will not finance the building of
                                                                dams and is not supporting dam infrastructure.
                                                                Subject to technical studies the project may
                                                                finance local flood prevention structures that
                                                                may temporarily retain excess water during peak
                                                                volume events, but which do not pose dam
                                                                safety issues. If built, such structures may affect
                                                                water availability to downstream riparians.
                         Projects on International        Yes   Two scenarios are at play. First, planned flood
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                   prevention infrastructure investments along the
                                                                Niger River and its tributaries, under
                                                                Component 2, may affect water flow into the
                                                                Niger River, an international waterways
                                                                servicing 9 riparian countries (Benin, Burkina
                                                                Faso, Cameroon, Chad, Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea,
                                                                Mali, Niger, and Nigeria). Second, the project
                                                                plans to engage in the rehabilitation of existing
                                                                dikes and renovation of water pumps along the
                                                                Komadougou River in the Diffa region. As a
                                                                tributary of Lake Chad, an international
                                                                waterway, project’s intervention along the
                                                                Komadougou Yobe River triggers OP/BP 7.50,
                                                                Under the first scenario, the Bank, on behalf of
                                                                the Government of Niger, will notify the Niger
                                                                Basin Authority (NBA), which in turn will
                                                                inform riparian countries about project activities
                                                                and seek their no objection. This notification
                                                                process is underway. Under the second
                                                                                                                                 scenario, the rehabilitation of dikes and water
                                                                                                                                 pumps concerns existing schemes. Therefore,
                                                                                                                                 following policy guidelines, the Niger
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 DRMUDP, as far as the Komadougou Yobe
                                                                                                                                 River is concerned, falls under the exception to
                                                                                                                                 the riparian notification requirement under
                                                                                                                                 paragraph 7 (a) of OP 7.50 (Projects on
                                                                                                                                 International Waterways).
                                                                                                                                  The team will also prepare a Memo to RVP in
                                                                                                                                 due course about the triggering of the
                                                                                                                                 international waterways policy and the status of
                                                                                                                                 the no objection sought from the NBA for the
                                                                                                                                 project to proceed. This memo will also make
                                                                                                                                 mention of the exception to the riparian
                                                                                                                                 notification requirement, regarding project’s
                                                                                                                                 intervention on the Komadoudou Yobe River,
                                                                                                                                 following OP/BP 7.50 guidelines.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             OP 7.60 is not triggered as there are no known
                                 7.60                                                                                            disputes over project area

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Sep-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Preparation of the ESMF, RPF and PMP are underway and will be submitted for clearance and
                                      subsequent disclosure prior to appraisal.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Richard James

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                                          Date: 19-Sep-2013
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Jonathan S. Kamkwalala (SM)                                                                                          Date: 02-Oct-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
