                                                                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                             APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA185
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Feb-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        China                                   Project ID:                       P118597
                              Project Name:                   CN Integrated Economic Development of Small Towns (P118597)
                              Task Team Leader:               Wendao Cao
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 12-Dec-2011                                   Estimated Board Date:             17-May-2012
                              Managing Unit:                  EASCS                                   Lending Instrument:               Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                         Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (55%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (20%), Solid waste
                                                              management (10%), Water suppl y (10%), Vocational training (5%)
                              Theme:                          Rural non-farm income generation (20%), Infrastructure services for private sector development (20%), Other public
                                                              sector governance (20%), Rural services and infrastructure (20%), Participation and civic engagement (20%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                        Amount
                                   Borrower                                                                                                                  146.64
                                   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                                     150.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                     296.64
                              Environmental Category:         B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              The Project Development Objective is to improve priority public infrastructure and services to contribute to economic development and
                              environmental protection for the residents and businesses in selected small towns in Guangdong, Hunan and Gansu Provinces.

                              3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                              In order to achieve the above objective, the Project will finance subprojects proposed by 28 small towns in the participating provinces and
                              comprising the following components and main activities:

                              Component A: Infrastructure Development (total cost US$ 244.66 million). This component seeks to improve rural towns’ infrastructure by
                              financing sustainable and high priority public investments aimed at expanding, rehabilitating, and modernizing infrastructure facilities or increasing
                              their operational efficiency. The subprojects are designed in response to the diverse needs of small towns in the project. To be eligible, towns have
                              demonstrated adequate financial capacity to invest, operate and maintain these facilities. Activities are part of the towns’ Master Plans and
                              contribute to the overall development strategy of provinces. They aim at improving the overall investment climate in the towns, and facilitate
                              backward and forward linkages across supply chains to increase market access, enhance productivity and quality, create employment, add value
                              and increase incomes.

                              The component includes investments in: (i) urban and rural roads; (ii) water supply and distribution; (iii) wastewater management and sewage
                              connection; (iv) creek rehabilitation and embankment; (v) rural irrigation systems; (vi) agro-industrial and commercial infrastructure support.

                              There are a total of approximately 60 subprojects under this component; on average two per town. Most subprojects are to construct new facilities;
                              a few are for the upgrade and rehabilitation of existing facilities. Subproject combine investments in different types of activities, often to support an
                              industrial or agricultural base. There are approximately 25 subprojects that include road construction, 20 subprojects that include water supply
                              (most often built in association with the roads), 9 that include waste water management and sewage connections, 1 creek rehabilitation subproject,
                              7 that include rural irrigation systems, and 18 that support agro-industrial and commercial infrastructure support. No subprojects will be added to
                              the project portfolio after appraisal.

                              Component B: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Enhancement (total cost US$ 15.64 million). This component seeks to improve the
                              institutional capacity for managing modern and efficient infrastructure, and to support services delivery. It includes supporting: (a) policy,
                              technology and marketing studies; (b) technical, managerial and financial training, workshops and study tours for stakeholders involved
                              (Government, Cooperatives, Water Users’ Associations, private entrepreneurs, etc.); (c) equipment for testing, grading and real time monitoring to
                              be used in parallel with infrastructure development to improve the quality and safety of marketable products, and monitor environmental aspects of
                              infrastructure subprojects; (d) training and extension services for rural migrants and farmers.

                              Component C: Project managements and M&E (total cost US$ 8.17 million). The objective of this component is to support project management
                              and coordination efforts. In particular it will support the PMOs at the various levels in managing, monitoring, evaluating and effectively reporting on
                              project implementation. It would include the strengthening of the institutions in charge of project implementation (incremental project staff, training

                                                                                                                                                                           Page 1 of 5
                               and workshops) as well as investments and incremental operating costs derived from their operations during implementation. An essential part of
                               this component is the implementation of the M&E system.

                               4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                               The proposed project is expected to cover a total of 28 towns of 28 counties (one county each) in Guangdong, Hunan and Gansu Provinces.
Public Disclosure Copy




                               5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                               Zong-Cheng Lin (EASCS)
                               Yiren Feng (EASCS)

                               6. Safeguard Policies                         Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                               Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01           Yes              Based on the review of the sub-projects, the project is rated a Category B due to
                                                                                              the type, location and scale, nature and magnitude of the potential impacts during
                                                                                              the construction and operating phase and the expected positive environmental
                                                                                              impact of the project.
                                                                                              As per requirements of the Bank and Chinese domestic regulations, an
                                                                                              environmental assessment (EA) has been carried out for the project, which
                                                                                              includes the following documents:
                                                                                              (a) A set of standard Environmental Code of Practices (ECOP) prepared for each
                                                                                              type of investment, and included as part of the Operational Manual;
                                                                                              (b) Environmental Impact Assessment/Environmental Management Plan (EIA/
                                                                                              EMP) prepared for the WWTP (3000t/d) in Hunan Province.
                                                                                              (c) Pest Management Plan (PMP) prepared for each province
                               Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                   No               The EA process confirms that this project will be carried out in urban and suburban
                                                                                              areas with long histories of human activities and without any natural habitats.
                               Forests OP/BP 4.36                            No               OP4.36 is not triggered because the project will not involve any logging or planting
                                                                                              activities in forest areas.
                               Pest Management OP 4.09                       Yes              The proposed project will not finance procurement of pesticides, but support to the
                                                                                              value chain services may result in the increased use of pesticides. A PMP was
                                                                                              prepared for each Province for the towns and sub projects for which the OP 4.09
                                                                                              will be triggered.
                               Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11        Yes              The EA process confirms that the project will not affect any physical cultural
                                                                                              resources. However, some subprojects in Hunan will affect some rural households’
                                                                                              graves, of which might be viewed connecting to local tradition. In this light, this
                                                                                              policy could be triggered, while all the compensation and relocation measures for
                                                                                              those graves are formally planned and designed in the Hunan provincial level
                                                                                              RAP, based on detailed survey and extensive consultation among the owners.
Public Disclosure Copy




                               Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                 Yes              The Bank's social development specialists conducted the primary screening of
                                                                                              Indigenous Peoples presence in the project areas. It was found that some Yugu
                                                                                              and Tibetan ethnic minority groups are present in project townships in Gansu
                                                                                              Province. Yugu and Tibetan ethnic minorities have unique cultures, traditional
                                                                                              methods of production, and their own language. They are therefore considered to
                                                                                              fit the definition of IP as per OP4.10, and the Policy will be triggered by this project.
                                                                                              A Social Assessment was conducted and an EMDP was developed to guide the
                                                                                              project activities within these communities.
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12           Yes              The project identification mission conducted a preliminary screening of subprojects
                                                                                              and concluded that one subproject in Guangdong Province, 9 subprojects in
                                                                                              Gansu province, and 16 subprojects in Hunan subprojects may unavoidably result
                                                                                              in land acquisition and structure demolition. Thus, Bank policy OP4.12 is triggered.
                                                                                              Since all sub-projects have been identified, it was agreed that a Resettlement
                                                                                              Action Plan (RAP) will be prepared for each province, with a clear description of
                                                                                              resettlement actions needed for each sub-project in the province.
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                     No               The project will not finance construction or rehabilitation of any dams as defined
                                                                                              under this policy. The water source for irrigation sub-projects in Gansu Province
                                                                                              will be groundwater and there are no dams involved. Therefore, OP4.37 is not
                                                                                              triggered.
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP     No               No sub-project will be located in international waterways. The policy is not
                               7.50                                                           triggered and no actions are required.
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60         No               No project area will be located in disputed areas. The policy is not triggered and no
                                                                                              actions are required.

                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:


                                                                                                                                                                           Page 2 of 5
                             Some negative short-term construction and long-term operational impacts may result from project implementation. The main environmental
                           issues are the construction related impacts during the construction phase and potential pesticide issues (if not well managed) during the
                           operational phase. These include limited negative impacts during construction on soil erosion, air, water, acoustic environments, waste, worker
                           safety, and social and traffic disturbance. Due to the small scale of the project, these impacts will be of a temporary nature and localized and
                           will be effectively mitigated by standard measures and engineering codes of practice.

                           Presence of Ethnic Minority Groups: Project activities will take place in one township, Hongwansi in Gansu Province, where Yugu, Tibetan, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Hui minorities live. The Qilian Jade Processing Base, a Trading Market and related infrastructure will be built and these project activities will
                           influence about 2731 Yugu,1758 Tibetan and 268 Hui farmers and herders. They are all the project primary stakeholders.

                           Involuntary Resettlement: Infrastructure construction in a total of 26 subprojects will result in land acquisition and resettlement in one township
                           in Guangdong Province, five townships in Gansu Province and ten townships in Hunan Province. In total, 1419 mu of land would be
                           requisitioned from 40 rural villages and this will affect 5941 farmers in 1344 households. 613 people in 162 households will be relocated due to
                           house demolition, and 74 shops and 9 enterprises will also be affected. 1223 farmers in 306 households will be impacted by temporary land
                           occupation.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                            It is expected that the long term impacts of the project area will be sustainable economic development in selected towns of Gansu, Hunan and
                           Guangdong provinces. Employment opportunities and income will be increased, and the quality of life will also be improvedsignificantly due to
                           public infrastructure development and the strengthened capacity of related institutions.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                             During project preparation, alternative locations and alternative technical processes and designs were explored and considered for the WWTP
                           in Hunan province. The EIA identified, evaluated and compared various options for sewage network system layout, WWTP location, WWTP
                           treatment process, and sludge disposal etc., with the objective to avoid or otherwise minimize potential adverse environmental and social
                           impacts and to maximize environmental benefits.

                           The EA team has worked closely with the project planners/ owners and the feasibility study teams to compare and evaluate alternatives.
                           Optimal alternatives were selected to minimize or avoid social and environmental impacts while taking into account economic, technical, and
                           financial considerations. A “no project? scenario was also considered as an alternative.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                            and implement the measures described.
                             Environment Assessment (EA) reports were prepared in accordance with national requirements and the Bank’s OP/BP/GP 4.01. The reports
                           include (a) a set of standard Environmental Code of Practice (ECOP), (b) EIA/EMP for a small size WWTP in Hunan Province, (c) PMP for
                           each province.

                           To enhance the environmental benefits of the project, mitigation measures have been integrated into the project design, construction and
                           operational phases. Preventive and mitigation measures to be implemented during the construction and operation phases were prepared and
                           are noted in the EIA/EMP, ECOPs and PMP respectively.

                           For the WWTP in Hunan province, EIA/EMP was prepared for the project. Preventive measures including EHS requirements during the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           construction and operation phases were prepared and are noted in the EIA/EMP. Proper implementation of the mitigation measures during the
                           construction and operation period can minimize the impacts to an acceptable level or even eliminate the negative impacts. In addition, all
                           mitigation measures related to contractors will be included in the bid documents and contracts.

                           A set of ECOPs were prepared for each type of investment, including ECOPs for roads, dredging activity, irrigation facilities, pipelines network,
                           and small civil works. These will be included as part of the Operational Manual. The ECOPs specify each aspect of environmental
                           management during the project cycle, including but not limited to, project planning & design, site preparation, construction camps, borrow
                           areas, topsoil salvage, storage and replacement, erosion control, construction dust management, air pollution control, noise impact control,
                           water pollution control, waste management, drainage, construction plants & equipment management, public and workers health and safety,
                           consultation for environmental aspects, etc. They also include the monitoring, reporting and supervision arrangements for the implementation
                           phase of the project.

                           A Pest Management Plan (PMP) was prepared for the project. The PMP describes major pest issues, pesticide management methods,
                           pesticide management organizations and their respective responsibilities in the project areas, environmental, occupational and safety risk
                           assessment, monitoring, evaluation activities, and capacity building, etc. It describes a range of methods and their application, and provides
                           recommendations for different situations. It lists all chemicals that may be needed for project activities. These chemicals fulfill the Banks
                           requirement and World Health Organizations recommendations.

                           Project social assessment (SA) was conducted by social scientists from Hohai University in cooperation with local practitioners in the Yugu,
                           Tibetan and Hui communities. The process involved free, prior and informed consultation among the ethnic minority groups and included 251
                           individual/ household interviews, 26 focus group meetings, 33 village meetings, and 364 farmer questionnaires. The SA resulted in the
                           development of the project Ethnic Minority Development Plan (EMDP).

                           The EMDP guided the adjustment of subproject components in the Hongwansi township to reflect the consultation with the Yugu and Tibetan
                           minorities and their stated preferences. Also, a participatory framework for project implementation and the Yugu and Tibetan Community
                           Action Plans were established. The Action Plan specifies a series of steps to be taken in project implementation, including training for capacity
                           building, organizing craft artists association, organizing livestock professional associations and training, ethnic minority traditional jade
                           processing skill protection and development, and participatory monitoring and evaluation of these actions. These steps are budgeted in the
                           project investment costs or will be funded by specified government resources and special funds. The fund flow for these actions is planned to
                           be in parallel with the subproject implementation schedule.

                           Because land acquisition and resettlement will take place in all the project provinces, each of the provinces invited resettlement experts from
                           Hohai University and China Agricultural University to help the PIUs prepare their resettlement components by disseminating project information
                                                                                                                                                                   Page 3 of 5
                           and carrying out consultation among the villages and households to be affected. In March 2011, the provincial resettlement teams started the
                           census and socio-economic surveys, impact inventories and assessments, and livelihood rehabilitation planning in collaboration with local
                           authorities and affected people. (The Hunan team started the work a bit later). In July, these teams prepared primary RAPs for each township
                           with subprojects causing land acquisition and resettlement, and then developed a consolidated provincial level RAP for each project province.
                           The RAPs stipulate the compensation measures including the replacement costs for asset losses and assistance for relocation and transition,
                           and set up appropriate approaches for livelihood restoration and development of the affected villages, households and enterprises.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Many of the town PMOs will undertake Bank supported projects for the first time. To ensure they are prepared to implement safeguards
                           activities, the Bank task team and expert consultants have provided training from the beginning of the project proposal stage throughout the
                           project life cycle. The towns and entities operating the subprojects now have ownership of the safeguard instruments including the EIA/EMP,
                           ECOPs, PMPs, RAPs and EMDP, and are committed to carrying out project implementation in accordance with these instruments. The Bank
                           will continue to provide training in using the safeguard instruments to ensure project implementation in compliance with the safeguards
                           requirements.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                            on potentially affected people.
                            During the preparation of EIA/EMP, two rounds of public consultation were undertaken. The first round took place at the beginning of EA
                           preparation. The second round was carried out after the draft EA was completed. Public consultation of the EA was undertaken following each
                           round of information disclosure. These consultations took various forms including questionnaires, interviews and meetings with project affected
                           people and experts. The EA and EMP incorporated countermeasures to address the concerns of the people consulted. In addition, the public
                           consultation mechanism during construction was also included into the ECOPs.

                           Information about the project, as well as the location and timing for public access to the draft EAs was disclosed through major local
                           newspapers, official websites and bulletins in local communities. The EAs were posted at the World Bank InfoShop on Nov 21, 2011.

                           All the peoples and communities in project areas in Gansu, Guangdong and Hunan provinces who will participate in project activities with
                           positive or negative impacts are key stakeholders. Those affected by land acquisition and resettlement are considered particularly important.
                           During project preparation, social scientists were invited by project entities, and together with the project staff and local practitioners, they
                           conducted resettlement information and consultation campaigns among all the affected groups and communities. These campaigns included a
                           two-way flow of communication on the nature of the project stakeholders’ needs and expectations, as well as nationl and the Bank safeguard
                           policies. Based on these consultations and field surveys, RAPs have been developed for appropriate impact compensation and livelihood
                           rehabilitation. An external resettlement monitoring mechanism has also been set up to insure the RAP provisions are fulfilled.

                           The Yugu, Hui and Tibetan, ethnic minority groups are participating in the preparation and implementation of project activities in Hongwansi
                           township of Gansu Province. The Yugu, Tibetan and Hui people are key stakeholders, and the Gansu PMO and the invited social experts
                           conducted fieldwork to consult with them about how to design project activities and the best ways to participate and carry out the project
                           activities. As a result, an EMDP was developed on behalf of the local ethnic minority communities. The EMDP includes an action plan to ensure
                           project activities are compatible with local ethnic cultures, and a framework for further consultation and participation during project
                           implementation.

                           During the preparation and finalization of the RAPs and the EMDP local communities were closely consulted. The documents were disclosed
                           to the public in county libraries and PIU offices (or websites) in November. They were also sent to the InfoShop on November 21, 2011.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                          Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                             15-Nov-2011
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                         30-Nov-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                          21-Dec-2011
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                           Directors
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                          Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                             15-Nov-2011
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                         21-Nov-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                          12-Jan-2012
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                          Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                             15-Nov-2011
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                         30-Nov-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                          21-Dec-2011
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                          Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                             15-Nov-2011


                                                                                                                                                                 Page 4 of 5
                              Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                         30-Nov-2011
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                          21-Dec-2011
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                            disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                            C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                              Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?              Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                            OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                              If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or SM? Are            Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              PMP requirements included in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                              Management Specialist?
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                              Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts on        Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                              If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and approved by    Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                              If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the      Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?              Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language      Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for   Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?              Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard    Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same        Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Task Team Leader:                    Wendao Cao
                            Approved By:
                            Sector Manager:                      Name Paul Kriss (SM)                                                       Date: 16-Feb-2012




                                                                                                                                                                 Page 5 of 5
