                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSC163

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Oct-2011
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Croatia                          Project ID:      P127308
                            Project Name:       Second Science & Technology Project (P127308)
                            Task Team           Paulo Guilherme Correa
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           04-Sep-2012                      Estimated        17-Jan-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      ECSPF                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector:             General industry and trade sector (85%), Central government administration
                                                (15%)
                            Theme:              Infrastructure services for private sector development (33%), Education for the
                                                knowledge economy (33%), Micro, Small and Medium Ent erprise support
                                                (17%), Technology diffusion (17%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                      Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Borrower                                                                 5.38
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                   26.88
                              Financing Gap                                                            0.00
                              Total                                                                   32.26
                            Environmental U - Not Rated (for all adjustment operations except for SECA)
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The objectives of the proposed project are to (i) improve the capacity of Croatia's R&D and
                           innovation institutions to implement Europe 2020 Strategy for increased investments in R&D
                           through efficient absorption of EU funds, and (ii) develop a pipeline of public and private R&D
                           projects, including research groups, that could qualify for financing through EU structural funds.
                           C. Project Description
                           STP II will have a dual approach, combining TA to the public sector and financing of risk-sharing
                         programs supporting R&D in SMEs (sub-financing), using these instruments with a focus on
                         preparing Croatia for efficient absorption of EU funds for R&D.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (i)      Preparing selected institutions through Technical Assistance (TA). It is envisaged that the
                         TA component of the proposed STP II will focus on building capacity in the Government to
                         efficiently manage the applications and disbursement of EU structural funds and implement the
                         objectives of the Europe 2020 Strategy. The component is expected to include the following
                         activities: (i) preparation of the strategic frameworks explaining the links between policy priorities
                         and country needs (ii) training of government staff on EU procedures for project preparation and
                         implementation; (iii) and strengthening of institutions of the National Innovation System # improve
                         the quality of public expenditures through better design, management, monitoring and evaluation of
                         policies, programs and research organizations in conformity with Europe 2020 goals.

                         (ii)    Developing a pipeline of public projects for EU funds. It was agreed that at least five
                         projects will be fully prepared during the implementation of STP II and will be ready for submission
                         when funds become available. Two of these projects refer to the preparation of the "Grant Schemes"
                         to finance R&D by SMEs during the different phases of the innovation process, and R&D for public
                         research organizations oriented towards strengthening the country's R&D human capital. The "Grant
                         Schemes" to be prepared will consist of the adjustment of three existing BICRO programs (RAZUM,
                         SPREAD and Proof of Concept) and selected UKF programs to EC regulations and procedural
                         norms. The other three projects are in the field of R&D infrastructure, mainly associated with
                         preparation of prototypes and updating of equipment used for research and development.

                         (iii)   Developing a pipeline of private projects. According to the Government request, STP II will
                         provide financial support to existing programs that are expected to be financed by the EU structural
                         funds (possibly BICRO#s RAZUM, SPREAD and POC; and UKF). This will help build a credible
                         number of innovative SME projects and research projects expected to absorb the funds from the
                         future "Grant Schemes." Some funds would be reserved for a running pilot of programs under the
                         structural fund guidelines.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the               safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The STP II project will through different programs (grant schemes and programs) include: a) sub-
                         financing of R&D projects supported by BICRO and UKF; and b) preparation of individual project
                         applications for EU financing, in the form of the grant schemes for which there is a need to show a
                         solid pipeline of sub-projects to be eligible for EU funds when Croatia joins EU, and in the form of
                         stand-alone infrastructure R&D project proposals. In addition to creation of a solid pipeline of sub-
                         projects, the existing programs need to show a good track record in financing R&D projects (mainly
                         pilots). At this stage of the STP II project, the eligible sub-projects for financial support have not yet
                         been identified. It is expected that they will be identified prior to appraisal stage (end of October
                         2011) or at least that eligibility criteria will be set. The project is not expected to finance
                         infrastructure R&D (such as physical facilities for R&D support), it will solely support preparation of
                         infrastructure R&D project proposals for EU funds.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The borrower has experience with implementation of the World Bank project, but solely with
                         category C projects (STP I). Through STP I many applications have been prepared and Croatian
                         environmental legislation was followed.
                           STP I project was categorized as environmental category C. The reasoning for this was (excerpt from
                           appraisal stage ISDS for STP I): In accordance with the Bank's Operational Directive on
                           Environmental Assessment (OD 4.01 Annex E), the proposed project is Category "C". The project
Public Disclosure Copy




                           will not finance civil works.

                           The most important component from the safeguards point of view under STP I was establishment of
                           financial intermediary under BICRO which had a soft loan mechanism and matching grants. Eligible
                           expenditures encompass a large number of activities, including patent applications. Examples are:
                           Pneumatic grinder, Development and research of 3K tunnel ventilation, Development of road
                           crossings on the basis of axle counters, hydrosphere airship, Automated robot for hydrodynamic
                           treatment of iron and concrete in construction, prototype ship, etc. This was done under sub-
                           financing mechanisms and some funds of the follow-up project would continue to provide for similar
                           projects.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Natasa Vetma (ECSS3)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/       TBD             The exact category of the project will be
                           BP 4.01                                            determined prior to appraisal.

                                                                              As the list of pilot sub-projects (although
                                                                              unlikely to be infrastructure R&D) to be
                                                                              financed is not yet determined nor did the
                                                                              eligibility criteria, it has been agreed to work
                                                                              with the client on determining the pipeline and/
                                                                              or criteria by the end of October 2010.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              If the project is determined to be Category C
                                                                              then no safeguards due diligence document will
                                                                              be required prior to appraisal.

                                                                              However, if it is determined to be Category B,
                                                                              an environmental due diligence document will
                                                                              need to be prepared and disclosed prior to
                                                                              Appraisal. It is anticipated that this will be an
                                                                              Environmental Management Framework which
                                                                              basically will ensure that: (i) under components
                                                                              2 and 3, any projects prepared for the EU
                                                                              pipeline will be prepared in a manner consistent
                                                                              with WB Safeguard Policies (this will be
                                                                              addressed in the TORs for the TA); (ii) any
                                                                              pilot projects financed under the project will
                                                                              also be implemented in a manner consistent
                                                                              with WB SG policies; and (iii) the Checklist
                                                                              EMP will be applied for any small scale
                                                                                                                                 infrastructure construction or rehabilitation.

                                                                                                                                 The team will meet with RSC after pipeline or
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 eligibility criteria have been established (end of
                                                                                                                                 October, 2011) and revise the ISDS accordingly.
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No
                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 19-Dec-2011
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      To be confirmed prior to appraisal.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Paulo Guilherme Correa

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 11-Oct-2011
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Lalit Raina (SM)                                                                                                     Date: 27-Jul-2012




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
