                                                                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                            APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA335
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Jan-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                       Cameroon                                 Project ID:                      P118018
                              Project Name:                  Cameroon:NGOYLA MINTOM PROJECT (P118018)
                              Task Team Leader:              James Michael Acworth
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 19-Jan-2012                                   Estimated Board Date:            06-Mar-2012
                              Managing Unit:                 AFTEN                                    Lending Instrument:              Specific Investment Loan
                              Focal Area:                    Biodiversity
                              Sector:                        Forestry (100%)
                              Theme:                         Biodiversity (100%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                       Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                         0.00
                                   Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                                                          3.50
                                   Total                                                                                                                      3.50
                              Environmental Category:        B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Global Environmental Objective(s)

                              The PDO is to improve the conservation and management of core areas within the Ngoyla Mintom forest massif and improve access to income-
                              generating activities for local communities in the project area.

                              3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                              The Ngoyla Mintom forest is a largely pristine rainforest block of about 900,000 ha in the southern part of Cameroon, located between the Dja
                              Faunal Reserve (a UNESCO World Heritage Site) and the Nki National Park in Cameroon, the Minkebe National Park in Gabon, and the Odzala
                              National Park in Congo (see Figures 4 and 5, and Annex 8). Together, Ngoyla and Mintom Municipalities cover 90% of the Ngoyla-Mintom massif
                              (61% and 29% respectively). The remaining 10% of the massif protrudes slightly into Messok and Lomié Municipalities (all of Forest Management
                              Unit (UFA) 10-036 and part of UFA10-028). Due to its location, the Ngoyla Mintom forest forms an important part of a regional green corridor, with
                              very diverse and rich ecosystems reported to contain an important stock of biodiversity, including 228 species of fish in the waterways, 37 species
                              of large and medium sized mammals – among them about 4,000 endangered gorillas, 1,500 chimpanzees, 3,000 elephants and mandrills – and
                              likely to contain several extremely valuable tree species (see Annex 9). UFA10-036 in particular is a critical part of the corridor that connects Dja
                              Wildlife Reserve to the rest of the massif and onwards to the other Protected Areas of the TRIDOM Zone. Beyond its importance as a natural
                              habitat, and a link between neighboring conservation areas, Ngoyla Mintom – like many rainforests – is also an important carbon sink and store,
                              helping to mitigate the effects of global climate change. In addition to these global goods, the area provides local communities with many
                              environmental and social services essential to maintaining their way of life. The local population, numbering around 10,200 people , consists of an
                              indigenous population of Baka pygmies, as well as a number of Bantu tribes.

                              The abundant mineral resources present in the Ngoyla Mintom forest block and its close vicinity have now been surveyed and proven under long-
                              standing exploration mining permits. High mineral prices have resulted in an increased likelihood that investors are now ready to bring these
                              mining operations to the exploitation phase. Though the mines are not yet operational, the exploration activities are already opening up the area
                              and reducing transport costs for all commodities to markets. As soon as the mines become operational, the investors will construct a railway,
                              initially to transport iron ore to a deep-water port to be built on the Atlantic coast, which will improve access and reduce transport costs to the
                              Ngoyla Mintom forest zone. Other infrastructure projects, in particular the ongoing upgrading of the N9 road from Sangmelima to Ouesso in the
                              Republic of Congo, will further compound the environmental and social impacts of economic development. These developments are rendering the
                              area more attractive to commercial loggers, medium and large scale commercial farmers, particularly for cocoa, oil palm and rubber, and new
                              settlers in search of work, cheap land and new economic opportunities. Such settlers will typically all engage in small scale commercial and
                              subsistence agriculture, hunting, and will stimulate artisanal timber extraction for house construction. As a result, the natural resources in the area
                              face growing threats. In the absence of appropriate investments in conservation, sustainable management, effective monitoring and enforcement,
                              the increase in a wide range of economic activities will lead to fragmentation of habitat, over-hunting of wildlife, rapid and irreversible degradation
                              of the area’s unique forests ecosystems, as well as indirect impacts such as sedimentation and pollution of freshwater ecosystems. These
                              changes and impacts have far-reaching consequences for the indigenous populations and their fragile society.

                              A 1995 indicative zoning plan designated the Ngoyla Mintom forest block to become permanent forest for commercial timber production. Since
                              then, development partners have repeatedly encouraged Government of Cameroon to seek conservation organizations to lease the areas for
                              ‘conservation concessions’, which have not been forthcoming. In 2009, an international call for expressions of interest published by the
                                                                                                                                                                         Page 1 of 7
                         Government of Government resulted in several expressions of interest for commercial timber exploitation, and a number of other proposals for
                         ‘conservation concessions’ in the area, combining biodiversity conservation and carbon finance. However till today, none of the forest massif has
                         been legally classified, or allocated for logging, or conservation. Two feasibility studies are under way to explore the potential for REDD+ projects
                         in the region: one specifically for the Ngoyla Mintom forest, and the other for the Dja Biosphere Reserve and its buffer zone, which overlaps with
                         Ngoyla-Mintom. There are two mining companies active in the area: CamIron (an iron ore mining company based to the South East of the Ngoyla
                         Mintom Forest Block) has prepared an Environmental and Social Management Plan for the area, which envisages establishment of a conservation
                         offset component as compensation for the environmental damage that their operations are projected to cause, and a fund for local development
Public Disclosure Copy




                         initiatives; and Geovic (a Cobalt and Nickel mining company) who have included similar conservation and local development initiatives in their
                         ESMP, linked to their mine to the North East of the Ngoyla-Mintom Block.

                         Rationale: The Government of Cameroon has requested technical and financial assistance from their development partners to analyze, assess
                         and compare the various proposals, and inform a final meso-zoning of the Ngoyla Mintom forest massif to define specific areas for conservation,
                         commercial timber production and other uses. Analysis of forest management options and meso-zoning is expected to be completed with support
                         from other projects. The GEF Project will support preparation of documents for the legal classification and participatory management of core areas
                         identified for conservation and low impact community use.

                         Approach: The GEF project aims to support the Government of Cameroon to: strengthen its capacity on the ground for participatory planning and
                         management of selected core areas; to design and test a livelihood support mechanism that provides immediate benefits to the local communities;
                         and to monitor long-term the quantity and quality of the forest protection areas supported by the project area. It will achieve this through close
                         consultation with, and participation of, all concerned stakeholders.

                         The precise external boundaries, appropriate legal status and fine grained micro-zoning for the protection and management of selected priority
                         forests will be defined during the preparation of classification proposals and drafting of management plans. In areas whose protection and
                         management will be supported by this project, the needs of local communities and the economic, social, and environmental impacts of future
                         protection and management status will be analyzed. Positive and any potential negative impacts of the proposed classification process will be
                         clearly communicated to all stakeholders. A livelihood support mechanism will be designed and piloted, with the specific aim to address any
                         potential negative impacts of the proposed classification and management proposals on affected groups, and in particular will encourage and
                         enable sustainable economic development of the area’s natural resources while safeguarding its rich biodiversity and local communities’ interests.
                         The decision to proceed with proposed classification and management activities will be taken after there is evidence of broad support for such
                         proposals among affected communities.


                         Project Components
                         Project activities will be articulated around three major components: (i) Strengthen government and civil society capacity for participatory planning
                         and management of the core areas that are proposed for conservation and low impact extraction; (ii) Design and implement a Livelihood Support
                         Mechanism (LSM); and; (iii) Design and implement a long term Monitoring and Evaluation System for the Ngoyla-Mintom Forest Massif; and
                         Project management.

                         Component 1 – Strengthen government and civil society capacity for participatory planning and management of the core a reas.
                         (Indicative budget for component: US$ 1.571million GEF)

                         The objective of this component is to strengthen the capacity of the government and civil society to manage priority “core areas” proposed for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         conservation and low impact community use. “Core areas” means areas of highest conservation value, and areas that serve as critical corridors
                         between the existing Protected Areas within the TRIDOM area. These core areas within the Ngoyla Mintom forest block will be selected on the
                         basis of biological surveys currently being undertaken by WWF, and the meso-zoning plan that is currently being prepared under two separate
                         projects. The GEF project will not actually contribute to the preparation of the meso-zoning plan, which should already be advanced or completed
                         by the time the project becomes effective, but will rather focus on participatory planning and management of the identified core areas. The Project
                         will promote a model of conservation for the Core Areas based on sustainable use and community management that: avoids opportunity costs;
                         reduces costs of management and policing by outsiders; and minimizes conflicts between external managers and communities. Empowerment of
                         communities to manage and hunt wildlife sustainably, in defined zones to the exclusion of outsiders will be prioritized, instead of investing solely in
                         blanket efforts to eliminate all forms of hunting. While there will be industrial and community based logging in the Ngoyla-Mintom massif in the
                         future, the Core Areas will be managed for conservation and low impact community use compatible with IUCN Protected Area Category VI, and
                         will explicitly exclude logging.

                         The project will more specifically implement three main sub-components.

                         a.        The first sub-component will strengthen capacity of relevant government entities and civil society organizations to support participatory
                         forest management and community based natural resource management in the project area by: (a) strengthening institutional and operational
                         capacity of MINFOF to manage the Ngoyla-Mintom site (in particular by facilitating the creation and strengthening of a MINFOF Technical
                         Operations Unit (UTO); (b) reinforcing multi-stakeholder consultation platforms to ensure coordination and consultation among stakeholders during
                         planning and decision-making processes; (c) strengthening capacity of Local Civil Society Organizations / NGOs to perform watchdog /
                         whistleblower functions; (d) definition and implementation of a local convention on the management of wildlife and control of hunting; and (e)
                         implementing a Communication and Outreach program.

                         b.          The second sub-component will (a) carry out studies of the socio-economic implications of classification and management options on
                         local communities, and in particular on the traditional forest access rights of Indigenous People; and (b) confirm local communities’ acceptance of
                         classification and management of the core areas for conservation and low impact community use, through thorough stakeholder surveys with
                         members of the consultation platforms.

                         c.        The third sub-component will (a) prepare classification proposals for selected core areas following a consultative participatory approach
                         and (b) draft management plans for a sub-set of priority “core areas” within the Ngoyla-Mintom Forest massif that are designated to become part of
                         the permanent forest estate. The designated legal status of these “core areas” could be one or more of various options but will accommodate
                         appropriate community participation in its management and use. The decision will be the outcome of negotiations with all stakeholders.

                         All three sub-components will be supported by the communication and outreach program that communicates to local populations and other
                                                                                                                                                           Page 2 of 7
                         stakeholders the importance and benefits of successful project implementation.

                         Component 2 – Design and Implement a Livelihood Support Mechanism (LSM).
                         (Indicative budget for component: US$ 1.406million GEF)

                         This component will design and pilot a Livelihood Support Mechanism (LSM) that will address immediate social and development needs of the
                         local communities and indigenous peoples with priority given to those groups that have traditional use rights in the forest and in particular those
Public Disclosure Copy




                         members of the local community who stand to lose from reduced access to the forest resulting from the future classification and sustainable
                         management of the core area(s) identified for conservation / low impact forest uses.

                         The LSM will be managed by an independent Management Contractor under a performance based contract. The LSM will in priority invest in
                         micro-projects that increase economic alternatives and reduce the community’s current dependence on the unsustainable use of natural resources
                         in core areas in order to support them in transition to more sustainable resource-use patterns. Such micro-projects may include: a) support to
                         establishment and/or improvement of alternative income-generating activities with conservation-compatible / low environmental impact such as
                         crop farming, livestock husbandry, pisciculture, apiculture, and associated buildings (crop storage facilities, drying facilities, livestock enclosures,
                         etc); simple market places, network building, and trade facilitation; and b) provision of basic social infrastructure such as wells, latrines,
                         maintenance of critical sectors of access roads. Support for development of this type is widely considered to be essential to secure community
                         support for the future classification and conservation oriented management of such a forest.

                         Two main sub-components are envisaged :
                         a.         First sub-component: Design , and piloting of a Livelihood Support Mechanism in accordance with the approved Operational Procedures,
                         which will include a series of outreach and training activities to build local capacity to access the Livelihood Support Mechanism; and
                         b.         Second sub-component: Evaluation of the Livelihood Support Mechanism with a view to developing subsequent scale-up
                         recommendations for the Project Area.

                         Key elements of the Operational Procedures for the LSM will be drafted during project preparation. The detailed design will be completed by the
                         competitively contracted Management Contractor based on a review of existing methodologies for similar successful mechanisms, and in close
                         consultation with the local stakeholders. The resulting Operational Procedures will: adapt best practice to local conditions; outline procedures for
                         planning and proposing micro-projects; define eligibility criteria for screening potential beneficiaries and micro-projects that could be supported;
                         include financial, economic, social and environmental screening procedures; and describe methods for approval, monitoring and accountability for
                         the micro-projects. The Operational Procedures will be adopted through a validation workshop with representatives of the local community as a
                         project activity prior to the LSM becoming operational.

                         Component 3 - Design and implement a long term Monitoring and Evaluation System for the Ngoyla-Mintom Forest Massif; and Project
                         Management.
                         (Indicative budget for component: US$ 0.523 million GEF)

                         This component has two sub-components: first, the design and implementation of a long term monitoring system that tracks social, economic, and
                         ecological information for Ngoyla Mintom forest massif; and second, project management. The M&E system will be designed to monitor socio-
                         economic impacts of the communities living around the larger forest massif, but investment on data collection of forest use and ecological
                         indicators will focus on the core areas for conservation and low impact community use. In particular, the M&E system will monitor levels of
                         participation and consensus reached over time among local stakeholders including indigenous peoples and vulnerable groups during the legal
Public Disclosure Copy




                         classification process, and preparation of management plans. It will also monitor the number of people benefiting and type of benefit delivered by
                         the project in general, and the Livelihood Support Mechanism in particular. Several tools are envisaged under this component: the GEF Tracking
                         Tool for Biodiversity Projects; Forest cover and biological monitoring; participatory socio-economic and ecological impact monitoring; and
                         conducting regular internal audits of safeguard compliance.

                         Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

                         The project will be implemented by the Ministry of Forests and Wildlife (Ministère des Forêts et de la Faune, MINFOF). The Project management
                         structures will comprise:

                         A Steering Committee (Comité de Pilotage) will be established to oversee the GEF Ngoyla Mintom project. Committee Membership includes
                         representatives of all Ministries who have a role in supervising investments and operations in the Ngoyla Mintom project area (including MINFOF,
                         MINEPAT, MINEP); 2 representatives of civil society chosen by the 2 stakeholder platforms to be established in the region; and 1 representative
                         from each of the projects in place in the Ngoyla Mintom area (TRIDOM project, WWF project), and Project Coordinator / Head of the Ngoyla-
                         Mintom Technical Operations Unit (Technical Secretary).

                         A Project Implementation Unit: MINFOF will create a Project Implementation Unit which will be responsible for all technical and safeguards aspects
                         of the project. This Unit will be headed by a Project Coordinator, who will be supported by a Financial Management Specialist and a Procurement
                         Specialist, and will also benefit from inputs from 4 additional technical staffs, all to be designated by the recipient Ministry. These technical staffs
                         include an Environmental and Social Management Expert in charge of overseeing all social and environmental related technical aspects.

                         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         The project is located in the southern part of Cameroon and covers about 900,000 ha.


                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                         Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTCS)
                         Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (AFTEN)

                         6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                    Yes        No      Explanation

                                                                                                                                                                     Page 3 of 7
                         6. Safeguard Policies Triggered          Yes   No   Explanation
                         Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01      ✖          The Client has prepared an Environmental and Social Impacts Assessment
                                                                             (ESIA) that includes an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP)
                                                                             identifying the likely environmental and social impacts and proposed mitigating
                                                                             measures. Site specific Environmental and Social Management Plans
                                                                             suggested by the social and environmental screening process will be prepared
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             for each PA during implementation and after designation of protected areas
                                                                             physical boundaries, in accordance with the national environmental (and
                                                                             social) management regulations and Bank’s safeguards policies. The ESIA
                                                                             along with the ESMP were publicly disclosed both in-country on 01/09/2012
                                                                             and at the World Bank InfoShop on 01/10/2012 prior to project appraisal.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04              ✖          The project will promote and support the creation of protected areas and the
                                                                             preparation of management plans to protect critical forest natural habitats from
                                                                             illegal logging, poaching and artisanal mining activities, and ensure
                                                                             sustainable management of these PAs through inclusive participation of local
                                                                             beneficiary communities.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                       ✖          The project will not finance any industrial logging activities. The project
                                                                             activities will rather promote forest classification and participatory management
                                                                             by taking into consideration the different stakeholders’ needs and demands. If
                                                                             a viable proposal is submitted by local communities for funding, Component 2
                                                                             (Livelihood Support Mechanism) could provide funds to support
                                                                             implementation of Community Forest Management Plans, which may involve
                                                                             low-impact small-scale logging.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09                  ✖          Component 2 (Livelihood Support Mechanism) of the project will support some
                                                                             agriculture and livestock rearing activities albeit at the small scale, which will
                                                                             likely involve the use of limited amounts of pesticides. All activities to be
                                                                             financed by this Componentwill be subject to a social and environmental
                                                                             screening process to ensure that safeguard policies are respected. The ESIA
                                                                             includes a specific section on Pest Management and a related action plan on
                                                                             how to adequately minimize any potential impacts from the misusage of
                                                                             pesticides and other chemical products was incorporated in the ESMP.
                                                                             Specific trainings on the IPMP will be provided to local beneficiaries during the
                                                                             course of project implementation.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   ✖          The project areas host a substantial population of indigenous peoples, with
                                                                             important cultural sites which need to be preserved. As so far the precise
                                                                             physical boundaries of the selected core protected areas and the final
                                                                             definition of the project’s activities under the Sustainable Livelihoods
                                                                             Mechanism have not yet been clearly identified; and as no survey of Physical
                                                                             Cultural Resources such as existing sites of cultural significance has been
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             undertaken by the client, OP 4.11 has been triggered and appropriate “chance
                                                                             find” procedures have been included in the ESMP to help mitigate any
                                                                             potential impacts.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            ✖          As the project will be implemented in the Ngoyla Mintom Forest block which
                                                                             hosts an important community of Indigenous Peoples (mainly the Baka
                                                                             community, about 3,000 members), it will be critical to ensure that (i) IP
                                                                             communities’ livelihoods resources are not negatively affected; (ii) they have
                                                                             an equitable share in the benefits of the project; and (iii) all necessary
                                                                             measures are being taken to minimize the possible risk of marginalization. An
                                                                             extensive series of free prior and meaningful public consultation and
                                                                             participation throughout the forest massif was undertaken during project
                                                                             preparation which led to a broader Baka community support to the project
                                                                             development objectives. As prescribed by the OP/BP 4.10 policy, the borrower
                                                                             prepared both a Social Assessment (SA) and an Indigenous Peoples Plan
                                                                             (IPP) which were broadly adopted by all local stakeholders (Baka, Bantou,
                                                                             Local Leaders and CSOs during a final round of extensive public consultation
                                                                             and participation workshop held in Ngoyla and Mintom forests’ massifs on
                                                                             August 29 and 31, 2011, respectively. Both the SA and IPP were publicly
                                                                             disclosed in-country on 12/20/2011and at the World Bank InfoShop on
                                                                             01/10/2012 prior to project appraisal.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      ✖          As the project is expected to promote the creation of a protected area, which
                                                                             could result in the restriction to access to the natural resources and other
                                                                             livelihood support means in a legally designated protected area, the Client has
                                                                             therefore complied with OP/BP 4.12 principles and procedures, by preparing a
                                                                             Process Framework (PF) which sets forth the principles and guidelines to be
                                                                             followed for sustainable management of these natural resources upon which
                                                                             local beneficiaries, particularly Indigenous Peoples livelihood depend. Hence,
                                                                             the PF clearly defines the tangible socioeconomic measures to be taken by the
                                                                             authorities to ensure the traditional rights of local populations as well as the
                                                                             (free prior and meaningful) consultation process during the classification and
                                                                             delimitation of any protected areas. The PF was publicly disclosed in-country

                                                                                                                                                   Page 4 of 7
                                                                                                    on 12/20/2011and at the World Bank InfoShop on 01/09/2012 prior to project
                                                                                                    appraisal.
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                     ✖      The policy is not triggered as no activity will involve construction of dams nor
                                                                                                    use resources from an existing dam throughout the life of the project cycle.
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                     ✖      The policy is not triggered as no activity will occur on and/or impact
                               7.50                                                                 international waterways during the project life cycle.
Public Disclosure Copy




                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                         ✖      The policy is not triggered simply because none of the proposed project
                                                                                                    activities will occur on disputed areas during the course of the project life cycle.

                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                 The Project is primarily aiming at ensuring free prior and informed consultations with local communities, particularly Indigenous Peoples and the
                                 vulnerable groups, to obtain their broad agreement with proposed forest classification (legal gazettement) and management plans of forest
                                 areas. The Project will not finance actual gazettement nor the implementation of forest management plans or any related concrete investments.
                                 It is thus not expected to have any direct environmental and social large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts due to project financed
                                 activities. The Project might have additional indirect impacts in the sense that it will classify priority conservation areas, and prepare
                                 management plans for areas to be designated as Protected Areas. It will also put in place a Pilot Livelihoods Support Mechanism (Component
                                 2) to finance small scale local development initiatives in communities living in the area to compensate for reduced access and restricted levels
                                 of natural resource harvesting (in particular hunting and gathering) in the short term necessary to achieve sustainability.
                               2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                                 It is expected that while the creation of some legally protected core areas may restrict access to natural resources, project interventions,
                                 including efforts to improve natural resources management, and the Livelihoods Support Mechanism (Component 2) will have on balance a
                                 positive impact on the project’s main beneficiaries, who are the local communities that live within and around the Ngoyla Mintom Forest massif,
                                 specifically in the communes of Mintom and Ngoyla, and whose livelihoods mostly depend on the natural resources of the Ngoyla Mintom
                                 Forest massif.
                               3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                                 Alternative of NOT implementing the project: The existence of valuable natural resources in the Ngoyla Mintom forest and expansion of road
                                 infrastructure through the area will in itself likely lead to widespread development of industrial and artisanal logging, expansion of commercial
                                 cocoa plantations, and potentially the installation of large scale agricultural plantations in the area. These developments would in turn stimulate
                                 rapid immigration to the area, thereby increasing pressure on its natural resources, particularly wildlife for bushmeat to feed the expanding
                                 population, and contributing to degradation of habitats, loss of biodiversity, reduction of environmental services and undermining indigenous
                                 peoples’ communities’ way of life. While the planned iron ore mining will not extend beyond the known deposits, artisanal gold mining is already
                                 expanding into the Ngoyla-Mintom forest and will extend without control in absence of a project. Therefore, the risks of not implementing the
                                 project and allowing widespread commercial timber harvesting, illegal hunting, artisanal gold panning, and unregulated conversion of forest to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 other land use patterns are perceived as much greater than those entailed in project implementation.
                               4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                                  and implement the measures described.
                                 The social safeguards documents prepared by the Client are respectively a Process Framework (PF) and an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP),
                                 and a Social Assessment (SA). The Process Framework (PF) sets forth the principles and guidelines to be followed for a sustainable
                                 management of these natural resources upon which local beneficiaries, particularly Indigenous Peoples livelihood depend. Moreover, it clearly
                                 defines the way in which traditional/customary rights will be preserved and establishes a framework and process for free prior and meaningful
                                 participatory consultation with all stakeholders, including Indigenous Peoples Organizations (IPOs) and other Civil Society Organizations (CSO)
                                 currently working with/supporting local beneficiary communities in order to ensure that the project abides by the triggered safeguard policies’
                                 principles and guidelines, and does take into consideration local communities’ needs and opinions and benefits them. Furthermore, and as
                                 suggested by the safeguard policies, results of these participatory public consultations were fully shared with primary beneficiaries to foster and
                                 ensure transparency.

                                 As specifically instructed by the OP 4.10 policy, a comprehensive Social Assessment (SA) was carried out based on socio-economic surveys
                                 and stakeholders, particularly Indigenous Peoples analysis in the project areas, and was coupled with the Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) to
                                 ensure that the Baka community in the area and vulnerable groups are freely and meaningfully consulted and they benefit from the project.

                                 The Client also prepared an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) with an Environmental and Social Management Plan
                                 (ESMP). The ESIA and the ESMP have incorporated a section on Pest management and an Action plan on pest management issues
                                 respectively.

                                 Each of these mentioned documents (namely, SA, IPP, PF and ESIA) were subject to further public consultation and participation exercise in
                                 the field, and have been reviewed and cleared by both the project safeguard team and ASPEN, and disclosed in-country and at the InfoShop
                                 prior to appraisal.

                                 Capacity of the client to plan and implement safeguards measures is moderate. The country in general is familiar with the World Bank
                                 environmental and Social Safeguards policies. The Norms and Control Department of the Ministry of Environment and Nature Protection
                                 (MINEP) will be responsible for providing overall quality control through the review and clearance of the ESMPs prepared by the client during
                                 classification of the forest, and of any other investor in the region. The Bank’s “Environmental and Social Capacity Building for the Energy
                                 Sector Project” (PRECESSE - P109588) is already providing general capacity building for MINEP to conduct Environmental monitoring and
                                 control in the context of large infrastructure projects, with an initial focus on energy projects, but may expand its operations to cover the Mining
                                 Sector after a mid-term review. Communication and coordination with PRECESSE will therefore be sought by the Project Coordinator.The
                                                                                                                                                                             Page 5 of 7
                           World Bank Safeguards team assigned to the project will provide tangible guidance on the elaboration of the Social and Environmental Clauses
                           of any Terms of Reference for private Contractors.

                           The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) for the project includes an Environmental and Social Management Expert (ESME) who will be identified
                           and assigned by the recipient ministry. S/he will have the overall responsibility for implementing the recommendations in the elaborated
                           safeguards documents (ESIA/ESMP, SA, IPP, PF). S/He will work closely with MINEPDED to ensure proper compliance with both World Bank
                           policies and National legislations. The project Manual of Procedures - which will reflect the core recommendation of the elaborated safeguards
Public Disclosure Copy




                           instruments - will further clarify its job descriptions and functioning modalities. The ESME will work closely with local MINFOF and MINEP staff,
                           local councils, local communities and administrative and traditional authorities to: ensure that the contents of the environmental and social
                           safeguard instruments are well understood by beneficiary communities, project implementers and other key stakeholders; conduct or
                           commission studies to identify the impacts of any project activities that may restrict community access to natural resources in the forest massif;
                           ensure adequate: implement mitigation measures identified in the environmental and social management plan and Process Framework and
                           compliance with both the environmental and social safeguards of the World Bank and the national legislation; and monitor the implementation
                           of environmental and social management plans of other projects in the region (Mining, Roads, Rail, etc.).
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                            on potentially affected people.
                           The Ngoyla Mintom area is home to approximately 10,200 people living in about 60 localities within and around the project area, including an
                           estimated 3,000 members of the Baka community, identified as indigenous peoples in Cameroon. While they are becoming increasingly
                           sedentarised, both through choice and because of Government policies, they still spend the majority of their time hunting, fishing and gathering
                           non-timber forest products in the forest.

                           The primary project beneficiaries of the project will be those among this community whose livelihoods traditionally depend on the diverse natural
                           resources within the Ngoyla Mintom forest. The benefits include: support to better define and secure their traditional rights of access to the
                           forest for hunting, gathering and cultural activities in future classification documents and management plans; improve sustainable use of forest
                           resources through training and other support; and provision of alternative livelihoods initiatives for those whose use of forest resources may be
                           restricted under future management scenarios.

                           The project will in particular aim to ensure that indigenous people benefit from a proportionally equitable share of the project activities and
                           investments to support new income-generating activities, and that their customary access rights to the forest are better defined. Such rights will
                           either be sustained, or if restricted, shall be adequately compensated as prescribed in OP/BP 4.10 and OP/BP 4.12 operational safeguards
                           policies.

                           The preparation process of all safeguards instruments was grounded on an inclusive consultation and participation of all key stakeholders.
                           Extensive participatory public consultations at the national and local levels have taken place during preparation. The Client carried out an
                           intensive public consultation and participation with the project site populations during the whole preparation process of the safeguards
                           instruments. On 29 and 31 August, 2011, the Government organized a series of workshops in Ngoyla and Mintom localities, with the objective
                           to present to the recipient communities the final draft safeguards documents. All related minutes of these consultation meetings are part of the
                           ESIA, PF and IPP annexes. . All safeguard documents were disclosed publicly in-country (on December 20, 2011, January 09 and 10, 2012
                           respectively) at easily accessible places and in a language understandable and easily accessible by the majority of affected and interested
                           stakeholders including the Baka Pygmies and vulnerable groups, prior to appraisal.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Consultation with communities and interest groups in the project area will be maintained during project implementation as part of a
                           communications strategy (under sub-component 1.1) to ensure that concerns are addressed in a timely and consistent manner. Stakeholder
                           involvement in the decision-making process will further be enhanced to encourage more ownership, foster social accountability which will lead
                           to more sustainability of project activities. A transparent conflict management approach with a clear grievance redress mechanism will also be
                           established at the very outset (as part of sub-component 1.1), and be annexed to the Project Implementation Manual, in order to manage and
                           resolve upfront any arising conflicts between stakeholders as soon as possible (both formal and traditional approaches will be explored for their
                           suitable use in the context of the project).

                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                           Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                              09-Jan-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                          09-Jan-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                           18-Jan-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                           Directors
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                           Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                              15-Oct-2011
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                          20-Dec-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                           09-Jan-2012
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                           Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                              24-Oct-2011
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                          20-Dec-2011

                                                                                                                                                                  Page 6 of 7
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                 10-Jan-2012
                             Pest Management Plan
                              Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                                 Yes
                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                    10-Jan-2012
                              Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                                10-Jan-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                 18-Jan-2012
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                            disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                            Pesticides Management is addressed in the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment and Environmental and Social Management Plan that
                            was disclosed in-country on 10 January 2012, and submitted to InfoShop on 9th January 2012.

                            C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                              Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                     Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]

                            OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                              If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) natural   Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              habitats, does the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                            OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                              If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or SM? Are                   Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              PMP requirements included in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                              Management Specialist?
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                              Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts on               Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                              If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and approved by           Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                              If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the             Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              plan?
                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include provisions for              Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              certification system?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?                     Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language             Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for          Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?                     Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard           Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same               Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Signed and submitted by:                                                  Name                                                        Date
                            Task Team Leader:                     James Michael Acworth                                                            14-Jan-2012
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:      Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                      31-Jan-2012
                            Comments:
                            Sector Manager:                       Idah Z. Pswarayi-Riddihough (SM)                                                 14-Jan-2012
                            Comments:      approved



                                                                                                                                                                          Page 7 of 7
