                                                                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                             APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA498
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Feb-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        Bosnia and Herzegovina                   Project ID:                        P115954
                              Project Name:                   Irrigation Development Project (P115954)
                              Task Team Leader:               Guy J. Alaerts
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 14-Feb-2012                                    Estimated Board Date:              01-May-2012
                              Managing Unit:                  ECSS1                                    Lending Instrument:                Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                         Irrigation and drainage (80%), Flood protection (10%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (10%)
                              Theme:                          Water resource management (67%), Rural services and infrastructure (33%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                          Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                            7.00
                                   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                                  40.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                        47.00
                              Environmental Category:         B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              The Project Development Objective is to improve the performance of the irrigation systems and the irrigation institutions to support agricultural
                              producers in the project areas.

                              3. Project Description

                              The project would have an overall size of about US$47 million, of which US$40million could be financed from the Credit. The final amount and the
Public Disclosure Copy




                              allocation by entity will need to be discussed during appraisal, based on the feasibility and readiness of the sub-projects. It appears that a slightly
                              larger amount of the fund could be allocated to sub-projects in RS than in FBiH. Considering the terrain conditions, RS may have an overall larger
                              area that is economically attractive for irrigation investments than the Federation, and in general, RS appears to have made most progress to date
                              with the preparation of the regulatory frameworks. A relatively rigorous subproject prioritization has been prepared identifying the potentially viable
                              scheme locations, applying criteria of agronomic and market opportunities, water resources, economic and financial feasibility, institutional
                              sustainability and readiness, and environmental and social safeguards. These schemes (and their design options) would need to be further
                              confirmed by appraisal regarding their feasibility and significance.

                              The works and equipment off-farm for each sub-project would be financed from the Credit and counterpart funds that will include both entity and
                              local-government contributions; in RS, a Regulation sets the contribution by the municipalities (amount to be determined in the Project Operational
                              Manual). The on-farm equipment such as sprinklers, local pumps and tubes are to be financed by the farmers, who can apply for credit from local
                              development banks or partial subsidy from the Entity, or canton/ municipality. The O&M costs of the equipment will be paid by the water users
                              based on a fee that will be collected and managed by a local agency (local government or Water Agency). This local agency will delegate and pay
                              for the actual O&M work, to be carried out by a local water utility or dedicated agency (such as the Water Drainage Company near Bijeljina).

                              The project would have the following components:

                              Component 1: Pilot Infrastructure Investment (US$37.5m: includes works, goods, consulting services). This component will finance the
                              implementation of irrigation and drainage infrastructure works/equipment in the form of about 12-13 Sub-projects (SPs), of which 6 each located in
                              RS and FBiH. The sub-projects are selected from the long-lists of potential sub-projects that were prepared by the two Ministries and the DB. The
                              sub-projects all take place on existing agricultural land that in the past has been provided for irrigation services; in some of the sub-projects the first
                              priority will be on restoring or improving drainage to ensure proper water management. The works/equipment will mostly comprise rehabilitation
                              with some reconstruction, upgrading and modernization, also introducing new technologies that are more water efficient such as drip irrigation and
                              low-pressure sprinklers (only for the public/main and semi-public/secondary parts of the irrigation system, hence not on-farm). The prioritization of
                              sub-projects is based on selection criteria, including economic and financial feasibility (including the predisposition of end users and local
                              governments to pay fees and undertake O&M), environmental and institutional sustainability, clarity of land tenure, and readiness for
                              implementation.

                              Component 2: Institutional Strengthening and On-farm Irrigation Modernization (US$6.8m: includes consulting services, goods/equipment, training,
                              and study tours). This component would support the capacity strengthening of the Ministries, the Water Agencies, the Irrigation Extension services
                              in RS and FBiH, and participating municipalities and cantons in addressing: the new sector policies, establishing and facilitating/strengthening the
                              capacity of Water Users Associations (WUA), the O&M arrangements for the introduced infrastructure/facilities, the fee determination, fee

                                                                                                                                                                             Page 1 of 4
                               collection and management, and related water resources and irrigation management. The Component will assist the Entities with the good
                               practices in irrigation-scheme design, Participatory Irrigation Management (PIM), and preparing legal and regulatory frameworks for I&D, in
                               particular supporting the finalizing of the “Irrigation Rulebook? in both entities, which will complement the State-level Water Code. The PIM
                               includes establishing a transparent fee collection and irrigation payment reporting system that will provide yearly reports to the annual assembly of
                               each WUA. This Component will also fund on-farm Irrigation Advisory Service (IAS), including assisting farmers to access credit and/or subsidy
                               programs for on-farm equipment for optimizing irrigation use (“more crop per drop? and “less drop per crop?). It will also selectively finance on-
                               farm water-management equipment for each SP serving no less than 1,000 ha (e.g. soil-moisture monitoring kits, water-flow meters, “Total
Public Disclosure Copy




                               Weather Station?).

                               Component 3: Project implementation support (US$2.7m: includes consulting/non-consulting services, goods, training, and incremental operating
                               costs). This would cover costs of project management including M&E, safeguards (ESMP), audits, management information system (MIS),
                               procurement and FM training, and office and mobile equipment.

                               4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                               The project will cover areas located throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina, within the two entities (Federation BiH and Republika Srpska).

                               The Project will not finance activities in areas that are suspect for presence of mines and other unexploded ordinances. As such, the Client will
                               need to obtain prior certification from the Bosnia and Herzegovina Mine Action Center (BH MAC) that a specific sub-project area is mine-free.

                               5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                               Naima A Hasci (ECSOQ)
                               Esma Kreso (ECSS3)

                               6. Safeguard Policies                           Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                               Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01             Yes              1. The Irrigation Development Project has been classified as a Category B project
                                                                                                requiring a Partial Environmental Assessment. Since some of the schemes are not
                                                                                                known at the time of Appraisal, an Environmental Management Framework
                                                                                                document has been prepared, while site-specific Environmental Management
                                                                                                Plans (EMPs) have been prepared for the five priority schemes. The identified
                                                                                                environmental impacts include those related to simple reconstruction works and
                                                                                                are also reflected in a Checklist EMP for Irrigation Systems Reconstruction
                                                                                                developed within the ESMF for this project.
                               Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                     No               The Project will focus on existing agricultural land with existing irrigation schemes,
                                                                                                and no conversion of land or works on natural habitats is envisaged.
                               Forests OP/BP 4.36                              No               The Project will finance activities related to agricultural land, and no activities on
                                                                                                forested land are foreseen.
                               Pest Management OP 4.09                         No               Even though the Pest Management policy (OP4.09) has not been triggered, the
                                                                                                Environmental Management Framework document provides an overview of the
                                                                                                pest management policies in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as the progress in
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                this sector made by the World Bank financed Agriculture and Rural Development
                                                                                                Project. The EMF also provides a framework for training and education of farmers,
                                                                                                if necessary.
                               Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11          No
                               Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                   No
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12             Yes              Project activities do not anticipate any significant resettlement. However a
                                                                                                provisional Resettlement Policy Framework has been developed, on the basis of
                                                                                                which, where applicable for any SP, a Land Acquisition Plan will be developed,
                                                                                                reviewed, cleared and disclosed publically prior to the commencement of any
                                                                                                physical works.
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                       No
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP       Yes              The IDP will focus on rehabilitation and reconstruction of the existing irrigation
                               7.50                                                             systems, with no changes to the quantity of water taken in or the quality of water
                                                                                                released downstream to the riparians.
                                                                                                Thus the Bank has obtained a waiver from its management as to the notification
                                                                                                requirement under OP7.50. Nevertheless, as per paragraph 7b of OP7.50, the
                                                                                                FBiH and RS (MOAWMFs) will remain responsible for examining, and acting on,
                                                                                                any emerging riparian issues (if any) as IDP advances, i.e. depending on the
                                                                                                findings of the SP-specific EMPs for the next-stage 9 SPs.
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60           No


                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:




                                                                                                                                                                             Page 2 of 4
                            Since some of the schemes are not known at the time of Appraisal, an Environmental Management Framework document has been prepared,
                           while site-specific Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) have been prepared for the priority schemes (priority subprojects, SP). On the
                           social side a social assessment is being undertaken and Resettlement Policy Framework has been prepared, which will serve as a guidance in
                           cases where a RAP or LAP will be required.

                           The Project consists of rehabilitation of existing irrigation schemes, and improvement of water usage within these systems. Since there will be
                           no new schemes established, and no new demands on the water bodies that supply these systems, majority of environmental impacts
Public Disclosure Copy




                           associated with the Project are limited to simple and standard reconstruction works (dust, noise, disruptions, waste generation) with proper
                           maintenance and decrease of water losses in the system mandated during operation of the systems.

                           As the IDP focuses on the rehabilitation and modernization of already existing schemes, with no new construction or establishment of new
                           irrigation schemes, the available design documentation suggests there will be no impact (from the first-stage 4 priority SPs) on the quantity or
                           quality of the water available to the riparians due to the rehabilitation nature of works. The team has received an Exception to Notification from
                           the ECAVP. Nevertheless, as per paragraph #7b of OP7.50, the FBiH and RS (MOAWMFs) will remain responsible for examining, and acting
                           on, any emerging riparian issues (if any) as IDP advances, i.e. depending on the findings of the SP-specific EMPs for the next-stage 9 SPs.

                           Pest Management (OP 4.09). Even though the Pest Management policy has not been triggered at the time of Appraisal the Environmental
                           Management Framework document provides an overview of the pest management policies in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as the progress
                           in this sector made by the World Bank financed Agriculture and Rural Development Project. The EMF also provides a framework for training
                           and education of farmers that could apply and that can be used for guidance by the PIUs.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                             Even though the actual environmental impacts during project implementation are minimal, and are reflected in the rehabilitation works with
                           proper mitigation measures, the positive environmental impacts and effects of the overall project will be significant. First and foremost the
                           usage of water for irrigation will be better planned and organized at the local level. Adequate maintenance of irrigation systems will help
                           decrease the water losses within the system, and the water usage will be rationalized through improved methods of irrigation. Through the
                           establishment of Water User Associations, the planned and rational method of water use will be strengthened, and the irrigation users of water
                           will have a body that would be able to represent them as an equal partner in future planning of river basin management or any other
                           discussions between water users among sectors such as power, tourism, water supply etc. By establishing more efficient WUAs the project
                           anticipate to improve equity in the distribution and access to the natural resources in the targeted areas. With the increased use of water
                           resources there may be a risk that the project activities may favour large companies, particularly in RS. In this context, one area that the
                           project will need to pay particular attention in terms of indirect impacts is ensuring better inclusion of small and vulnerable farmers to the
                           irrigation system.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                            NA
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                            and implement the measures described.
                            The Project will be implemented through respective Project Implementation Units in the two entities of BiH (and District of Brcko). The Project
                           Implementation Unit within the Republika Srpska Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Management, which will be implementing this
                           Project, already has experience with the World Bank financed Small Scale Commercial Agriculture Development Project and the Agriculture
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and Rural Development Project. Both of these projects were Category B and all of the requirements as per the respective EA documents have
                           been implemented satisfactorily. The same approach will be taken in Federation BiH, where the PIU is also within the Ministry of Agriculture,
                           Water Management and Forestry and has already implemented the two World Bank financed projects. The segments involving District of Brcko
                           will be implemented through their Department for Agriculture, Forestry and Water Management, which has no previous experience working with
                           World Bank financed projects. The Department however will be encouraged to cooperate with the other two PIUs and to seek advice from the
                           World Bank Task Team.

                           The environmental permitting system is in place in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and is carried out at the level of the entities, with respected
                           ministries dealing with environment in both. District Brcko also handles environmental permitting through a department responsible for
                           environment. The EIA laws and requirements are in line with those established in the EU. In addition, water permits are issued for all projects
                           and activities that require water use or wastewater releases. Such Water Management Permits are issued based on the water balance and
                           assessment of the competing demands for water. The entities handle water management through four semi-independent Water Agencies that
                           are operational and that focus on integrated river basin management being guided by the EU Water Framework Directive and as such are
                           better positioned to manage water than some of the neighboring countries. The Department however will be encouraged to cooperate with the
                           other two PIUs and to seek advice from the World Bank Task Team. On social mitigation side it was agreed that in RS, there will be specific
                           requirement established to ensure that there’s a balanced distribution of the project resources between large companies and small, vulnerable
                           farmers.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                            on potentially affected people.
                             The key stakeholders include the project beneficiaries, which are commercial farms and farmers, including smallholders slightly above
                           subsistence all the way to fairly large commercial agribusiness. The social assessment (SA) underway has undertaken questionnaires and
                           focus groups to ensure that the needs of the stakeholders, particularly the small and vulnerable beneficiaries is being taken into account in the
                           project design.

                           The ESMF and Subproject-specific ESMPs will be disclosed and made available to the public both on-line and in hard copy at project locations,
                           including meaningful public consultations organized at the level of the capital cities of the two Entities (on December 22 in Sarajevo for FBiH,
                           and on December 23, 2011 in Banja Luka for RS), as well as for each subproject. Announcements will be made in the local media, and through
                           local government units, as well as targeted invitations sent out to ensure all of the potentially affected people can be consulted and have a
                           chance to express their views. Disclosure would be made in two stages as follows:

                           i.       The Social and Environmental Assessment Framework ESMF (including a Resettlement Policy Framework RPF), and the
                           Subproject-specific EMP for Gorazde, have been drafted and sent to the Bank in mid December 2011 for disclosure. These were disclosed at
                                                                                                                                                                   Page 3 of 4
                              the website of the Federal ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Management (www.fmpvs.gov.ba), the PIU website (http://portal.piusum.
                              ba), and in hard copy within the PIU offices in Sarajevo. Their final documents (incorporating the aforementioned public consultations) would be
                              disclosed by RS, FBiH and in Infoshop in January 2012.
                              ii.        Amid the Project appraisal (February 2012), the Subproject-specific EMPs and SAs for the four priority SPs will be finalized and
                              disclosed.

                            B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                              Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                           Yes
                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                              16-Dec-2011
                              Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                          16-Dec-2011
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                           29-Dec-2011
                              For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                              Directors
                             Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                              Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                           Yes
                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                              16-Dec-2011
                              Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                          16-Dec-2011
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                           29-Dec-2011
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                            disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                            C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                              Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?               Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [    ]

                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                              If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the       Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [    ]
                              plan?
                            OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                              Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                                          Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [    ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?               Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [    ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language       Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [    ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for    Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [    ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?               Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [    ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard     Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [    ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same         Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [    ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Task Team Leader:                    Guy J. Alaerts
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:     Name:                                                                       Date:
                            Sector Manager:                      Name Dina Umali-Deininger (SM)                                              Date: 10-Feb-2012




                                                                                                                                                                   Page 4 of 4
