                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA4415
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Jun-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-May-2013, 03-Jun-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                              Project ID:    P129657
                            Project Name:      Concentrated Solar Power Project (P129657)
                            Task Team          Yanqin Song
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          15-Apr-2013                        Estimated   10-Sep-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASCS                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Other Renewable Energy (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Climate change (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        156.40            Total Bank Financing: 80.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                           Financing Gap:         0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                    76.40
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                       80.00
                              Total                                                                                      156.40
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The development objective of the proposed project is to demonstrate the technical viability of
                           Concentrate Solar Power development in cold, dry, and high latitude conditions
                            3. Project Description
                           The proposed project is a national concessional bidding project organized National Energy
                           Administration (NEA). As one of the leading RE enterprises in China, China Datang Corporation

                                                                        Page 1 of 9
                         Renewable Power Co. Ltd (Datang RE hereafter), whose mother company is Datang Corporation
                         (Datang), won the bid. Datang RE created and registered a subsidiary, Datang Ordos Renewable
                         Power Co. Ltd., in Ordos, Inner Mongolia, to develop the proposed project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed project includes the construction of a 50 MW CSP plant on a 200 ha site in the Gobi
                         area. Annual power generation is estimated at 120 GWh. The approved tariff is about US$ 0.15/kWh.
                         According to the concession’s conditions, the project should be built within 30 months after the
                         project company is registered. The project company was registered in December 2011.

                         Technology and cost. Following the requirement in the concession program, parabolic trough
                         technology was selected for the proposed CSP project with 4 hours of thermal storage. Given the
                         water scarcity in the northern region of China, the plant will be dry-cooled. Total cost of the project
                         is US$156.4 million

                         Project scope. The project includes two components at a total cost of US$156.4 million. The first
                         component is a physical investment, estimated at US$152.5 million, which supports the development
                         and construction of a 50 MW concentrated solar parabolic trough plant with 4 hours of thermal
                         storage. The second component is technical assistance(TA), estimated at US$3.9 million, which is
                         designed to strengthen the capacity of the Datang RE Ordos to ensure the smooth implementation of
                         the proposed project and future operation and maintenance of the CSP plant. The TA component
                         includes: (a) capacity building of Datang RE Ordos staff on site and overseas training related to the
                         operation and maintenance of the CSP plant not included in an EPC (engineering, procurement, and
                         construction) type of contract and Owner’s Engineer (OE) contract; (b) acquisition of computer
                         based models and operational methodologies and related training to use them properly; and (c) hiring
                         an OE to assist in improving the technical design and preparing the bidding documents to avoid
                         delays in project implementation.

                         Financing. The total project investment is estimated to be US$156.4 million and the proposed IBRD
                         loan would be around US$80 million. The remaining financing will be covered by (a) Equity from
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Datang RE as required by Chinese law (at least 20 percent); and (b) a commercial loan from the
                         China Construction Bank.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is located in Balagong Town of Hangjinqi in Ordos, Inner Mongolia. The site is well
                         suited for solar projects, especially for development of CSP, due to adequate solar resources and
                         proximity to the power grid. An existing 220 kV substation is located 700 meters away from the
                         project site.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Chongwu Sun (EASCS)
                         Jun Zeng (EASCS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes               Project related environmental issues appear to
                          BP 4.01                                              be minimal. In accordance with Chinese
                                                                               Environmental Assessment requirements, A
                                                                               Chinese Environmental Impact Assessment



                                                                       Page 2 of 9
                                 Report was prepared, for a 85 MW CSP power
                                 plant, by Nanjing Research Institute of
                                 Environmental Sciences, a institute holding EA
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Class A Certificate issued by the Ministry of
                                 Environmental Protection, and approved by Inner
                                 Mongolia EPB in 2008. The capacity of the
                                 proposed CSP for Bank financing is reduced to
                                 50 MW, at the same location.

                                 Through site visit and discussion with the client
                                 and their EA consultant, the task team conducted
                                 preliminary environmental screening:

                                 The proposed project is located the New Energy
                                 Development Zone, in Balagong Town of
                                 Hangjinqi in Ordos, Inner Mongolia (see Figure
                                 1-1). The site is well suited for solar projects,
                                 especially for development of CSP, due to
                                 adequate solar resources and proximity to the
                                 power grid. An existing 220 kV substation is
                                 located 700 meters away from the project site.
                                 There are no farming and other active economic
                                 activities in that area and villages are at least 5
                                 km away from the Zone.

                                 Environmental Issues-Construction
                                 Environment, worker health and safety issues
                                 associated with construction are the traditional
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 aspects of moving men, materials, and machines,
                                 namely:

                                 Waste gas
                                 Pollution during construction period is mainly
                                 dust from: excavation and use of explosives, and
                                 stacking, transport, loading, unloading of
                                 construction materials (concrete, sand, etc.)
                                 Exhaust gases and dust from movement of
                                 various vehicles and construction equipment, and
                                 storage sites of construction rubbish

                                 Noise
                                 Noise sources include mechanical devices and
                                 vehicles including grab, blender, vibrator,
                                 concrete transportation vehicles, bulldozer,
                                 impact driller, air compressor, welder, multiple
                                 function wood planner, trucks, pile drivers and
                                 grinders.



                         Page 3 of 9
                                  Waste water
                                 The waste water from this project during the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 construction period is sewage from the
                                 construction crew and small amounts from
                                 equipment cleaning and mechanical flushing.

                                 Solid waste
                                 The solid waste during the construction period of
                                 this project is non-hazardous waste generated
                                 mainly from the construction rubbish and rubbish
                                 from construction crews.

                                 Health and Safety
                                 Use of heavy equipment, lifting and moving
                                 equipment and materials, handling and use of
                                 explosives and various hazardous materials
                                 (paints, cleaning materials, oil, greases, etc.).

                                 Environmental Issues-Operation
                                 The project will use a dry cooling system, so
                                 water requirements will be minimal. The main
                                 pollution during operation period mainly is
                                 nonhazardous solid waste and wastewater
                                 generated from the workers daily functions.
                                 There will also be a small amount of wastewater
                                 produced from mirror cleaning and the
                                 concentrate stream from the reverse osmosis
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 desalting system producing purified water for:
                                 mirror cleaning, boiler make-up, and cooling
                                 system for the heat transfer fluids etc.

                                 There are minor health and safety issues
                                 associated with the use and handling of the heat
                                 transfer fluids (HTF). These materials are
                                 relatively inert and safe, but they are combustible.
                                 The HTF can burn at elevated temperatures. Its
                                 chemical nature is such that its use as heat
                                 transfer medium in a properly designed and
                                 operated system does not normally constitute a
                                 serious fire or explosion hazard: vapor leaking
                                 into the air rapidly cools down to temperatures
                                 below the fire point. However, high pressure
                                 mists can form an explosive mixture with air if
                                 there is a leak in the heat exchange system
                                 between the molten nitrate salt and the HFT. The
                                 feasibility study recommended nitrogen



                         Page 4 of 9
                                                                        blanketing to avoid the formation of an explosive
                                                                        mixture in case of a HTF to nitrate salt leakage.
                                                                        An emergency response plan is recommended for
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        the operation of the CSP, included in the EMP.

                                                                        Based on the above, this policy is triggered and
                                                                        the instruments are: EIA and EMP.

                                                                        IFC’s Environmental, Health and Safety (EHS)
                                                                        Guidelines on Community Health and Safety, and
                                                                        Occupational Health and Safety are applicable to
                                                                        this project.

                                                                        The project has been categorized B because (1)
                                                                        there is no hazardous materials/wastes from the
                                                                        proposed technology and processing of the CSP
                                                                        project; (2) the proposed CSP project is not
                                                                        located in a sensitive environmental area, and
                                                                        there is no significant flora and fauna in the area;
                                                                        and (3) the environmental impacts of the
                                                                        proposed project screened and identified are
                                                                        measurable and manageable and none of them are
                                                                        unprecedented.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No            As mentioned above, according to domestic
                                                                        requirement and regulation, an EIA was prepared
                                                                        and cleared in 2008 for a 80 MW CSP at the same
                                                                        site, located in the semi-desert area. However,
                                                                        that project was not proceeded. When this 50
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        MW CSP project is proposed for Bank financing,
                                                                        that EIA was provided for Bank information. In
                                                                        that EIA, there was information about survey of
                                                                        natural resource, which indicated that there was
                                                                        no significant natural habitat resource near the
                                                                        site and no significant flora and fauna in that area.
                                                                        Based on this available information, OP4.04 is
                                                                        not triggered. The TT will ask the EA consultant
                                                                        to recheck and confirm this in the EA process.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            The project will not involve any forestry
                                                                        activity.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            The project will not involve any pesticides.

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No             Initial screening and site visit by the task team
                         BP 4.11                                        did not reveal any relics or physical resources that
                                                                        are culturally or historically significant. The EA
                                                                        report prepared in 2008 had confirmed this. The
                                                                        task team request the institute which prepared EA
                                                                        to further consult with relevant government


                                                                Page 5 of 9
                                                                       authorities responsible for protection of physical
                                                                       cultural resources during EA preparation process.
                                                                       Furthermore, EMP will include chance find
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       procedures in accordance with both Chinese
                                                                       regulations and World Bank policy.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    No             The project will be constructed in Bayinger
                                                                       Village at Balagong Town, Hangjing Banner,
                                                                       Ordos Municipality, Inner Mongolia Autonomous
                                                                       Region. The proposed project site is more than 5
                                                                       KM from the nearest residential area of the
                                                                       village and the project construction/
                                                                       implementation will not cause any impact to the
                                                                       villagers there. There are 619 households living
                                                                       in the Bayinger Village. Among its 1500 people,
                                                                       925 are Mongolians and the remaining are Han
                                                                       people. Within the village, there is no clear
                                                                       boundary between Mongolians and Han people;
                                                                       Although Mongolians has its own language, the
                                                                       villagers use Mandarin in their daily lives and
                                                                       they also intermarry. Moreover, they are not
                                                                       presenting customary social and political
                                                                       institutions. And in the village, they live together
                                                                       with Han people and share land and natural
                                                                       resources. The transmission line will be
                                                                       constructed along the existing local highway with
                                                                       no impact on local communities. Based on these
                                                                       discussions, the team considered the OP4.10 is
                                                                       not triggered.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   No             The project will occupy a total of 200 ha of land
                         4.12                                          area. The land acquisition procedures, conducted
                                                                       in accordance with local regulations, were
                                                                       completed in 2008. Therefore, there will be no
                                                                       land acquisition or structure demolishing needed
                                                                       for the project construction.
                                                                       The power plant will be connected to the existing
                                                                       substation with a 110 kV-line. The construction
                                                                       of the required transmission line will be located
                                                                       along the existing highway with no land
                                                                       acquisition required.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No             The project is not expected to involve any dams.

                         Projects on International        No            The project will not involve any international
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                          waterways.
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No            The project will not involve any disputed areas.
                         7.60




                                                               Page 6 of 9
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The Bank policy OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment is triggered and the project has been
                              classified as Category B. An Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) was carried out for the
                              proposed project in accordance with China’s national policy and regulations. As part of the EIA,
                              environmental management plan (EMP) was prepared to summarize the key environmental
                              impacts, to determine the mitigation measures and environmental monitoring program and
                              necessary institutional arrangement. The environmental safeguard document was prepared on the
                              basis of Chinese legal and policy framework for environmental protection and applicable Bank
                              safeguard policies and Bank group’s Environment, Health and Safety Guidelines.

                              Through preparation of safeguard documentation, there was not any potential large scale,
                              significant and/or irreversible environmental impacts to be found. From proposed components, the
                              following benefits are expected: the general population in the project area will benefit from the
                              reduced local air pollution, while society in general will gain the benefits from the mitigation of
                              greenhouse gases.

                              The environmental impacts during construction period were identified and assessed, including
                              noise, wastewater, waste gas, solid wastes from construction activities and construction materials
                              and machines, and all of those are measurable and manageable. The main pollution during
                              operation period mainly is nonhazardous solid waste and wastewater generated from the workers
                              daily functions. There will also be a small amount of wastewater produced from mirror cleaning
                              and the concentrate stream from the reverse osmosis desalting system producing purified water
                              for: mirror cleaning, boiler make-up, and cooling system for the heat transfer fluids etc. There are
                              minor health and safety issues associated with the use and handling of the heat transfer fluids
Public Disclosure Copy




                              (HTF). These materials are relatively inert and safe, but they are combustible. The HTF can burn
                              at elevated temperatures. Its chemical nature is such that its use as heat transfer medium in a
                              properly designed and operated system does not normally constitute a serious fire or explosion
                              hazard: vapor leaking into the air rapidly cools down to temperatures below the fire point.
                              However, high pressure mists can form an explosive mixture with air if there is a leak in the heat
                              exchange system between the molten nitrate salt and the HFT. The feasibility study recommended
                              nitrogen blanketing to avoid the formation of an explosive mixture in case of a HTF to nitrate salt
                              leakage. An emergency response plan is recommended for the operation of the CSP, included in
                              the EMP.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                                As a long term impact, the general population in the project area will benefit from the reduced
                              local air pollution, while society in general will gain the benefits from the mitigation of
                              greenhouse gases.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                                N/A
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.


                                                                         Page 7 of 9
                            Environmental: The EIA report, prepared by the client and their EA consultants, thoroughly
                           addressed the potential environmental impacts envisaged for the project, and developed adequate
                           measures in the EMP to avoid, minimize, mitigate and compensate the potential adverse impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The preparation of EA documents followed the relevant national laws/regulations and guidelines,
                           as well as Bank’s safeguards policies and environmental health and safety (EHS) guidelines.

                           During the EIA, risk analysis was carried out with proposed mitigation measure and emergency
                           plan, including (1) the general principle is in compliance with relevant regulation and standards,
                           featuring fire compartments based seriously on types and fire-resisting levels of processing units
                           and buildings, according to satisfy requirement on fire-prevention and safe evacuation; (2)
                           adequate techniques should be used to design precautionary measures for safety assurance; (3)
                           combustible gas test detector and poisonous gas test detector should be installed on the sites where
                           are identified as sensitive operation areas.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Environmental: Two rounds of public consultations were carried out during the EA process. The
                           technique used for the public consultations included surveys using public opinion questionnaires,
                           focus group discussions, and public meetings with key stakeholders and interviews with some
                           project affected persons. The issues raised during these consultations have been incorporated in
                           the EIA and EMP. Furthermore, feedback over the concerns and issues collected in public
                           consultation have been provided to the concerned groups and documented in the EA. The EIA and
                           EMP documents and other project related documents have been disclosed locally through various
                           means (e.g., websites, newspapers, etc.), as required by national and Bank's policies. The EIA and
                           EMP have been disclosed through Bank’s InfoShop on February 11, 2013.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      14-Jan-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   21-Jan-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            19-Dec-2012
                           Comments: EA was disclosed in the adminstration office of village close to the project and on
                                         the local website
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)         Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?



                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Yanqin Song
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Mark R. Lundell (SM)                         Date: 03-Jun-2013




                                                                       Page 9 of 9
