                                                                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                             CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC670
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Feb-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        Africa                                  Project ID:                       P123093
                              Project Name:                   West Africa Regional Communications Infrastructure Project - APL 2 (P123093)
                              Task Team Leader:               Boutheina Guermazi
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 04-Feb-2013                                   Estimated Board Date:             28-Mar-2013
                              Managing Unit:                  TWICT                                   Lending Instrument:               Adaptable Program Loan
                              Sector:                         Telecommunications (50%), General information and communications sector (50%)
                              Theme:                          Regulation and competition policy (40%), Regional integration (40%), Infrastructure services for private sector
                                                              development (20%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                        Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                          0.00
                                   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                                85.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                      85.00
                              Environmental Category:         B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              B. Project Objectives

                              The proposed project development objective (PDO) is to contribute to increasing the geographical reach of broadband networks and reducing
                              costs of communications services in the territories of Mauritania, Mali and in Togo.

                              C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Similarly to APL 1-A and APL 1-B, the proposed operation will have in each country three components as follows:
                               Component 1: Supporting connectivity,
                               Component 2: Creating an enabling environment for connectivity, and
                               Component 3: Project implementation.

                               WARCIP2-Mauritania

                              Component 1 Supporting connectivity will focus on (i) building 2 fiber optic missing links (270 km link to Néma; 969 km link to Akjoujt-Atar-Tidijkja)
                              to provide redundancy connectivity for cross-border links towards ECOWAS - namely towards landlocked countries Mali, Niger and Burkina Faso -
                              and towards North Africa (via the connection with Morocco) as well as dissemination of international connectivity to all 13 provincial capitals
                              contributing hereby to reducing the urban/rural divide in the sub-region and on (ii) establishing national and regional Internet Exchange Points
                              (IXPs). Missing links and IXPs shall be (as for ACE international connectivity) built and operated under a PPP and in accordance with open access
                              principles. Economic and financial analysis will be conducted for the proposed investment as part of project preparation.

                              Component 2 Creating an enabling environment for connectivity will focus on (i) adapting as appropriate the existing transaction design and
                              operating model for ownership and management of international infrastructure to the roll-out and operation of terrestrial backbone links financed
                              under the project (ii) review and revise wherever necessary the legal and regulatory framework for ICT to maximize the benefits of the proposed
                              connectivity project (iii) stimulating broadband usage both in urban and rural areas and (iv) strengthening of policymaking and regulatory functions.

                              Component 3 Project implementation will provide support needed to strengthen the capacity of the Government to implement the connectivity
                              project, including setting up very small Project Implementation Unit (PIUs) which will be mainstreamed into the Executing Agency, which is the
                              Ministry of Employment, Professional Education and New Technologies (MEFPNT). The core PIUs staff will consist of a project coordinator,
                              procurement specialist, finance specialist, accountant and an office assistant. Technical specialists may also be hired if required for
                              implementation of the project. The component will also cover office equipment, incremental operating costs, audits and communications as well as
                              M&E, environmental and social studies, their implementation and/or the monitoring of their implementation.

                              WARCIP2-Mali

                              Component 1 Supporting connectivity will focus on (i) building 2 missing links of the national and regional backbone (see picture below:
                              Government phase II: 130 km link from Bamako to border with Guinea; 500 km link between Gao and Mopti to connect existing fibers to the
                              borders of the West and fibers to the borders of the East of Mali) and on (ii) establishment of neutral carrier hotel / national and regional IXP
                           where a market and a hub for capacity could be established in order to have alternative access to improve terms of access to capacity and lower
                           cost . Missing links shall be built and operated under a PPP and in accordance with open access principles. Economic and financial analysis will
                           be conducted for the proposed investment as part of project preparation.

                           Component 2 Creating an enabling environment for connectivity will focus on (i) defining and implementing the transaction design and operating
                           model for ownership and management of international, regional and national infrastructure including the carrier hotel / IXP (ii) reviewing the legal
                           and regulatory framework for ICT and addressing any policy and regulatory bottlenecks to maximize the benefits of the proposed connectivity
Public Disclosure Copy




                           agenda (iii) stimulating broadband usage both in urban and rural areas and (iv) strengthening of policymaking and regulatory functions.

                           Component 3 Project implementation will pr ovide support needed to strengthen the capacity of the Government to implement the connectivity
                           project, including setting up very small Project Implementation Unit (PIUs) which will be mainstreamed into the Executing Agency, which is Ministry
                           of Posts and New Technologies (MPNT) . The core PIUs staff will consist of a project coordinator, procurement specialist, finance specialist,
                           accountant and an office assistant. Technical specialists may also be hired if required for implementation of the project. The component will also
                           cover office equipment, incremental operating costs, audits and communications as well as M&E, environmental and social studies, their
                           implementation and/or the monitoring of their implementation.

                           WARCIP2-Togo

                            Component 1 Supporting connectivity will focus on (i) establishment of a neutral carrier hotel / national and regional IXP where a market and a
                           national / regional hub for capacity could be established in order to have alternative access to Togo Telecom to improve terms of access to
                           international capacity and lower cost and on (ii) purchase of capacity on fiber-based transmission networks to connect targeted users (e.g. schools,
                           universities, hospitals, and other priority groups) with discounted capacity prices. By doing so Togo will benefit from similar conditions of access to
                           connectivity (diversity of choice, low prices) as other countries in the ECOWAS region. Economic and financial analysis will be conducted for the
                           proposed investment as part of project preparation.

                             Component 2 Creating an enabling environment for connectivity# will focus on (i) defining and implementing the transaction design and operating
                           model for ownership and management of the carrier hotel / IXP and transaction support for the competitive tender for international bandwidth (ii)
                           reviewing the legal and regulatory framework for ICT and addressing policy and regulatory bottlenecks to maximize the benefits of the proposed
                           connectivity agenda (iii) stimulating broadband usage both in urban and rural areas and (iv) strengthening of policymaking and regulatory
                           functions.

                            Component 3 Project implementation will provide support needed to strengthen the capacity of the Government to implement the connectivity
                           project, including setting up very small Project Implementation Unit (PIUs) which will be mainstreamed into the Executing Agency, which is the
                           Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications (MPT) . The core PIUs staff will consist of a project coordinator, procurement specialist, finance
                           specialist, accountant and an office assistant. Technical specialists may also be hired if required for implementation of the project. The component
                           will also cover office equipment, incremental operating costs, audits and communications as well as M&E, environmental and social studies, their
                           implementation and/or the monitoring of their implementation.

                            D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                           Additional information to the exact paths of the missing links and sites of neutral carrier hotels / national and regional IXPs should be known before
                           the Decis                                  ion meeting, but likely not all of it.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

                           The institutional responsibilities for preparing the various safeguards instruments will lie with the implementing agency. The agencies responsible
                           for implementation are:

                           In the case of Mauritania: the Ministry of Employment, Professional Education and New Technologies (MEFPNT).
                           In the case of Mali: the Ministry of Posts and New Technologies (MPNT).
                           In the case of Togo: the Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications (MPT).

                           The Ministries have limited capacity for safeguards. Given that a lot more will be required for ensuring compliance from safeguards instrument
                           preparation and reviews to implementation, there will be the need for capacity building. Any specific required action for some of the civil Works will
                           be taken into account during project implementation. Institutional responsibilities for preparing the safeguard assessment strategy will be defined
                           closely with the Safeguards Team.

                           In addition, capacity building on safeguards issues will be provided to the Project Coordination Unit to implement the ESMF, ESIA/EMP, RPF and
                           RAP.

                            F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

                           Paula F. Lytle (AFTCS)
                           Maman-Sani Issa (AFTEN)
                           Africa Eshogba Olojoba (AFTEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

                            Safeguard Policies                               Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01              Yes               The operation includes physical investments such as missing links of national
                                                                                              and regional backbones and neutral carrier hotels / national and regional IXPs.
                                                                                              Because the exact nature and location of investments may not be determined up
                                                                                                                        front, the Borrower will prepare an Environment and Social Management
                                                                                                                        Framework (ESMF).
                                Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                        TBD                   The missing links shall be deployed alongside existing roads and the neutral
                                                                                                                        carrier hotels / national and regional IXPs shall be established in the capital city.
                                                                                                                        While the links are not expected to affect critical habitats, the ESMF process will
                                                                                                                        assess the possibility and, where necessary, include mitigation measures for
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        such impacts.
                                Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                 TBD                    The missing links shall be deployed alongside existing roads and the neutral
                                                                                                                        carrier hotels / national and regional IXPs shall be established in the capital city.
                                                                                                                        Therefore, the civil works involved are not expected to have an impact on
                                                                                                                        forests.
                                Pest Management OP 4.09                                            No

                                Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                             TBD                    The missing links shall be deployed alongside existing roads and the neutral
                                                                                                                        carrier hotels / national and regional IXPs shall be established in the capital city.
                                                                                                                        While the civil works are not expected to affect physical cultural resources, the
                                                                                                                        ESMF will assess this possibility and include “chance finds? procedures for
                                                                                                                        inclusion in the contractors’ contracts.
                                Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                      TBD                   The missing links should be deployed alongside existing roads and the neutral
                                                                                                                        carrier hotels / national and regional IXPs should be established in the capital
                                                                                                                        city. While the civil works are not expected to affect Indigenous Peoples, due
                                                                                                                        diligence will be undertaken in each country and IPPFs will be prepared, as
                                                                                                                        necessary.
                                Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                                TBD                    The missing links should be deployed alongside existing roads and the neutral
                                                                                                                        carrier hotels / national and regional IXPs should be established in the capital
                                                                                                                        city. While the civil works are not expected to involve land acquisition/
                                                                                                                        involuntary resettlement, due diligence will be undertaken in each country and
                                                                                                                        RPFs will be prepared, as necessary.
                                Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                          No

                                Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                          No
                                7.50
                                Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                              No



                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS:
Public Disclosure Copy




                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
                                  should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                    Neither the exact path alongside existing roads nor the exact location of the neutral carrier hotels / national and regional IXPs have been
                                    defined yet. Environmental and Social Management Frameworks (ESMF) and, where applicable, Resettlement Policy Frameworks (RPFs) and
                                    Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) will be prepared and consulted upon for each country prior to Project appraisal. These
                                    documents will be reviewed and cleared by the World Bank and publicly in the country as well as in the Bank InfoShop.

                                    Once the final paths and sites are chosen and the specific civil works identified, an Environmental and Social Assessment including an ESMP,
                                    and a RAP or Abbreviated RAP - whichever will be appropriate will also be prepared. If paths and sites are known soon (because feasibility
                                    studies have been completed), this could even be done before Project Appraisal. For international links to be built on the borders of the
                                    countries, it will be ascertained as soon as possible that there is no territorial dispute in the proposed Project area.

                                    Finally, since the Program will involve PPP schemes, appropriate technical clauses will be prepared and included in the biddings/binding
                                    documents for the Private Entity when necessary, to ensure the execution of agreed environmental and social safeguards measures and
                                    implementation of the recommendations in the instruments.

                         IV. APPROVALS
                                Task Team Leader:                                Name: Boutheina Guermazi
                                Approved By:
                                Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                 Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                     Date: 12-Mar-2012
                                Sector Manager:                                  Name: Randeep Sudan (SM)                                                                              Date: 28-Feb-2012




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
