                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSC764

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Jul-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Africa                           Project ID:      P131027
                            Project Name:      Inga 3 and Mid-Size Hydropower Development TA (P131027)
                            Task Team          Philippe J-P. Durand
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          12-Dec-2012                      Estimated        09-Apr-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTG2                            Lending          Technical Assistance Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector:            Hydropower (100%)
                            Theme:             Regional integration (70%), Infrastructure services for private sector
                                               development (30%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                    43.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              African Development Bank                                                     20.00
                              Total                                                                        63.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to contribute to the cost-effective
                           development of Inga 3 and mid-size hydropower projects under balanced public-private partnerships.
                           This will be achieved through: (i) strategic advice and expertise to the GoDRC; (ii) key
                           complementary studies (including feasibility studies and safeguards assessments); and (iii) capacity
                           building and institutional development.
                           C. Project Description
                           The project consists in technical assistance provided to the GoDRC to support the development of
                           Inga 3 and mid- size hydropower projects in the DRC.
                         Inga 3 would be developed as a public-private partnership (PPP) and would include an open air
                         intake canal with a dam impounding a small reservoir located in the Bundi valley and have an
                         installed capacity in the range of 4000 MW. According to the prefeasibility study completed in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         October 2011, this scheme would present lower costs and risks, and shorter implementation schedule,
                         than the Inga 3 scheme with tunnels that was originally planned. It would also kick start future
                         development of Grand Inga under a phased approach matching the evolution of the regional demand.
                         Mid-size hydropower projects (in the range of 10-100 MW installed capacity) are expected to be run-
                         of-river projects.
                         The project includes the following components divided between two Parts:
                         Part A. Support to the development of Inga 3
                         Component A.1: Strategic advice and institutional support to the GoDRC
                         This component aims at creating the framework for a sound and sustainable development of Inga 3
                         and of the subsequent stages of the scheme up to the full Grand Inga.
                         Component A.2: Key complementary technical, environmental and social activities studies
                         While detailed design activities for the parts of the project that will fall under the PPP will be
                         conducted by the developers/investors, additional investigations and studies such as geotechnical
                         investigations, topographical surveys, bathymetry, physical scale modeling, hydrology, and sediment
                         management will be managed directly by the public implementation agency and provided to the
                         candidates.
                         In addition to that, this component will include:
                         (i)      Detailed engineering for Inga 3 for the parts of the project that will remain in the public
                         domain (intake, cofferdam, canal, dam;
                         (ii)     HV transmission lines : feasibility studies for the HV transmission lines (new/reinforced);
                         (iii)    ESIA, EMP and RAP for the selected transmission lines routes;
                         (iv)     Bidding documents for construction and O&M for the parts of the project that will remain in
                         the public domain (intake, canal, dam, transmission lines);
                         (v)      Integration of the various technical studies performed by the developer/investor with those
                         developed by GoDRC;
                         (vi)     Review and supervision of the activities performed by the developer/investor and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         subsequently by the SPV, including the review of the environmental and social mitigation plans;
                         (vii)    In preparation for the further developments of the Inga site and namely of the construction of
                         a dam on the Congo River, knowledge and data gathering on the biodiversity in the river in the
                         vicinity of the rapids.
                         Component A.3: Capacity building and communication. This component will include support to
                         establishment and operations of (i) the Inga Dedicated Development Structure, and (ii) the public
                         common infrastructure company, (iii) support to the project implementation unit (GoDRC
                         engineering type of activity), preparation of the IDA support for the implementation phase of the
                         project.
                         Part B. Promote the development of mid size hydropower projects in DRC & carbon finance
                         The mid size hydro projects have been inventoried. The technical assistance will aim at selecting the
                         most promising ones through a desk study and at conducting the prefeasibility study. The goal of this
                         component is to promote the development of mid size hydropower projects in DRC by selecting
                         potential projects, performing the prefeasibility studies and evaluating the possibilities for carbon
                         finance for both Inga 3 and mid-size hydropower projects. This Part will comprise 3 components:
                         Component B.1: Analysis of the institutional framework in the energy sector for mid-size hydro
                         projects. This component aims at determining the best candidate for a Coordinating and Managing
                         Entity in charge of development of mid size projects, identification of the potential capacity gaps;
                         Component B.2: Prefeasibility studies of selected mid size hydropower projects.
                         Component B.3: Carbon Finance. This component will: (i) assess the eligibility for carbon finance
                         for Inga 3 and mid-size hydropower projects; and (ii) develop of a CDM Program of Activities
                         (PoA). Under this component, advice will be provided to the government on how carbon finance
                         operations work in general and an assessment of prospects, options and requisites for carbon finance,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and the implications on project design.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the               safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Inga 3 project (also called Grand Inga Phase A) will include a water intake on the Congo River,
                         upstream of the water intake for Inga 1 and 2 existing power stations, an 11 km long canal bringing
                         the waters in the Bundi valley, a 100 m high dam in the Bundi valley and a hydropower station
                         equipped with 8 units releasing the waters in the Congo river downstream of Inga 1 and 2 power
                         stations.
                         The investment cost of Inga 3 is estimated at $33-$35/MWh. Consequently the economic rationale
                         for selecting Inga 3 does not rely on the potential development of subsequent phases of Grand Inga.
                         This is significant from an EIA point of view, as it implies that a detailed study is not required at this
                         stage of the potential impacts of the full Grand Inga development, because full development is not
                         necessary to justify Phase A.
                         A less detailed review of the potential impacts of the full Grand Inga development will be necessary,
                         however, because (i) the proposed design of Inga 3 includes turbines dimensioned to function at both
                         the Phase A and Phase C capacities, after increasing the Bundi dam height for Phase C and (ii) part
                         of the rationale given for selecting Inga 3 canal option is that this will allow the future full
                         development of Grand Inga at a lower cost.
                         The development of Grand Inga Phase C and subsequent phases will have significantly more serious
                         environmental and social impacts because:
                                 Phase C and subsequent phases will require the construction of a barrage across the Congo
                         River. It is proposed that only a residual ecological flow of 5,000 m3/s (about 10% of the annual
                         average flow) be released to the 25km section of river between the barrage and the Grand Inga
                         outfall. This reduction in flow, and the barrier presented by the barrage, will have serious
                         consequences for aquatic life and livelihoods;
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 The reservoir to be formed for Phase C and subsequent phases would cover some 40 km2
                         compared to about 15 km2 for Inga 3, with potentially significant consequences for biodiversity and
                         livelihoods;
                                 The barrage will raise the level of the river by 40m at the barrage, raising water levels as far
                         as 180km upstream. This will affect a number of villages and the town of Luozi, and would currently
                         require the resettlement of an estimated 6,300 people;
                                 The river segment with raised water levels would extend upstream beyond the point at which
                         the river forms the frontier with the Republic of Congo, with significant trans-boundary
                         considerations.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The electricity utility SNEL has an Environmental and Social Management Unit (UGES), which is
                         staffed with 8 specialists (5 environmentalists and 3 social scientists) with appropriate budget,
                         equipment and logistics. UGES has benefited from comprehensive capacity building provided by an
                         international firm under the PMEDE project, as well as from frequent hands-on training from World
                         Bank's safeguards specialists based in Kinshasa. UGES has the capability to conduct and/or
                         supervise EIAs/ESMPs/RAPs, as well as supervise related consultant work.
                         F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                         Paul Jonathan Martin (AFTN3)
                           Antoine V. Lema (AFTCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Safeguard Policies             Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes          The Inga 3 project will require 77ha of land for
                           BP 4.01                                     the canal, and the associated Bundi reservoir
                                                                       will inundate 15.5 km2, including 2.6 km2 of
                                                                       forest land and land used for shifting cultivation.
                                                                       For the Inga 3 project, the Bundi reservoir will
                                                                       not exceed elevation 170.2m; at this elevation
                                                                       no significant negative impacts are anticipated
                                                                       nor on people or nature. However more severe
                                                                       impacts are anticipated in subsequent phases of
                                                                       Grand Inga development when the Bundi
                                                                       reservoir elevation will reach elevation 205m
                                                                       and a barrage will be constructed across the
                                                                       Congo River. The reservoir formed for Grand
                                                                       Inga's subsequent phases (Phases C to G) would
                                                                       cover some 40 km2.
                                                                       The Inga 3 EIA should provide additional
                                                                       information on the four points mentioned in
                                                                       above section D, particularly the first two.
                                                                       In addition, environmental and social
                                                                       assessment of the transmission lines associated
                                                                       to the Inga 3 project (scope and routes still to be
                                                                       determined) will have to be paid special
                                                                       attention, particularly in relation with OP/BP
                                                                       4.04; 4.36; 4.10; 4.11 and 4.12).
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    Yes          Four IUCN Red List mammal species have been
                                                                       identified in the Inga area: Chimpanzee
                                                                       (Endangered); Hippopotamus (Vulnerable); Bay
                                                                       Duiker (Least Concern); Sitatunga (Least
                                                                       Concern). Regarding the presence of
                                                                       chimpanzees, local people report the continued
                                                                       presence of chimpanzee in forested areas
                                                                       beyond the left bank of the river at a level
                                                                       adjacent to Inga, and in the hilly areas beyond
                                                                       the right bank just upstream of Inga extending
                                                                       to Luozi.
                                                                       More detail is required in the Inga EIA on the
                                                                       presence of these species, in particular
                                                                       chimpanzee, the potential impact on them of the
                                                                       development of Inga, measures to mitigate this
                                                                       impact, and if possible to improve the protection
                                                                       of these species.
                                                                       Aquatic biodiversity: The Inga zone of the
                                                                       Congo River is rich in diversity of fish species.
                                                                 An evaluation states that 146 fish species have
                                                                 been identified in Inga area, of which only the
                                                                 African Butter Catfish (Schilbe mystus) is
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 included in the Red List (Least Concern in
                                                                 central Africa). However, the evaluation also
                                                                 states that four fish species have been identified
                                                                 as endemic to this part of Bas-Congo.
                                                                 The Inga EIA should be revised to better reflect
                                                                 the Red List concern regarding the impact of
                                                                 Inga development on these species.
                                                                 The evaluation also notes (i) the presence of
                                                                 endemic species of micralestes and
                                                                 micropanchax, which could be threatened by the
                                                                 development of Grand Inga, and (ii) that it is
                                                                 "certain" that a number of species, particularly
                                                                 those adapted to the deepest parts of the river
                                                                 (up to 100m deep) remain to be discovered. In
                                                                 presenting the report, the consultant also noted
                                                                 the dearth of information on the possible
                                                                 presence and behavior of migratory fish species,
                                                                 which would be particularly impacted by the
                                                                 Phase C barrage.
                                                                 Given the importance of the aquatic diversity in
                                                                 the Inga area, it would be appropriate to initiate
                                                                 as soon as possible long-term support for
                                                                 scientific research that will guide efforts to
                                                                 mitigate these impacts in both the medium-term
                                                                 (i.e. for Grand Inga Phase A or Inga 3) and the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 longterm (i.e. Grand Inga Phase C and
                                                                 subsequent phases), in collaboration with
                                                                 international research centers who are or have
                                                                 been involved in researching the aquatic
                                                                 biodiversity of Bas-Congo.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                TBD   There are no significant forests in the project
                                                                 area concerned by the Inga 3 hydro project.
                                                                 However existence of potential impact of the
                                                                 transmission lines routes will have to be studied
                                                                 once the anchor customers are known.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    No pest management activities are foreseen
                                                                 under the project.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   No known locations with PCR will be affected
                         BP 4.11                                 by the project.
                                                                 Assessment to be revised once transmission line
                                                                 routes are known.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     TBD   There are no people in the project area or its
                                                                 immediate area of influence that would be
                                                                                                                                 classified as indigenous under OP/BP 4.10.
                                                                                                                                 Assessment to be revised once transmission line
                                                                                                                                 routes are known.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           The TA will include a social impact assessment
                                 4.12                                                                                            and a resettlement action plan focusing on the
                                                                                                                                 Inga 3 project and on the transmission lines
                                                                                                                                 routes. In addition to that, although not
                                                                                                                                 impacted by the rising of the water level, the
                                                                                                                                 resettlement of the10,000 person Camp
                                                                                                                                 Kinshasa located within SNEL concession will
                                                                                                                                 be considered and any confirmed legacy issues
                                                                                                                                 raised by communities affected by Inga 1&2
                                                                                                                                 construction will be addressed  all as part of
                                                                                                                                 the Inga 3 project.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         Yes                           The Inga 3 project will include a large dam in
                                                                                                                                 the Bundi valley (100 m high) and an important
                                                                                                                                 canal. There will be a need to consolidate the
                                                                                                                                 geotechnical knowledge of the area and to
                                                                                                                                 prepare a preliminary geotechnical baseline
                                                                                                                                 report.
                                                                                                                                 Sediment management is known to be a critical
                                                                                                                                 issue on Inga 1 and 2. An appropriate sediment
                                                                                                                                 management strategy will have to be designed
                                                                                                                                 for Inga 3 and subsequent phases of the project.
                                                                                                                                 A panel of experts for Inga is already in place
                                                                                                                                 since March 2011. It comprises five specialists
                                                                                                                                 (geotechnical, concrete, sediment, dam,
                                                                                                                                 electromechanical) who field at least semestrial
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 visits to the site and produce associated reports.
                                 Projects on International                                         Yes                           OP 7.50 applies to projects that carry out
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            detailed design and engineering studies for
                                                                                                                                 hydroelectric projects involving the use of
                                                                                                                                 international waterways. The Congo River is an
                                                                                                                                 international waterway.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project is not located in a disputed area, nor
                                 7.60                                                                                            is the project area likely to become one in the
                                                                                                                                 foreseeable future.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Nov-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      TOR for environmental and social studies to be conducted under the TA project should be
                                      finalized and disclosed prior to appraisal of the TA project. An environmental and social expert
                                      panel will be established under the TA project.




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:   Name: Philippe J-P. Durand
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)   Date: 23-Jul-2012
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Lucio Monari (SM)             Date: 22-Aug-2012
Public Disclosure Copy
