                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC5198

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed:
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:                                            Project ID:
                            Project Name:
                            Task Team
                            Leader:
                            Estimated                                           Estimated
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Estimated
                            Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:                                      Lending
                                                                                Instrument:

                            Sector(s):
                            Theme(s):
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     90.00                     Total Bank Financing:         90.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                                Financing Gap:                 0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        90.00
                              Total                                                                        90.00
                            Environmental
                            Category:
                            Is this a
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives


                           C. Project Description
                            The proposed project is expected to improve the energy efficiency of district heating (by reducing
                         heat and water losses in heat transmission and distribution) and increase the use of locally sourced
                         renewable biomass (replacing natural gas for heat generation) in the selected project towns. The
                         project would be implemented over five years, through an Investment Project Financing operation
Public Disclosure Copy




                         from IBRD to the government of Belarus in the amount of about US$90 million. The project would
                         be implemented by the Energy Efficiency Department of the State Standards Committee, its project
                         management unit BelInvestEnergoSberezhenije (PMU), and district heating companies in areas
                         where sufficient biomass fuel supply is available within an economically viable distance.

                         A recently completed ESMAP-financed analytical and advisory activity (AAA), “Belarus Biomass-
                         Based District Heating” (P130977), provides solid analytical underpinnings to guide the project
                         design. The study identifies technically and economically feasible options for converting natural-gas-
                         fired heat boilers to biomass-fired heat boilers. Feasibility analysis carried out by the study on four
                         representative district heating systems indicates that the proposed investments in energy efficiency
                         and biomass-fired boilers for heating are economically viable. The study provides guidance on how
                         to determine the optimal size and technology options for biomass-based heating. In addition, the
                         study shows that a combination of base-load biomass and peak-load gas produces the best economic
                         rate of return; peak-load biomass is not recommended because the heat load is too low to justify the
                         higher up-front investment costs of biomass boilers. The study also reviews the current biomass fuel
                         contracting practices in Belarus and recommends a shift from volume-based biomass pricing to
                         energy-content-based pricing. The insights and methodologies developed in the ESMAP study would
                         be used in selecting and analyzing investments proposed by the Energy Efficiency Department.
                         Recommendations on improving biomass fuel pricing practices would be incorporated in the
                         project’s technical assistance component.

                         The proposed project consists of three components:

                         (1) District Heating Energy Efficiency. This component would include the following typical
                         investments in the selected district heating systems: (i) modernizing the heat substations by
                         introducing individual building-level heat substations and (ii) replacing district heating pipes that
Public Disclosure Copy




                         have large heat and water leaks. Substations at the building level enable a reduction in technical and
                         nontechnical losses, while improvements in piping reduce technical losses.

                         (2) Biomass Heat Generation. This component would support investment in biomass boilers or small
                         combined heat and power plants using biomass as the main fuel to replace existing gas boilers. About
                         10 district heating systems (towns) in Brest, Gomel, Grodno, Minsk, and Mogilev oblasts are
                         expected to be selected. Several criteria would be used for site selection: (i) consumer demand for
                         heat is densely concentrated (measured in MWh/year/channel length), and the population in the
                         proposed community is stable or growing; (ii) biomass fuel (wood chips and wood waste) is
                         available at a reasonable distance from the heat source; (iii) biomass is supplied by certified forestry
                         enterprises from sustainably managed forests; and (iv) biomass will replace imported fuel (gas or oil)
                         for base-load heat generation.

                         The types of biomass boilers would be selected to represent well-known technologies with proven
                         operational performance in geographic locations and with biomass feedstocks similar to those of the
                         selected project towns. The concentration of consumer demand (heat load) is a key factor in
                         determining whether the construction of new biomass district heating is economically viable.
                         Economic feasibility analysis would take into account local conditions to ensure that biomass
                         provides the least-cost solution for heat supply in each proposed project area.
                           (3) Technical Assistance and C apacity Building. This component would finance capacity building
                           for the participating district heating utilities and implementation support to the PMU and the
                           participating utilities. The component would include (i) social accountability measures; (ii) technical
Public Disclosure Copy




                           assistance to support the shift from the current volume-based biomass pricing to energy-content-
                           based pricing; (iii) gender consultation, including support to develop gender-informed project design
                           and to undertake gender impact assessments; (iv) implementation support consultancy to support the
                           PMU and the utilities in the implementation and supervision of the project; (v) training and capacity
                           building for the district heating utilities based on international best practices for energy efficiency
                           improvements in district heating and proven biomass technologies; (vi) social surveys of customer
                           satisfaction before and after the project; (vii) an annual financial audit of the project accounts; and
                           (viii) other consultancy services. For small towns, social accountability efforts would focus on
                           improving access to and availability of information for consumers and civil society organizations on
                           district heating services, the structure of bills, benefits of energy efficiency, project design and
                           implementation, and the like. For large towns, the project would support efforts by the Energy
                           Efficiency Department to improve grievance mechanisms and feedback analysis to enhance service
                           delivery.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                            The project will finance investments in district heating and biomass heat generation systems at 13
                           locations in Brest, Gomel, Grodno, Minsk, and Mogilev oblasts of Belarus. Physical works on most
                           of the project sites will take place at existing industrial/district heating footprint. Few sites will
                           involve small-scale greenfield construction. Based on previous experience with similar investments,
                           the rehabilitation/replacement works are not expected to generate any hazardous materials that will
                           require special disposal.
                           The locations where boilers will be converted to use biomass fuels (wood chips and shavings;
                           sawdust) are known, so the basic issue of sustainability of the biomass production can be addressed
                           during project design rather than being included in the EMP to be addressed during project
                           implementation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                            The Borrower and Project Implementation Unit (Belinvestenergosberezhenije) has proven track
                           record in successful implementation of energy efficiency projects. A designated safeguards specialist
                           will monitor environmental performance of project implementation.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team



                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The types of activities to be implemented will
                           BP 4.01                                               have either minor or no adverse environmental
                                                                                 impacts and provide significant environmental
                                                                                 benefits (reductions in local pollution such as
                                                                                 dust and sulfur dioxide emissions and/or
                                                                                 reductions in emissions of greenhouse gases
                                                                                 such as carbon dioxide). Negative
                                                             environmental impacts are primarily associated
                                                             with construction activities (e.g. dust, noise,
                                                             disposal of non-hazardous waste) and they will
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             be mitigated through good construction and
                                                             housekeeping practices. The EMP (of Checklist
                                                             EMP) will be prepared as part of design
                                                             documentation. In every project location there
                                                             will be public consultations held with prior
                                                             announcement in the local press and by posting
                                                             information on the theme, time and place of the
                                                             consultation in the publicly attended places
                                                             (office of the utility, local authorities’ office,
                                                             web-site of the utility). The information on the
                                                             project with EMP will also be placed on the
                                                             websites of the PMU
                                                             “Belcomenergosberezhenie” and the Energy
                                                             Efficiency Department. In every place the
                                                             public consultation will start with a presentation
                                                             by the Utility and the PMU on the current state
                                                             of affairs and the project main activities and
                                                             expected results as related to the locality. The
                                                             minutes of the public consultations for every
                                                             locality will contain copies of announcements,
                                                             presentations made, summary of comments
                                                             received and list of participants. Summaries of
                                                             the public consultations will be disclosed in the
                                                             same way as invitation to participate.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            TBD   To ensure that he biomass comes from
                                                             sustainable sources, project preparation in each
                                                             selected site would require: (i) information on
                                                             the process and status of sustainability
                                                             certification of forest enterprises in Belarus; (ii)
                                                             provisions to be included in agreements with
                                                             beneficiary utilities requiring that they obtain
                                                             the biofuel from certified sustainable sources (as
                                                             opposed to uncertified enterprises or through
                                                             self-collection of local wood resources); and
                                                             (iii) estimated current and projected supply and
                                                             demand for these materials in the project areas,
                                                             to confirm that there is adequate excess material
                                                             available from existing forest enterprise
                                                             activities so that the increased demand for them
                                                             will not lead to changes in forest management
                                                             or utilization practices (if project-related
                                                             increased demand could lead to such changes,
                                                                                                                                 OP 4.36 would likely need to be triggered and
                                                                                                                                 appropriate measures to ensure sustainability
                                                                                                                                 will be included in the EMP).
Public Disclosure Copy




                                   Pest Management OP 4.09                                         No

                                  Physical Cultural Resources OP/ No                                                             No old or historic buildings/facilities will be
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         included in the project.
                                  Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No

                                  Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP No                                                              No temporary or permanent displacement will
                                 4.12                                                                                            be required for the proposed investments; the
                                                                                                                                 project will be implemented on municipal land
                                                                                                                                 that is not used in any other way. There are no
                                                                                                                                 illegal occupiers or squatters on expected
                                                                                                                                 project sites.
                                   Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                       No

                                  Projects on International                                        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                  Projects in Disputed Areas OP/                                   No
                                 BP 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS : 16-Dec-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                       Safeguard-related studies are expected to be launched on September 16, 2013. The studies are
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      expected to be completed by December 2, 2013.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Fan Zhang

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name:                                                                                                                      Date:
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name:                                                                                                                      Date:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
