                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC568

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Aug-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Mauritania                     Project ID:      P126902
                            Project Name:       Mauritania Basic Education Sector Support Project (BESSP) (P126902)
                            Task Team           Cherif Diallo
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           00-undefined-0000              Estimated        04-Jan-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      AFTEW                          Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector:         Primary education (86%), Central government administration (14%)
                            Theme:          Education for all (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                     0.00
                              Education for All - Fast Track Initiative                                   12.40
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Total                                                                       12.40
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           16.      The Development Objectives of the proposed operation are to improve the quality of teacher
                           training and provide greater access among girls in targeted areas to lower secondary schooling.
                           C. Project Description
                           17.      The BESSP will support quality and access of basic education by providing support has three
                           inter-related components: (i) improve the quality of teaching and learning in basic education; (ii)
                           expand access to and equity in basic education; and (iii) strengthen capacity for administrative and
                           pedagogical management and monitoring.

                           18.    Component 1: Improve the Quality of Teaching and Learning in Basic Education (Estimated
                           Base Cost US$7.3 million). This component will support improvements in pre-service training at the
                         two existing ENIs for primary school teachers. The component aims to improve the quality of ENI
                         faculty, administrators and students and their training environment through:
                         (i)          providing content and pedagogical training for the ENI faculty to improve the quality.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project will support training for the ENI faculty on curriculum content, pedagogy, and bilingual
                         education in French and Arabic. To facilitate the bilingual education aspect of the training the project
                         will provide language lab equipment. The faculty will also receive training in assessment
                         methodologies so that they can (a) assess their students and (b) teach their students assessment
                         methodologies;
                         (ii)     training of ENI administrative staff related to the overall management of the ENIs;
                         (iii)    introducing a competency assessment for each new student cohort at the beginning of their
                         training program to assess their level when entering the ENI. This will allow the ENI management
                         staff and faculty to design a study program that is appropriate for the new students. Moreover, this
                         will allow the ENIs to work with the Ministry of Labor on improving the teacher training school
                         entrance examination which needs to be updated and improved; and
                         (iv)     upgrading the quality of the facilities through the acquisition and distribution of (a) language
                         laboratories equipment and classroom inputs such as desk, chairs and library books depending on the
                         needs of the ENIs.

                         19.      Component 2: Expand access and equity to basic education. (Estimated Base Costs US$3.1
                         million) UNICEF recently completed a study on girls' education in Mauritania which showed that
                         parents are reluctant to send their girls to lower secondary schools because of: (i) the distance girls
                         have to travel to attend lower secondary school, which was identified by 79 percent of parents as a
                         major concern; and (ii) the need to ensure the safety of their girls once they are in school which was
                         identified by 71.2 percent of parents as a concern. Since girls' participation rates in lower secondary
                         school are considerably lower than that of boys, the project will focus on expanding access to lower
                         secondary schools for girls. The project will attempt to reduce the gender gap through demand and
                         supply-side interventions.

                         20.     Sub-component 2.1: Expand Access and Equity for Girls to Secondary Education (Estimated
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Base Cost US$2.0 million). This sub-component will pilot the construction of approximately 5-10
                         lower secondary schools, close to communities (collges de proximits), that currently do not have
                         lower secondary schools. The project will target poor areas that are more densely populated and will
                         be selected based on current school mapping data. The sub-component will finance: (i) the
                         construction and of a small number of lower secondary schools; (ii) civil works site supervision
                         during the construction phase; (iii) purchase of school furniture and basic equipment including the
                         delivery and installation and testing of the equipment; and (iv) purchase of library books for the
                         small school library. To facilitate more rapid results, the project will identify the beneficiary wilayas
                         by appraisal and propose mechanisms to target girls' enrollment even before schools have been built.

                         21.      Sub-component 2.2: Improve equity through the implement of mechanisms to promote girls'
                         schooling (especially in rural areas and in areas having the largest gender gap) (Estimate Base costs
                         US$1.1 million). To respond to the demand side of girls' schooling the project will: (i) organize
                         sensitization campaigns to promote girls' schooling with the support of NGOs or other donors who
                         can be supervised by the regional education directorates (DREN); (ii) encourage the government to
                         continue girls' graduation ceremonies and distribution of awards; (iii) sensitization trainings for
                         teachers, inspectors and school directors in rural colleges regarding girls' rights to education; and (iv)
                         help off-set financial burden to parents through the distribution of school material kits to girls
                         enrolled in the collges built by the project.
                           22.      Component 3: Strengthen capacity for monitoring and evaluation. (Estimated Base Cost US
                           $2.0 million). The MOE-S Directorate of Strategy, Planning and Cooperation (DSPC) is responsible
                           for the compilation and quality of education data and the publication of the data to inform education
Public Disclosure Copy




                           policy and investments. Previous Bank-supported projects in Mauritania have supported the
                           development of an EMIS system that is functional within the DSPC. Government now wants to
                           ensure the full integration of the system by networking all MOE-S departments, including the
                           regional directorates (DRENs), to improve the reliability, timeliness and harmonization of data for
                           the production of the annual education statistics yearbooks. To facilitate this integration and
                           connectivity, the project will support the development of the network system. The interconnectivity
                           will allow regional offices and departments to transfer data to the DSPC for consolidation and
                           facilitate DSPC's final analysis of the data. To ensure proper and accurate data collection at the local
                           levels, the DSPC will guide and train DREN staff as necessary.

                           23.     The project will also finance some operating costs for the DPEF in support of
                           implementation activities which could include the financing of: (i) a limited number of consultants
                           such as one additional accountant and one procurement assistant; (ii) project audits; (iii) bi-annual
                           education sector reviews and supervision, and iv) safeguards training.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the              safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Nationwide in Mautania

                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The borrower's capacity for safeguards is average and there is no national environmental protection
                           agency (EPA). Environmental Assessments are handled within the context of the environmental code
                           of July 26, 2000 and administered by the Ministry of Environment. The project will recruit and
                           environmental and social consultant who will be responsible for following safeguards concerns in the
                           project. The Bank safeguards specialists will provide additional support by way of regular safeguards
                           guidance and training as and when necessary.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Salamata Bal (AFTCS)
                           Africa Eshogba Olojoba (AFTN1)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              Project activities associated with component 2
                           BP 4.01                                               (promote universal access to basic education) is
                                                                                 likely to trigger small scale and site specific
                                                                                 potential environmental and social impacts.
                                                                                 These activities include the construction of
                                                                                 classrooms, rural colleges, and critical ancillary
                                                                                 infrastructure such as latrines and water points.
                                                                                 To address this, an Environmental and Social
                                                                                 Management Framework (ESMF) will have to
                                                                                 be prepared, reviewed, approved and disclosed
                                                                                                                                 in-country and at the InfoShop prior to
                                                                                                                                 appraisal.
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No
                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           New constructions could trigger land take,
                                 4.12                                                                                            restriction of access to assets or sources of
                                                                                                                                 livelihood. As due diligence, a Resettlement
                                                                                                                                 Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared,
                                                                                                                                 reviewed, approved and disclosed in-country
                                                                                                                                 prior to appraisal.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Oct-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The environmental and social safeguard studies (ESMF and RPF) have been prepared since March
                                      15, 2011 and are under review. When approved they will be disclosed in-country and at the
                                      InfoShop prior to appraisal.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Cherif Diallo

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                                          Date: 02-Aug-2012
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Emanuela Di Gropello (SM)                                                                                            Date: 19-Jul-2012




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
