                                                                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                            CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSC429
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                                                               Project ID:
                              Project Name:
                              Task Team Leader:
                              Estimated Appraisal Date:                                              Estimated Board Date:
                              Managing Unit:                                                         Lending Instrument:
                              Sector:
                              Theme:
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                      Amount
                                   Borrower                                                                                                               380.00
                                   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                                  120.00
                                   Financing Gap                                                                                                             0.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                  500.00
                              Environmental Category:
                              Is this a Repeater project?

                              B. Project Objectives

                                         The PDO for the proposed project is to scale up rooftop PV systems and EE investments in the public sector in Beijing. This will be
                              achieved through supporting a large scale roof-top PV program among about 1000 Beijing public schools and colleges using market-based
                              business model, pilots in two-way metering and possibly net metering in a few selected schools for each option, and an EE investment program in
                              the public sector using the ESPC approach.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              C. Project Description

                               The proposed Project will comprise three components:

                              Component 1: Sunshine Schools Program (proposed IBRD financing $95million). The total investment cost of the component is about 1.8 billion
                              yuan (based on an estimated installed cost of 18 yuan/watt), or about US$283.5 million (US$1=6.35 yuan) for a total installed capacity of 100
                              megawatts (MW). The PV systems will be installed in about 1000 public schools and in a number of municipal-budget financed colleges.
                              Individual PV systems are expected to range from 50 kilowatt (kW) to 200kW. Central and municipal government subsidies will finance about two
                              thirds of the estimated investment. IBRD loan is proposed to cover the remainder. The Sunshine Schools program also includes pilots on two-way
                              metering and even net metering if possible in a few selected schools, related technical studies, and educational activities on sustainable energy.
                              These will be covered under Component 3 (Policy Support and Capacity Building) for the purpose of streamlining implementation arrangements for
                              the proposed project.

                              Component 2: Public Sector EE Program (proposed IBRD financing $20 million). The total investment cost of the component remains to be
                              identified. The main investment activity currently under consideration is an EE renovation program among Beijing Municipal Government (BMG)-
                              funded colleges, covering heating, ventilation, and air conditioning systems, lighting, and building envelope. Initial survey done by Beijing Energy
                              Conservation and Environmental Protection Center indicated an EE investment portfolio of about 150 million yuan (about $24 million) among 28
                              BMG-funded colleges. It is expected that ESPC approach will be used for this component.

                              Component 3: Policy Support and Capacity Building (proposed IBRD financing $5 million). Proposed activities include (1) supporting pilots of two-
                              metering and even net metering and related technical studies; (2) expanding and upgrading the on-line monitoring platform for PV systems
                              installed by the Sunshine Schools program; (3) supporting the establishment of an sustainable energy education platform in public schools,
                              including curriculum development and demonstration laboratories for hands-on learning and experimentation, and training of school technical
                              managers for energy management based on international best practices and experiences; and (4) improving energy management in public entities
                              (e.g., implementation of energy monitoring and targeting).

                              D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                               The proposed project is to support roof-up solar PV power generation facilities in about 1000 schools and EE renovation in a number of public
                              sector buildings within the jurisdiction of Beijing Municipality.

                              E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                             Beijing municipal government has had long cooperation with the Bank over two decades. They have implemented several World Bank and ADB
                           funded infrastructure and environmental improvement projects. Therefore, they are familiar with Bank's safeguard policies and requirements.

                            F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

                            Safeguard Policies Triggered                  Yes        No      TBD                                  Explanation
                             Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01           ✖                           The proposed project will have limited environmental impacts
                                                                                                      during installation and operation of rooftop PV facilities, with main
                                                                                                      concerns for safety issues. Such impacts will be of small scale and
                                                                                                      site-specific, and can be readily avoided/mitigated with good
                                                                                                      construction specifications and operational management rules.
                                                                                                      Therefore, the proposed project is Category B as per OP4.01.

                                                                                                      Given the limited and generic environmental impacts of the project,
                                                                                                      the borrower will prepare an EMP or Environmental Code of Practice
                                                                                                      (ECOP) prior to appraisal for different typologies of investments. The
                                                                                                      EMP will include description of circumstances where additional
                                                                                                      mitigation/management measures may need to be developed during
                                                                                                      implementation, and provisions of review and approval of these
                                                                                                      additional mitigation measures. In addition the EMP/ECOP will also
                                                                                                      ensure that the EHS guidelines on Occupational Health and Safety
                                                                                                      are incorporated.
                             Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                             ✖                 The project is mainly in the urban setting and the areas disturbed
                                                                                                      by intensive human activities. According to the preliminary
                                                                                                      environmental screening, there are no ecological sensitive areas
                                                                                                      and natural reserved. This policy is not triggered.
                             Forests OP/BP 4.36                                      ✖                  The Project does not involve forests resources. This policy is not
                                                                                                      triggered.
                             Pest Management OP 4.09                                 ✖                 The Project will not lead to purchase or use of any pesticides. This
                                                                                                      policy is not triggered.
                             Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                  ✖                  It is unlikely that the project will have any impact on physical
                                                                                                      cultural resources, as the proposed components are to be
                                                                                                      implemented on existing buildings. A chance find procedure will be
                                                                                                      included in all construction contracts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                           ✖                  According to Beijing Census data, more than 95% of Beijing's
                                                                                                      residents belong to the Han Chinese majority. Ethnic Minority
                                                                                                      populations include Manchu, Hui, Mongols, and Koreans. Most of
                                                                                                      the ethnic minority populations are living scattered within the territory
                                                                                                      of Beijing municipality. Some Manchu and Hui population are living
                                                                                                      collectively within ethnic minority townships/villages. However, these
                                                                                                      Manchu and Hui groups shared the similar economic, social, and
                                                                                                      political institutions as those of Han society, and they are not
                                                                                                      collectively attached to geographically distinct habitats or ancestral
                                                                                                      territories, nor to the natural resources in their land. Moreover, they
                                                                                                      do not use any indigenous language in their daily lives. Therefore,
                                                                                                      the team concluded that Manchu and Hui groups in Beijing are not
                                                                                                      indigenous people as defined in Bank's OP4.10 and the policy is not
                                                                                                      triggered.
                             Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                     ✖                 All civil works related to the project will be conducted within the
                                                                                                      selected existing schools and colleges; therefore no land taking is
                                                                                                      expected. And the policy is not triggered.
                             Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                               ✖                 The project will not involve impacts to any dams in the project area.
                                                                                                      This policy is not triggered.
                             Projects on International Waterways OP/BP               ✖                  The project will not involve trans-boundary rivers. The policy is not
                            7.50                                                                      triggered.
                             Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                   ✖                  The project is not located in any disputed areas. The policy is not
                                                                                                      triggered.
                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                           A.     Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS : 31-May-2012
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
Public Disclosure Copy




                              should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                  A.          Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS would be prepared:

                                B.            For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:

                                C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing should
                                be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.

                         IV. APPROVALS
                            Signed and submitted by:
                            Task Team Leader:                                Name:                                                                                                 Date:
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                 Name:                                                                                                 Date:
                            Comments:
                            Sector Manager:                                  Name:                                                                                                 Date:
                            Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                             form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
