                                                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                                    APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                             Report No.:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Sep-2011

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                                  Country:                          Maldives                              Project ID:                   P128278
                                  Project Name:                     Wetlands Conservation and Coral Reef Monitoring for Adaptation to Clim
                                  Task Team Leader:                 Priti Kumar
                                  Estimated Appraisal Date: 12-Sep-2011                                   Estimated Board Date:         05-Oct-2011
                                  Managing Unit:                    SASDI                                 Lending Instrument:           Technical Assistance Loan
                                  Sector:                           General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%)
                                  Theme:                            Climate change (30%), Biodiversity (30%), Water resource management (30%), Environmental policies and
                                                                    institutions (10%)
                                  Financing (In USD Million)
                                     Financing Source                                                                                                      Amount
                                     Borrower                                                                                                                  0.00
                                     Maldives Climate Change Trust Fund                                                                                        4.36
                                     Total                                                                                                                     4.36
                                  Environmental Category:           B - Partial Assessment
                                  Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              The project development objective is
                              1) To strengthen the institutional capacity of the Ministry of Housing and Environment and local councils in planning and demonstration of
                              community based wetland management
                              2) To implement a coral reef monitoring system
Public Disclosure Copy




                              3. Project Description

                              Project Objectives:
                              -----------------------
                              The main aim of the Wetlands Conservation and Coral Monitoring (WCCM) for Adaptation to Climate Change Project is to contribute to climate
                              change adaptation capacity of the Republic of Maldives in the context of wetland and coral reef management. Accordingly, this project has two
                              development objectives:

                              -      To strengthen institutional capacity for planning and demonstration of community based wetland management, and
                              -      To implement a coral reef monitoring system

                              Project Description:
                              ------------------------
                              The proposed WCCM project will have three components that have been designed based on consultations held with the Government of Maldives,
                              civil society institutions and other stakeholders, as well as the technical assessment undertaken as part of the preparation process:

                              Component 1: Wetland Conservation:
                              -----------------------------------------------

                              The primary objective of this component is to strengthen the capacity of GOM and communities to plan for conservation of coastal wetlands,
                              drainage management and water harvesting through pilot activities in two islands. It would also provide technical support for capacity building of
                              local councils on climate change adaptation.
                              The activities to be financed are grouped under the following sub-components:

                              -     Community-based wetland management
                              -     Technical support and demonstrative implementation for drainage management and water harvesting
                              -     Strengthen local government capacity on mainstreaming climate change considerations

                              Component 2: Coral Reef Monitoring
                              ---------------------------------------------

                              The primary objective of this component is to pilot capacity building of tourist resorts to conduct coral reef monitoring and, to provide technical

                                                                                                                                                                           Page 1 of 5
                         support for developing a technology platform that will enable easy access to the data and decision support tools. The World Bank supported
                         Maldives Environment Management Project (MEMP) funded the development of a National Coral Reef Monitoring Framework in 2009. Fifteen
                         scalable coral and reef fish monitoring proto cols were developed, reflecting the international Reef Check Programme which is endorsed by the
                         Convention on Biological Diversity. The protocols allow for collection by different skill groups and subsequent integration of this information.
                         Technical testing of 13 of the protocols was done in 2009. A subset of these protocols was further refined into the MEMP monitoring and
                         evaluation framework in 2010. However, the full coral reef monitoring framework has not been further developed and implemented. The WCCM
                         project will primarily build upon work undertaken in the MEMP on coral reef monitoring. The coral reef monitoring protocols developed under
Public Disclosure Copy




                         MEMP will be peer reviewed and revised where possible to accommodate key Reef Check, Bleach Watch and other global initiative indicators. The
                         activities to be financed under this component are grouped under the following sub-components:

                         - Training and capacity building
                         - Monitoring of coral reefs
                         - Web-enabled technology platform
                         - Dissemination and policy inputs

                         Component 3: Project Management
                         --------------------------------------------

                         The objective of this component is to carry out the various management functions entailed in implementing the project. It would also include project
                         monitoring and progress reporting. This component will include the incremental costs to the existing Project Management Unit (PMU) established
                         for MEMP. The costs would include the set-up costs of office infrastructure and equipment, incremental professional staffing, individual
                         consultancies and operating costs. While the MOHE has the overall responsibility for project implementation and to ensure that the project
                         objective is met, it will execute through the Environment Protection Agency (EPA) and the Marine Research Centre (MRC) of the MOFA, in close
                         coordination with Southern Utilities Limited (SUL) and Land and Survey Authority (LSA).The PMU staff in MOHE will recruit a Project Manager, a
                         Wetlands Coordinator and a Coral Reef Monitoring Coordinator to undertake day-to-day management. The PMU will include the following
                         functions: overall project and specific component management, liaison with other agencies and programs, financial management, procurement,
                         monitoring and evaluation, and project communications. In addition, there will be project management staff posted at the Fuvahmulah and
                         Hithadhoo islands for guiding and overseeing activities in the wetlands component.The project will also support a part-time Resort Liaison Officer
                         at MRC.

                         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         The Wetland Conservation component will mostly be implemented in Fuvahmulah
                         [➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?
                         ➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?Ã ?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?73 deg24'30"E and 0 deg16'45"S] of Gnaviyani Atoll
                         and Hithadhoo [73 deg05'37"E and 0 deg37'06"S] of Seenu Atoll [also called Addu Atoll]. Both are large islands with significant human populations,
                         wetland areas, rampant problem of flooding, and where wetlands play an important role in natural drainage and freshwater security.
                         35.    The wetlands of Hithadhoo and Fuvahmulah are among the largest in the country and are significant for biodiversity conservation,
                         freshwater security and flood control.

                         - Wetlands of Hithadhoo: The Northern Wetland Area comprises Eidhigali Kilhi 9declared protected area) which has a management plan; and the
                         Southern Wetland Area comprises
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Maamendhoo Kulhi (declared Environmentally Sensitive Area) and Fehele Kulhi both of which do not have management plans.

                         - Wetlands of Fuvahmulah: The Northern Wetland Area comprises the Fuvahmulaku Bandara Kulhi and the Southern Wetland Area comprises the
                         Dhandi Magu Kulhi (both
                                declared Environmentally Sensitive Areas) both of which do not have management plans.

                         The implementation of the Wetland Conservation component in these islands will yield lessons for wetland management for the other islands in the
                         country. Demonstrative investments in rainwater harvesting will be tried out in one island (Fuvahmulah) selected on the basis on representative
                         criteria of water-stressed conditions during the dry months, institutional readiness and accessibility to other islands for exposure and training. The
                         activity 'capacity building on climate change adaptation' for local governments will cover all the local councils in the country.

                         The coral reef monitoring component will select Atolls based on the following criteria: (i) proximity to Male' enabling easier access to technical
                         support and training services from Male;(ii) fairly large concentration of resorts that are likely to be interested in this project; and (iii) opportunity for
                         monitoring by MRC staff. The North and South Male' Atolls have tentatively been identified as they meet all these criteria. The selection will be
                         finalized in consultation with the MOFA during project implementation. If significant number of resorts in a limited set of Atolls participates then it
                         will also provide a good monitoring coverage for these Atolls.

                         Within the selected Atolls this component will be implemented in at least five pilot resorts selected on the basis of the following criteria: (i)
                         demonstrated commitment by the partnering resort; (ii) east of logistical access for monitoring; (iii) building on existing sys tems/historical data set;
                         (iv) opportunity for future extension to regions/local communities/students; (v) social, economic 9stakeholder use, level of negative impact,
                         management), and environmental significance reflected, for example, in protected areas and environmentally sensitive areas; and (vi) sensitivity/
                         vulnerability to climate change. Visits in June to Resorts in North and South Male' Atoll together with feedback from a workshop on 19th June
                         suggests a positive interest in participating.

                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                         Parthapriya Ghosh (SASDS)
                         Darshani De Silva (SASDI)

                         6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                       Yes        No      Explanation



                                                                                                                                                                           Page 2 of 5
                               6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                  Yes        No      Explanation
                               Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                ✖                As a category B project, WCCM triggers OP 4.01 - Environmental Assessment
                                                                                                   to ensure any environmental impact associated with project activities are
                                                                                                   identified in time and mitigated while maximizing environmental resources
                                                                                                   management and socio-economic benefits to local communities within the
                                                                                                   scope of the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                               Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                        ✖                Natural Habitats have been triggered as project area consists of Protected
                                                                                                   Areas and Environmentally Sensitive Areas.
                               Forests OP/BP 4.36                                           ✖
                               Pest Management OP 4.09                                      ✖
                               Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                       ✖
                               Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                ✖
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                ✖                OP 4.12 has been triggered for a "chance find" as there could be future
                                                                                                   chance find of involuntary land taking in the wetland conservation subproject
                                                                                                   impacting community adversely as a small percentage of community relies on
                                                                                                   the wetlands for agriculture and livelihood. A Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                                                                   has been prepared as part of ESDD in line with the Bank's OP 4.12. However,
                                                                                                   there could be other social issues such as conflict during beneficiary selection
                                                                                                   for livelihood options; or in finalization of livelihood options; gender
                                                                                                   representation in community-led management body; etc. Similarly no social
                                                                                                   safeguards issue is anticipated in coral reef monitoring subproject.
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                    ✖
                               Projects on International Waters OP/BP 7.50                  ✖
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                        ✖

                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                 The overall negative environmental impacts of the project is minimal, as the project is focused on ensuring environmental management of
                                 wetland and coral reefs ecosystems in selected sites in Maldives.

                                 Activities under the Component 1 - wetland protection and conservation such as zoning, fencing, regulation on solid waste disposal and
                                 rainwater harvesting are likely to result in reduced environmental degradation. However, it is possible that due to activities under this sub-
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 component, negative impacts such as disturbance to water bird breeding sites and shifting of solid waste to another location could also take
                                 place. Environmental issues may also stem from improper drainage and water harvesting solutions (increased flooding, increase in vector-
                                 borne diseases, salinity intrusion, reduced harvesting of fresh water in wetland, poor water quality, etc.).

                                 Component 2 - coral reef monitoring is not expected to lead to significant negative environmental impacts. Potential issues that may require due
                                 diligence include possible damage to corals, their habitat and to the associated organisms from activities/events associated with field monitoring
                                 such as boat anchoring, oil leakages from boats, transect marking and physical monitoring. Safety issues may stem from malfunctioning of
                                 equipment, inadequate equipment, diving related accidents, etc.

                                 As per the Environmental and Social Due Diligence (ESDD) report prepared by the client through an independent consultant, the environmental
                                 impacts of the project can be easily reduced or mitigated through careful planning and adequate level of attention to implement the identified
                                 impacts. The hydrological assessment has proposed practical solutions to ensure proper drainage and water harvesting solutions are
                                 developed during the project implementation stage. In addition, the project activities have been mainly designed to address the above
                                 mentioned negative environmental impacts and therefore only require minimum level of additional safeguards actions.

                                 As a category B project, WCCM triggers OP 4.01 - Environmental Assessment to ensure any environmental impact associated with project
                                 activities are identified in time and mitigated while maximizing environmental resources management and socio-economic benefits to local
                                 communities withing the scope of the project. The OP 4.04 - Natural Habitats have been triggered as project area consists of Protected Areas
                                 and Environmentally Sensitive Areas.

                                 The ESDD shows that the social safeguard issues are non-existent. Nonetheless, OP 4.12 has been triggered for a "chance find" as there could
                                 be future chance find the involuntary land taking in the wetland conservation subproject impacting community adversely as a small percentage
                                 of community relies on the wetlands for agriculture and livelihood. A Resettlement Policy Framework has been prepared as part of ESDD in line
                                 with the Bank's OP 4.12. However, there could be other social issues such as conflict during beneficiary selection for livelihood options; or in
                                 finalization of livelihood options; gender representation in community-led management body;etc. Similarly no social safeguards issue is
                                 anticipated in coral reef monitoring subproject.

                                 Since there is no indigenous community in Maldives, the OP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples has not been triggered.
                               2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                                 By virtue of the nature of the project, the social and environmental impacts of the project are expected to be positive, beneficial, and aimed
                                 towards long term sustainability. The project is also expected to improve, the overall economic profile of the community and environmental

                                                                                                                                                                        Page 3 of 5
                           management of key ecosystems in the Maldives. There will not be potential and/or long-term impacts that are not manageable due to planned
                            Describe any in the alternatives
                         3. future activitiesprojectproject area. (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                           Not applicable for this project.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                            and implement the measures described.
                           In order to identify adverse social and environmental issues related to wetland protection and conservation activities and coral reef monitoring,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the Ministry of Housing and Environment has conducted an Environmental and Social Due Diligence (ESDD) through an independent
                           consultant firm. This study included assessments of the environmental and social baseline condition in the selected sites and the potential
                           environmental and social risks and impacts of the project activities. The ESDD includes protocols for screening project activities, guidelines for
                           mitigation of environmental and social risks, and guidance on development of Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) and Resettlement
                           Action Plans (RAPs). Further, the ESDD includes guidelines for coral reef monitoring based on the existing international best practices for
                           environmental sports diving prevalent in the Maldives, including health and safety as well as recommendations for basic training on these
                           practices by certified trainers to the participating project field partners.

                           The associated costs to implement EMPs and RAPs will be part of the project budget. The project will ensure all works contracts will include
                           the EMP and cost of RAP implementation. In such cases, the cost of implementing the EMP and RAP will be identified as an item in the Bill of
                           Quantities.

                           The Project Management Unit (PMU) in the MOHE will have an Environment and Social (E&S) Coordinator who will report to the Project
                           Manager and will work closely with the Wetlands Technical Coordinator and the Coral Reef Monitoring Coordinator. The E&S Coordinator will
                           be responsible for overall implementation of environment and social management plan and will also liaison with other agencies at the island
                           level to implement safeguards mitigation measures, monitoring and evaluation of implementation and report on compliance and status of
                           performance indicators. In addition, there will be project management staff posted at the Gn. Fuvahmulah and S. Hithadhoo islands for guiding
                           and overseeing the activities in the wetlands component.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                            on potentially affected people.
                           Public consultations were held with the affected stakeholders at the local and national levels during preparation of ESDD. In addition to focused
                           group discussions and meetings, one to one consultations were carried out with 400 individual households in Hithadhoo and 335 individual
                           households in Fuvahmulah. A workshop that included participation from the tourist resorts and government stakeholders was held in Male on
                           June 19, 2011 to discuss the coral reef component of the Project including safeguards issues. As part of the ESDD, an entitlement framework
                           has been developed. All safeguards related documents will be disclosed by the Ministry of Housing and Environment in-country through the
                           websites of MOHE, Marine Research Centre (MRC), Environment Protection Agency (EPA) and the Ministry of Fisheries and Agriculture
                           (MOFA) and on World Bank's Infoshop in Washington DC. Hard copies of the reports and executive summaries in the local language will be
                           distributed to the atoll and island offices in Fuvahmulah and Hithadhoo islands. Once the project commences implementation, the project team
                           is expected to have regular consultations with local stakeholders on issues related to environment and social within the scope of the project.

                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                                           Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                              04-Aug-2011
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                                          25-Aug-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                           02-Sep-2011
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                           Directors
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                                           Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                              04-Aug-2011
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                                          25-Aug-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                           02-Sep-2011
                         Technical Assistance Project
                         For a TA project which will finance the preparation of a specific safeguards instrument, please indicate type of document disclosed, if any.

                         Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
                         Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?             NA
                         Date of receipt by the Bank NA
                         Date of "in-country" disclosure NA
                         Date of submission to InfoShop         NA

                         Pest Management Plan:
                         Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?             NA
                         Date of receipt by the Bank NA
                         Date of "in-country" disclosure NA
                         Date of submission to InfoShop         NA
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                         disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.

                                                                                                                                                                        Page 4 of 5
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                            Not applicable to this project.

                            C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                     Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]

                            OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                              If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) natural   Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              habitats, does the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                              If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the             Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?                     Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language             Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for          Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?                     Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard           Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same               Yes [   ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Signed and submitted by:                                                  Name                                                      Date
                            Task Team Leader:                     Lakshmi Narayanan                                                              08-Sep-2011
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:      Sanjay Srivastava (RSA)                                                        20-Sep-2011
                            Comments:      cleared
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Sector Manager:                       Herbert Acquay (SM)                                                            09-Sep-2011
                            Comments:




                                                                                                                                                                        Page 5 of 5
