                                                                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                             CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC440
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Dec-2011

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        Ghana                                    Project ID:                      P114264
                              Project Name:                   Ghana Commercial Agriculture (P114264)
                              Task Team Leader:               Christopher Paul Jackson
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 06-Dec-2011                                    Estimated Board Date:            22-Mar-2012
                              Managing Unit:                  AFTAR                                    Lending Instrument:              Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                         General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (40%), Crops (20%)
                              Theme:                          Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Rural markets (30%), Export development and competitiveness (20%),
                                                              Infrastructure services for private sector development (10%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                        Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                           0.00
                                   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                               100.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                     100.00
                              Environmental Category:         A - Full Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              B. Project Objectives

                              The project development objective is to improve the investment climate for agri-business and establish inclusive public-private partnerships aimed
                              at increasing on-farm productivity and value addition in selected value chains.

                               The main outcome of the project will be an improved investment climate that delivers more - and more inclusive - private sector investment in
                              agriculture. Accordingly, project success will be defined by the following results:
Public Disclosure Copy




                               Increased private investment in agriculture should increase across a range of related enterprises including large(r)-scale commercial farming,
                              agricultural processing and marketing industries and small-scale entrepreneurial farmers.

                               An expansion of marketing arrangements that link small-holders with larger commercial entities. (These commercial entities could be engaged in
                              production, as in the traditional nucleus-out grower type model, or in downstream marketing or processing, in the case of contract framing.)

                                Increased productivity of small-holder farmers brought about by a combination of (input and output) market access improvements, improved
                              technology and behavioral shifts resulting from lower risks and/ or improved incentives generated from a stronger private-sector led agricultural
                              sector.

                              C. Project Description

                              Component One: Strengthening investment promotion infrastructure, facilitating secure access to land and project management. This component
                              will ensure that Ghana attracts fit and proper investors willing and able to invest in strategic subsectors that contribute most positively to national
                              development gains. It will promote secure investment climate particularly with respect to access to land that reflects rights and obligations of
                              investors, government and affected communities. This component will establish a one-stop shop for investment promotion, drawing on the
                              competences from existing Ministries and Agencies in a streamlined institutional architecture. This will transform the current fragmented and
                              ineffective regime to one in which agriculture-related investment promotion efforts are focused on securing domestic and foreign investments in
                              activities/ locations/ business models that most contribute to Ghana's national development goals. It will also strengthen the oversight capacity of
                              Government to ensure investor's development plans are being fulfilled and to develop more orderly exit of failing investors and the reallocation of
                              land to new entrants.

                                This component will also support an improved mechanism for facilitating access to land by reducing the search costs to potential investors
                              through an expansion of a database of land suitable for investors and by actively matching potential investors with suitable land owners. In the
                              case of land under traditional ownership, due diligence and sensitization of surrounding communities will promote an understanding of the rights
                              and obligations from subsequent lease agreements. A model lease agreement will be developed to form the basis of all subsequent investor
                              agreements, and which includes indicative arrangements for managing leasehold payments and other community development-type funds.

                                Component Two: Securing PPPs and small-holder linkages. This component will involve the identification and realization of private investments in
                              the value chain through PPPs. Investors could be local or international. Investments could be in production or processing and ancillary businesses.
                              For example:
                                      This would include support to warehousing and storage through the rehabilitation and concessioning of publicly owned marketing
                           infrastructure (including the development of warehouse receipts system). It would include support for agri-business centers that provide essential
                           services and inputs to small-holder farmers. In both cases, the project would encourage formal linkages with small-holders. This would initially
                           focus on the Northern Region, but would be responsive to opportunities in other regions if these were of a sufficient scale. (It would be important to
                           avoid supervisory activities being spread too thinly across a wide area in order to keep management costs down.)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                     It would also assist in the establishment of large commercial farms as nucleus farms with appropriate linkages under out-grower
                           schemes. Support to the nucleus would include critical access infrastructure including roads, power connections and primary irrigation facilities. It
                           would also assist with land acquisition under the one-stop-shop proposed above. It would include additional support to extend nucleus investments
                           for the benefit of small-holders through various means including assistance to expand necessary infrastructure into out-grower lands as well as
                           direct support to the small-holders to ensure they are capable out-growers. This component would focus on the Accra Plains, where an area of has
                           been proposed (in general terms) for a substantial irrigation investment to be managed under a PPP and which would supply water to both large
                           commercial farms and an out-grower scheme. The project would be responsive to similar opportunities in other regions, especially when put
                           forward by the private sector themselves.

                             For all investments so assisted, the project would seek to leverage small-holder participation. Project activities will include developing a
                           framework for out-grower schemes and contract farming arrangements that will sensitize potential small-holder participants in order to align
                           expectations of both small-holders and the "nucleus"➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂?➃?➂ . This component will support start-up costs resulting
                           from institutional demands of sustainable small-holder linkages as well any investment costs from new agronomic practices etc that maximize the
                           impacts of marketing linkages. Activities could include: the organizing small-holder participants into groups and building their capacity to become
                           capable partners, recognizing the greater demand for business acumen in negotiating beneficial arrangements with investors; grants to meet the
                           establishment costs of small-holder farmers (land-preparation, planting material, etc); and/ or working capital for out-growers to procure necessary
                           farm inputs (improved seeds, fertilizer). To encourage investors themselves to finance small-holder linkages as part of their integrated business
                           model (and thereby maximizing the use of IDA resources), while recognizing the increased financial risks from doing so, this component will
                           include a risk sharing mechanisms (e.g. first loss cover).

                            D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                           The project will have national coverage through the policy and enabling environment components. The Northern Region and Accra Plains will be a
                           particular focus for project interventions to attract private investment.

                            E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

                           Ghana has a well established legal and regulatory basis for environmental assessment, implementation and monitoring. At the Ministry level, the
                           Ministry of Environment, Science and Technology (MEST) has the oversight responsibility for policy directions and implementation on
                           environmental issues. However, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) of Ghana is the designated public body for setting environmental
                           standards and ensuring their full compliance. The EPA is considered one of the experienced safeguard institutions in Africa particularly on
                           environmental safeguards and is familiar with World Bank environmental safeguards policies. Although, overall, the EPA is well placed to handle
                           environmental and social safeguards issues, it would still need capacity building especially in involuntary resettlement.

                            F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Jonathan Mills Lindsay (LEGEN)
                           Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTCS)
                           Moses Yao Duphey (AFTEN)
                           Angela Nyawira Khaminwa (AFTCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

                            Safeguard Policies Triggered                     Yes        No        TBD                                   Explanation
                            Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                ✖                           In pursuance of its project development objective the Ghana
                                                                                                           Commercial Agricultural Project will finance the construction of
                                                                                                           agriculture related infrastructure, including construction and
                                                                                                           rehabilitation access/feeder roads and irrigation schemes. The
                                                                                                           potential environmental and social impacts are likely to be small-
                                                                                                           scale and site specific, typical of Category B projects. However, the
                                                                                                           actual locations and sizes of sub-projects are not yet known in
                                                                                                           sufficient detail at this time of project preparation. The Government
                                                                                                           of Ghana will prepare an Environmental and Social Management
                                                                                                           Framework (ESMF). The ESMF will provide detailed guidelines and
                                                                                                           procedures including a checklist for screening sub-projects for
                                                                                                           potential environmental and social impacts. The ESMF will be
                                                                                                           disclosed in-country and at the Bank InfoShop prior to project
                                                                                                           appraisal.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                        ✖                           Although several positive environmental and social impacts are
                                                                                                           expected to be generated by the project, some activities however
                                                                                                           may involve investments near or adjacent to critical natural habitats
                                                                                                           and others may have indirect impacts on critical natural habitats (e.
                                                                                                           g., rehabilitation of existing irrigation infrastructures). Specific areas
                                                                                                           may include adjacent Forest Reserves/community forests as well as
                                                                                                           potential indirect impacts on surrounding parks. All critical natural
                                                                                                           habitats will be identified and mapped out in the ESMF to ensure
                                                                                                                                 that appropriate safeguard measures are established to avoid any
                                                                                                                                 adverse impacts in any critical natural habitats. All potentially
                                                                                                                                 adverse environmental or social impacts in critical and non-critical
                                                                                                                                 natural habitats, along with the recommended mitigation and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 enhancement measures, will be described in details in the
                                                                                                                                 suggested ESMFthat will be ultimately disclosed both in-country and
                                                                                                                                 at the Bank InfoShop prior to appraisal.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                  ✖                                   Project investments under component one are foreseen to target at
                                                                                                                                 certain community-forest areas with the aim to improve the quality of
                                                                                                                                 forests in priority catchments areas in the basin. The forest sector
                                                                                                                                 investments are aimed at improving the health and quality of natural
                                                                                                                                 forests in degraded production landscapes throughout the Volta
                                                                                                                                 River basin; many of which are adjacent to certain critical natural
                                                                                                                                 habitats. Although the aim of these targeted but specific investments
                                                                                                                                 is to ameliorate the quality of natural forested lands for commercial
                                                                                                                                 agriculture to reduce environmental degradation, soil erosion and
                                                                                                                                 sedimentation into the Volta River and/or some of the northern
                                                                                                                                 region's rivers in the SADA zone, along with their main tributaries, it
                                                                                                                                 is possible that minor, time bound adverse environmental impacts
                                                                                                                                 may be generated as a result of specific actions during project
                                                                                                                                 implementation. To eliminate, minimize and mitigate such potential
                                                                                                                                 impacts, the Borrower will make explicit in the ESMF how such
                                                                                                                                 investments will be screened, approved, designed, implemented and
                                                                                                                                 monitored.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09                                             ✖                                   The project is not expected to directly finance the purchase of
                                                                                                                                 pesticides or herbicides fertilizers or other inputs. However, the
                                                                                                                                 development of intensive agriculture through project activities may
                                                                                                                                 lead to increased use of fertilizers, pesticides or herbicides. The
                                                                                                                                 borrower will prepare and disclose an Integrated Pest Management
                                                                                                                                 Plan (IPMP) country-wide in Ghana and at the Bank#s InfoShop
                                                                                                                                 prior to appraisal.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                              ✖                                   The project does not anticipate involving physical and cultural
                                                                                                                                 resources, but this might arise with the expansion of large-scale
                                                                                                                                 commercial farms. This is likely to be minimal since such farms
                                                                                                                                 negotiate lease agreements with traditional landowners (i.e. chiefs)
                                                                                                                                 who would presumably exclude such areas. Nevertheless, since the
                                                                                                                                 exact physical location of these resources are unknown at this
                                                                                                                                 stage, the ESMF will include chance finds procedures for any PCR
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 (e.g., archeological sites) identified during project implementation.
                                                                                                                                 As part of safeguards due diligence, the team will assess whether
                                                                                                                                 further measures will be required during project preparation or
                                                                                                                                 whether chance finds procedures to be spelled out in the ESMF are
                                                                                                                                 sufficient to mitigate any adverse impacts on these resources.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                                    ✖
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                                 ✖                                   The implementation of this Project would lead to land acquisition.
                                                                                                                                 However, the exact location and the areal extend of the land to be
                                                                                                                                 acquired are not yet known in sufficient details. The Government of
                                                                                                                                 Ghana will prepare a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to
                                                                                                                                 address the needs of persons who will be affected by loss of
                                                                                                                                 economic activities, land acquisition and/or relocation. In particular,
                                                                                                                                 the RPF will be formulated to establish and clarify the resettlement
                                                                                                                                 principles, guidelines, valuation and compensation procedures,
                                                                                                                                 eligibility criteria, institutional arrangements, conflict redress
                                                                                                                                 mechanism and design criteria to be applied to sub projects which
                                                                                                                                 will be prepared during the main project implementation. It will also
                                                                                                                                 summarize key land tenure issues that will arise during project
                                                                                                                                 implementation. In addition, the RPF will contain a checklist for
                                                                                                                                 screening sub-projects to determine whether or not OP 4.12 is
                                                                                                                                 triggered. Sub-project specific resettlement action plans consistent
                                                                                                                                 with the RPF will subsequently be prepared and submitted to the
                                                                                                                                 Bank for approval after the relevant and specific information on the
                                                                                                                                 subproject becomes available.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                           ✖                                   The project may attract commercial investors that wish to construct
                                                                                                                                 small earth dams but these are unlikely to be sufficiently large to
                                                                                                                                 trigger the safeguard policy. Nevertheless, because of the likelihood
                                                                                                                                 of their occurrence and the risks involved in their maintenance,
                                                                                                                                 especially for women, young community-members and elderly
                                                                                                                                 people working nearby during rehabilitation of the earth dams for



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                            Safeguard Policies Triggered                                      Yes           No           TBD                                             Explanation
                                                                                                                                    irrigation schemes will also involve application of some generic
                                                                                                                                    guidance to be reflected in the ESMF.
                            Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                           ✖                                   The project will finance irrigation infrastructure from the Volta River,
Public Disclosure Copy




                            7.50                                                                                                    which is an international waterway shared with the VRA riparian
                                                                                                                                    countries. Though Ghana is the final riparian country downstream
                                                                                                                                    and given the amplitude of irrigations investments in both the Accra
                                                                                                                                    Plains and the SADA zone, sending Riparian Notification Letter
                                                                                                                                    would be sent to all riparians to seekng exemption as required.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                                            ✖

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                           A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 09-Dec-2011
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
                              should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                The project triggers a number of safeguard policies. The team proposes to adopt frameworks (rather than full management plans and impact
                                assessments) because specific project areas are not known ex ante. Therefore, a robust framework for ensuring compliance withsocial and
                                environmental regulations is needed as part of the new government architecture.

                                The project will prepare an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework. These studies
                                were initiated in November, 2010 and should be completed by January, 2011. ESMF and RPF will be disclosed in Bank InfoShop and in-
                                country prior to project appraisal.

                         IV. APPROVALS
                            Signed and submitted by:
                            Task Team Leader:                                Name: Christopher Paul Jackson                                                                        Date: 08-Dec-2011
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                 Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                     Date: 08-Dec-2011
                            Comments:
                            Sector Manager:                                  Name: Karen Mcconnell Brooks (SM)                                                                     Date: 09-Dec-2011
                            Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                             form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
