                                                                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                            APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA173
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Nov-2011

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        Egypt, Arab Republic of                 Project ID:                      P118090
                              Project Name:                   EG-Enhanced Water Resources Management (P118090)
                              Task Team Leader:               Yoshiharu Kobayashi
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 10-Nov-2011                                   Estimated Board Date:            22-Mar-2012
                              Managing Unit:                  MNSSD                                   Lending Instrument:              Specific Investment Loan
                              Focal Area:                     International waters
                              Sector:                         Public administration- Water, sanitation and flood protection (70%), Irrigation and drainage (20%), Solid waste
                                                              management (10%)
                              Theme:                          Water resource management (80%), Pollution management and environmental health (10%), Climate change (10%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                       Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                         1.56
                                   Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                                                          6.68
                                   Local Sources of Borrowing Country                                                                                         0.12
                                   Bilateral Agencies (unidentified)                                                                                          0.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                      8.37
                              Environmental Category:         B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Global Environmental Objective(s)
Public Disclosure Copy




                              The project development objectives (PDOs) are to pilot IWRM in the Nile Delta and to enhance the knowledge and capacity of water sector
                              institutions for IWRM in Egypt. Specifically, the project will promote the IWRM principles and practices through (i) awareness-raising, institutional
                              and capacity strengthening, and demonstration activities implemented in the selected pilot schemes in the Niel Delta to improve the coordination
                              among water project management units (PMUs), Government agencies, local authorities and water user associations (WUAs); and (ii) technical
                              assistance (TA) on targeted studies, capacity building training, and provision of equipment to strengthen the capacity and knowledge of the
                              national institutions in water sector and to improve the national water resources monitoring networks.

                              The global objective of this project is to establish the basis for scaling up investments through the GOE's IWRM plan and contribute more
                              significantly to pollution control and improved ecosystem health of the Mediterranean Sea and its biodiversity resources. It is expected that the
                              successful operationalization of the IWRM approach and principles in pilot schemes will demonstrate the benefits of synergy of the ongoing
                              investment projects (IIIMP, NDP2, and ISSIP) and will be replicated in the Nile Delta, which will result in increased water use efficiency and
                              availability for reuse, and improved water quality and livelihood of the poor; which would eventually have a great impact on reducing the pollution
                              load flowing into the Mediterranean Sea (the objective of Sustainable MED).

                              3. Project Description

                              The proposed Project will comprise the following three components:

                              Component 1: Pilot Schemes (GEF - US$2,914,000; GOE - US$624,000, Beneficiaries - US$121,000)

                              The project is expected to develop synergy between the three ongoing water projects (IIIMP, NDP2, and ISSIP) through demonstration activities in
                              three pilot areas. Such interventions can help to focus attention and assistance for promoting IWRM. The project will further improve coordination
                              and integration across the ongoing water projects and their implementing agencies. Investments from the three ongoing projects will be supported
                              by the GEF project to demonstrate synergy of the integration of these sectoral efforts in pilot schemes in the Nile Delta. The resources from these
                              ongoing projects do not require change of the scope of their activities since the proposed pilot schemes would add additional inputs and increase
                              their benefits. The proposed pilot schemes are located within the project areas of these ongoing projects and will build on their already planned
                              activities.

                              This integrated approach is expected to lead to more efficient and effective water resources management, which will result in (i) maximization of
                              the investment benefits as synergy of the investments will be generated, (ii) strengthened capacity of water agencies, local authorities and WUAs,
                              and (iii) acceleration of dissemination of lessons and knowledge learned from pilot activities promoted through the GEF project.

                              Three pilot areas have been selected to improve water management and control pollution by applying the principles of IWRM for sustainable use,

                                                                                                                                                                         Page 1 of 7
                         reuse and disposal of water. Structural improvements of the irrigation and drainage systems as well as the sanitary conditions offered by the
                         ongoing projects will be combined with management tools and institutional arrangements that will maximize their benefits. Thus water availability in
                         terms of quantity and quality will improve with significant gains in productivity, health and environmental conditions. The GEF project will help plan
                         and establish the most efficient sequence of coordinating activities to be implemented by the ongoing projects including consultation and
                         participation of local authorities, Branch Canal Water Users Associations (BCWUAs), WUAs and beneficiaries, monitor and evaluate the
                         implementation process, and establish successful procedures for future replication of this IWRM approach in the Nile Delta. The GEF project will
                         provide intensive training for government staff as well as for stakeholders at the lowest possible administrative level including local authorities,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BCWUAs, and WUAs in order to facilitate decentralized IWRM as a model that can be replicated in the Nile Delta.

                            (i)    Nekla/Menesi Pilot Scheme

                         This pilot scheme is located in the West Delta and will focus on improving surface water management in order to increase water use efficiency and
                         improve water quality in the irrigation canals and agricultural drainage networks. This will be done through the integration of innovative
                         technologies and management interventions introduced by the ongoing projects (i.e. IIIMP and ISSIP) within the pilot scheme. It will further
                         introduce and support management options and institutional arrangements that promote the principles of IWRM and support their implementation.
                         Both the IIIMP and the ISSIP aim at improving the quality of water discharges from the irrigated fields and rural settlements, respectively. Hence
                         both projects contribute in improving the quality of the discharges into the drainage network with subsequent improvement of the quality of the re-
                         used drainage water.

                         IWRM will be enhanced through promoting participatory water management at the lowest level across the water using subsectors. The project will
                         provide an opportunity for the WUAs to play a key role in introducing and applying new concepts and approaches such as continuous flow in the
                         branch canals, controlled subsurface drainage, effective O&M of the newly implemented modern irrigation, drainage and sewerage systems, and
                         interactive communication and coordination with the local authorities. Solid waste management (SWM) is another appealing intervention to both
                         farmers and local governments that would significantly contribute to improving water quality in irrigation canals and drains. The pilot scheme will
                         introduce a model for SWM largely operated and maintained by the local communities. Intensive TA, capacity development and training will be
                         provided to the BCWUAs and WUAs to help them to be effectively engaged in water and SWM.

                         Activity 1: Enhanced Surface Water Management - The project will help improve the capacity of the Integrated Water Management District (IWMD)
                         to efficiently and effectively manage irrigation water using the "continuous flow" principle in the branch canals. This will be done by properly
                         allocating irrigation water among WUA members together with appropriate cropping pattern planning. The project will also facilitate adoption of
                         #controlled drainage# to reduce draining water from paddy fields, which could save significant amount of irrigation water to be applied for the
                         paddy fields. The project will also pilot test the System of Rice Intensification (SRI) in selected mesqas to reduce water consumption in the rice
                         fields of this pilot scheme.

                         Activity 2: Solid Waste Management - The project will help BCWUAs in cleaning irrigation and drainage canal systems by removing solid wastes.
                         Such wastes could be dried and used for organic fertilizer. A feasibility study will be carried out on this activity before commencing any
                         intervention. The governorate represented by the local councils will be involved in carrying out this activity as a prime agency responsible for SWM.

                         Activity 3: IWRM Monitoring by GIS - The project will provide IWMD and 4 BCWUAs with geographical information system (GIS) together with a
                         GIS computer in order to monitor irrigation water allocation, water requirement, water quality, cropping pattern, harvesting time, extension of crop
                         disease, extension of crop damage by insect, collection of water charges, etc. Their staff will be trained to use the GIS. Such training will be carried
                         out in parallel with training under Activity 1.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            (ii) Okda/Tellin Pilot Scheme

                         This pilot scheme is located in the East Delta and will focus on management of drainage water and groundwater which are affected by pollution
                         from agricultural, municipal and industrial sources. Thus, this pilot scheme is selected in an area where drainage water and a fresh groundwater
                         aquifer co-exist. The potential of improved water management introduced by the ongoing project (i.e. NDP2) will be enhanced by adopting good
                         practices that protect drainage water and groundwater from domestic and industrial pollution sources as well as disposal of solid wastes. This
                         component will provide an opportunity for WUAs to be engaged in a participatory effort to protect drainage water and groundwater against
                         pollution. Local authorities, BCWUAs and WUAs will be strengthened through intensive TA, capacity development and training at this pilot scheme.
                         The BCWUAs are expected to take a leading role in monitoring and evaluation of drainage water and groundwater in the area.

                         Activity 1: Environmental Impact Assessment - The project will carry out environmental impact assessment (EIA) of this pilot scheme and develop
                         an environment management plan (EMP) in order to identify the source of pollution and take necessary mitigation measures to improve water
                         quality in the drainage canals, including public consultations and SWM. The EMP will be carried out by the investment fund from the NDP2.

                         Activity 2: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building - The project will help improve capacity of the IWMD and local and central departments
                         of the Egyptian Public Authority for Drainage Projects (EPADP) in efficiently and effectively maintaining the drainage systems. The project will also
                         help establish a District Water Board (DWB) which will be involved in planning, design and implementation of the in-stream wet land to be carried
                         out by the NDP2.

                         Activity 3: Solid Waste Management - The project will help the BCWUAs in cleaning the irrigation and drainage canals by removing solid wastes.
                         Organic waste could be dried and used for organic fertilizer. A feasibility study will be carried out on this activity before commencing any
                         intervention. The governorate represented by the local councils will be involved in carrying out this activity as a prime agency responsible for SWM.

                         Activity 4: Pollution Reduction Intervention Support - The project will support the NDP2 in identifying small-scale and cost effective interventions
                         that suit the specific conditions of the pilot area, such as in-stream wetlands, train the local communities in operation and maintenance of such
                         facilities built by the NDP2, and train the local authority in water quality monitoring and enforcement of regulations.

                         Activity 5: Public Awareness Campaign for Compliance of Environmental Regulations - The project will carry out a public awareness campaign to
                         disseminate information on relevant regulations relating to the environment, waste avoidance, recycling, and environmental health, and improve
                         understanding and support for compliance (protection of health and the living environment of stakeholders).

                            (iii) Khadrawia Pilot Scheme
                                                                                                                                                                     Page 2 of 7
                         This pilot scheme is located in the Central Delta and will focus on drainage water management. The Khadrawia drain has been heavily
                         contaminated by untreated sewerage discharges from the neighboring villages, massive agricultural and domestic solid wastes, and untreated
                         industrial waste water from the nearby industrial zone. Since the pollution level is severe, this pilot scheme will focus on the study to identify
                         options for possible interventions by a future project and awareness campaign for the stakeholders and local populations.

                         Activity 1: Stakeholder Analysis - The project will provide TA to carry out stakeholder analysis, which will identify the polluters and the affected
Public Disclosure Copy




                         people and establish a forum for communication between them. This will facilitate discussion concerning the best option to resolve the long-
                         standing and serious problem of industrial pollution in the Khadrawia drain.

                         Activity 2: Study for Environmental Impact Assessment and Financial Options to Resolve Drain Pollution - The project will provide TA to carry out
                         an EIA and a study to identify possible financial options to resolve this drain pollution. The study will examine economic feasibility of potential
                         financial options, which will be discussed in the forum established under the stakeholder analysis. The EIA will update the existing EMP to address
                         the necessary follow-up mitigation activities to be carried out by NDP2.

                         Activity 3: Study for Resolving Pollution in the Drains - The project will carry out a feasibility study to find out the most viable intervention option for
                         resolving pollution in the drains, possibly construction of in-stream wetlands, which will be tested under the NDP2. The local communities will be
                         involved in the preparation and implementation of such intervention so that they will have a sense of ownership of the system built and will operate
                         and maintain it after its completion.

                         Activity 4: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building - The project will help improve the capacity of the IWMD and the local and central
                         departments of the EPADP to efficiently and effectively maintain drainage systems. The project will also help establish a district water board
                         (DWB) which will be involved in planning, design and implementation of possible interventions such as in-stream wetlands to be financed under the
                         NDP2.

                         Activity 5: Public Awareness Campaign for Compliance of Environmental Regulations - The project will carry out public awareness campaign to
                         disseminate information on regulations dealing with the environment, waste avoidance, recycling, and environmental health, and also improve
                         understanding and support for compliance with the regulations (protection of health and the living environment of the stakeholders).

                         Component 2: Capacity Building for Surface Water and Groundwater Management and Monitoring (GEF - US$3,322,000; GOE - US$822,000)

                         Under this component, the project will assist the government agencies concerned to strengthen their institutional and technical capacity and
                         knowledge in monitoring and managing the surface water and groundwater more effectively and efficiently across sectoral borders. As a result, this
                         component will enhance the management of water resources at the macro level in order to improve water availability in terms of quality and
                         quantity in response to growing water scarcity and climatic variability including flood and drought and thus contribute significantly to reducing
                         pollution and improving the health of the Mediterranean ecosystem and its biodiversity resources. This component will optimize the availability of
                         water taking into consideration the impact of climate change in the management of surface water, groundwater and Lake Nasser. This component
                         will include provision of monitoring equipment, training and modeling, and carrying out strategic studies addressing priority issues, to make the
                         most of the scarce water resources available to Egypt from the Nile River. The activities of this component will include:

                            (i) Evaporation Losses Analysis Study in Lake Nasser
Public Disclosure Copy




                         his study will determine the monthly evaporation parameters, impact of changing High Aswan Dam (HAD) operation rules on the evaporation
                         losses, and the total expected losses due to different future scenarios of low or high inflows. The study will carry out an accurate estimation of lake
                         evaporation losses. The Nile Research Institute (NRI) of the NWRC will carry out this study in collaboration with the High Aswan Dam Authority
                         (HADA).

                            (ii) Climate Change Impact Assessment Study in Water and Agriculture in the Nile Delta

                         This study will assess the impacts of climate change on water and agriculture in the Nile Delta including the impacts of rising sea water causing
                         salt intrusion in the coastal Delta region, and the impacts on land use due to increased temperature and changing water availability in the Delta.
                         The Environment and Climate Change Research Institute (ECRI) of the NWRC will carry out this study in collaboration with the PS of the MWRI.

                            (iii) Surface Water Modeling Analysis Study in the Nile Delta

                         This study will update the information for surface water modeling (Decision Support System [DSS]) to reflect new changes since 1977 in order to
                         ensure effective planning and management of surface water resources. The Drainage Research Institute (DRI) of the NWRC will carry out this
                         study.

                            (iv) Groundwater Modeling Analysis Study in the Nile Delta

                         This study will analyze the impact of sea water level rise on groundwater in the Nile Delta and prepare mitigation measures in order to cope with
                         the climate change. The Research Institute for Groundwater (RIGW) of the NWRC will carry out this study.

                            (v) Surface Water Quality Monitoring Capacity Enhancement in the Nile System

                         This subcomponent will help enhance the capacity of government staff by training, and improve the effectiveness of the surface water monitoring
                         network by providing necessary monitoring facilities in strategic locations. The NWRC will lead this activity in cooperation with NRI and DRI.

                            (vi) Groundwater Quality Monitoring Capacity Enhancement in the Nile System

                         This subcomponent will help enhance the capacity of the government staff by training, and improve the effectiveness of the groundwater
                         monitoring network by providing necessary monitoring facilities. The Research Institute of Groundwater (RIGW) of the NWRC will lead this activity
                         in cooperation with the Groundwater Sector of the MWRI.

                                                                                                                                                                         Page 3 of 7
                         (c)       Component 3: Project Management (GEF - US$446,000; GOE - US$118,000)

                         Considering its broad scope and the large number of stakeholders to be involved in implementation of this project, it is crucial to have an effective
                         project coordination unit (PCU). The PCU will be established under the PS of the MWRI; headed by a Project Director; comprised of an Irrigation/
                         drainage specialist, a procurement specialist, a monitoring and evaluation specialist and a water resources specialist; and supported by two local
                         consultants (a social scientist and financial management specialist). It is expected that the project will generate a lot of useful information,
                         improved knowledge and strengthened capacity for IWRM. In this regard, this component will provide support for PCU and facilitate knowledge
Public Disclosure Copy




                         sharing. It will include the following:

                            (i)    Project Coordination Unit (PCU) - investment to strengthen the PCU; and
                           (ii)    IW Learn - a tracking tool for reporting and disseminating lessons learned, and investment for sharing information at the international
                         water conferences.

                         The PCU will be supported by the Central Directorate for Irrigation Advisory Service (CDIAS) in community development activities under
                         Component 1. The Project will provide necessary support for PCU activities in terms of per diem of the PCU staff, fuel to travel to the pilot sites,
                         recruitment of local consultants, and required cost of stakeholders meetings.

                         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         Nile Delta, Nile River, and Aswan High Dam in Egypt.


                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                         Concepcion Esperanza Del Castillo (MNSWA)
                         Ahmed Shawky M. Abdel Ghany (ECSS1)

                         6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                    Yes        No      Explanation
                         Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                 ✖                 As the GEF project will only finance soft-type activities (TA, training, few
                                                                                               goods), the draft EA/EMP prepared by the MWRI/NWRC has determined that
                                                                                               there is no significant negative impact envisaged from the Project. Thus the
                                                                                               draft ESMF suggested triggering only the Bank's OP4.01 (requiring a partial
                                                                                               EA/EMP) and OP7.50, and the Project can be deemed a Category B as to the
                                                                                               Bank's social and environmental safeguards. Therefore, the draft ESMF, to be
                                                                                               budgeted at around US$0.7million (including contingencies) mainly under
                                                                                               Components 2 and 3 (and partly under component 1), will only be focused on:
                                                                                               (i) supporting the monitoring of the Nile/canal/drain incremental water quality
                                                                                               improvements (through cooperation between NWRC/PS, with the M&E Units
                                                                                               of IIIMP, ISSIP and IDIPII), including the improvements occurring close to the
                                                                                               Northern Delta Lakes (particularly Edku Lake) and the Mediterranean Sea; (ii)
                                                                                               empowering the PS to address the water-quality aspects of IWRM, and
                                                                                               empowering the Environmental Management Unit (EMU) of NDP2 over the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               coming 3-4 years, which will otherwise be underfunded by GOE (due to the
                                                                                               recent political developments). The latter will include addressing any additional
                                                                                               caveats (that may not be directly covered by the currently ongoing EMP of
                                                                                               NDP2) associated with developing solid or liquid waste management
                                                                                               measures under the pilots of Component 1 (e.g. the in-stream wetland under
                                                                                               the Khadrawia pilot scheme, in case a wetland solution is selected),
                                                                                               particularly, to ensure safe dredging and disposal of the pollutants captured by
                                                                                               a wetland or by a solid waste management landfill (as per the "EHS
                                                                                               Guidelines" for the WB/IFC supported projects).
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                    ✖      The project will not affect the natural habitats in the Nile Delta.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                                             ✖      There is no forest in the Nile Delta.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09                                        ✖      The project procurement plan does not include procuring pesticides or
                                                                                               herbicides; and the project does not seek to horizontally develop new lands,
                                                                                               and thus adds no defuse-pollution load. Moreover, the project awareness
                                                                                               activities and EMP will aim to reduce pesticide use and promote proper
                                                                                               disposal of unused pesticides and containers, and so reducing pesticide
                                                                                               pollution. Hence OP4.09 would not be triggered.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                         ✖      Based on the three existing projects (IIIMP, NDP2, and ISSIP) and the
                                                                                               information available during GEF project preparation, it is not expected that
                                                                                               project activities would affect antiquities. If any are encountered, this would be
                                                                                               handled under archeological chance find procedures, in accordance with the
                                                                                               safeguards incorporated in the relevant project being supported by the GEF
                                                                                               project.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                  ✖      There is no indigenous people in the Nile Delta.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                            ✖      OP 4.12 is not triggered. In pilot areas, the GEF project and the associated
                                                                                               projects may support improvements in solid waste collection, recycling and
                                                                                               disposal that might involve acquisition of relatively small amounts of land for
                                                                                               waste processing or disposal, in which case the activities financed by the
                                                                                               complementary projects will need to comply with the Bank policies concerning

                                                                                                                                                                      Page 4 of 7
                               6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                  Yes        No      Explanation
                                                                                                   land acquisition and involuntary resettlement and set out in those project
                                                                                                   documents. The earlier proposal for an in-stream wetland in the Khadrawia
                                                                                                   drain stated that about 1.5 feddans would be needed for drying sludge from
                                                                                                   the sediment trap. IIIMP included a component for mainstreaming
                                                                                                   environmental management, and its resettlement policy framework (RPF)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                   includes provisions related to solid waste management, including some kinds
                                                                                                   of activities for which the GEF project may provide technical support. ISSIP
                                                                                                   includes a RPF anticipating construction of wastewater treatment facilities,
                                                                                                   installation of sewerage, and other activities. The RPF for NDP2 includes
                                                                                                   arrangements for compensation if crops are damaged by the installation of
                                                                                                   subsurface drainage. A RPF was also prepared for the Additional Financing for
                                                                                                   the NDP2 approved in 2010. If a specific need for involuntary land acquisition
                                                                                                   arises during implementation, then an Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan
                                                                                                   (ARAP) would need to be prepared, based on the RPF for the projects which
                                                                                                   the GEF project is supporting, in particular IIIMP or ISSIP in Nekla/Menesi pilot
                                                                                                   scheme and NDP2 in Okda/Tellin and Khadrawia pilot schemes.
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                    ✖      The project does not have any physical intervention and does not affect the
                                                                                                   safety of the Dam. The result of the study for reduction of evaporation losses
                                                                                                   in Lake Nasser will be reviewed by Dam specialist of the Bank.
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP         ✖                 As Lake Nasser is an international waterway, the project triggers the Bank's
                               7.50                                                                policy on Projects on International Waterways. However, the project will
                                                                                                   support only a study on lake evaporation losses and how these would be
                                                                                                   affected by changes in reservoir operations, as well as a study of social and
                                                                                                   environmental impacts, including impacts on the Sudanese portion of the lake.
                                                                                                   Consequently, these activities fall under the exception to the notification
                                                                                                   requirement under paragraph 7(b) of OP 7.50 "Projects on International
                                                                                                   Waterways". In accordance with the requirements of the policy, the RVP
                                                                                                   approved this exception to notification through a memorandum on October 13,
                                                                                                   2011.
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                        ✖      There is no disputed area in the Nile Delta.


                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                 Environment - There is no significant negative impact envisaged from the Project (soft-type) incremental activities. However, OP4.01 is
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 triggered, and the Project is categorized B. The ESMF focuses on: (1) monitor impacts on ambient water quality and public health in areas
                                 adjacent to the 3 pilots including areas close to Northern Lakes (under Component 2, through NWRC coordinating with NDP2 and IIIMP M&E
                                 Units); and (2) empower MWRI's Planning Sector and the EMU of NDPII to address the water-quality aspects of IWRM, including SWM.

                                 International Waterways - As Lake Nasser is an international waterway, the project triggers the Bank's policy on Projects on International
                                 Waterways. However, the project will support only a study on lake evaporation losses and how these would be affected by changes in reservoir
                                 operations, as well as a study of social and environmental impacts, including impacts on the Sudanese portion of the lake. Consequently, these
                                 activities fall under the exception to the notification requirement under paragraph 7(b) of OP 7.50 "Projects on International Waterways." In
                                 accordance with the requirements of the policy, the RVP approved this exception to notification through a memorandum on October 6, 2011.
                                 Nevertheless, as per OP7.50 (paragraph 7b) the MWRI team will be responsible for examining any potential riparian aspects, and for acting
                                 accordingly (e.g. in relation to the Lake Nasser study in Component 2).

                                 Pest Management - The project procurement plan does not include procuring pesticides or herbicides; and the project does not seek to
                                 horizontally develop new lands, and thus adds no pollution load. Moreover, the project awareness activities and EMP will aim to reduce
                                 pesticide use and promote proper disposal of unused pesticides and containers, and so reducing pesticide pollution. Hence OP4.09 would not
                                 be triggered. Similarly for IIIMP it was determined that the "vertical expansion" attributed to IIIMP physical interventions would be within 20%,
                                 and thereupon, the incremental increase in pesticide and fertilizer residues (if any) cannot exceed that 20% range. Since the baseline (before
                                 IIIMP) residual concentration of the water-pollutant parameters (e.g. Alpha-BHC and Malathion) was found to be way lower than the GOE and
                                 WHO standards, a vertical expansion of 20% cannot cause these to violate the standards. Hence IIIMP did not trigger OP4.09.

                                 Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement - OP 4.12 is not triggered. In pilot areas, the GEF project and the associated projects may
                                 support improvements in solid waste collection and disposal that might involve acquisition of relatively small amounts of land for disposal, in
                                 which case the activities financed by the complementary projects will need to comply with the Bank policies concerning land acquisition and
                                 involuntary resettlement and set out in those project documents. The earlier proposal for an in-stream wetland in the Khadrawia drain stated
                                 that about 1.5 feddans would be needed for drying sludge from the sediment trap. IIIMP included a component for mainstreaming
                                 environmental management, and its resettlement policy framework (RPF) includes provisions related to solid waste management, including
                                 some kinds of activities for which the GEF project may provide technical support. ISSIP includes a RPF anticipating construction of wastewater
                                 treatment facilities, installation of sewerage, and other activities. The RPF for NDP2 includes arrangements for compensation if crops are
                                 damaged by the installation of subsurface drainage. A RPF was also prepared for the Additional Financing for the NDP2 approved in 2010. If a
                                 specific need for involuntary land acquisition arises during implementation, then an Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (ARAP) would need
                                 to be prepared, based on the RPF for the projects which the GEF project is supporting, in particular IIIMP or ISSIP in Nekla/Menesi pilot
                                 scheme and NDP2 in Okda/Tellin and Khadrawia pilot schemes.

                                                                                                                                                                        Page 5 of 7
                           Physical Cultural Resources and Protection of Antiquities - Based on the three existing projects and the information available during GEF
                           project preparation, it is not expected that project activities would affect antiquities. If any are encountered, this would be handled under
                           archaeological chance find procedures, in accordance with the safeguards incorporated in the relevant project being supported by the GEF
                           project.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                           The Nekla/Menesi pilot scheme will support BCWUAs and the DWB in working with IWMDs to improve the integrated management of irrigation
                           and drainage and to reduce pollution of drainage canals by improving solid waste management, including the use of GIS to support decision-
Public Disclosure Copy




                           making and monitoring by IWMDs and BCWUAs. Since these organizations have already been established, the GEF project will focus on
                           enhancing their capacity with additional training, advice, and other support from IIIMP, NDP2, and ISSIP. During the public consultation
                           meetings, WUA leaders and local officials expressed strong interest in working to improve solid waste management and reduce pollution of
                           drainage canals. During a follow-up meeting to learn about the results of the earlier solid waste management experience in Nekla Village,
                           supported by a World Bank trust fund, BCWUA and village leaders expressed their continuing interest to work on improving solid waste
                           management on their own and willingness to work together with the HCWW and other organizations, as long as local groups could have a
                           major role in decisions and implementation. They explained that the earlier activities had not been sustained because the local unit of the
                           district lacked the resources to continue the regular, frequent, solid waste collection that had been planned. Attempts to hire a private contractor
                           raised costs above what households were ready to pay. This is an indication that while willingness to pay for solid waste collection exists, it has
                           limits. One implication is that revenue from recycling and composting may be crucial for the financial sustainability of local solid waste
                           management.

                           Okda/Tellin pilot scheme will support existing BCWUAs and the establishment of a DWB to work with the IWMD. During the public consultation
                           meeting, village leaders, BCWUA leaders and local officials confirmed that water pollution and solid waste management were priorities that they
                           wanted to work on.

                           Khadrawia pilot scheme will support development of a stakeholder forum within which the issues can be discussed and possible solutions
                           considered, and will also support more specific analysis to improve understanding of the economic cost of current pollution, and conversely the
                           benefits of improvements, as well as the technical and financial options available. During the stakeholder consultation, representatives of
                           factories in the industrial zone, BCWUAs, and local officials expressed strong interest in improving solid waste management and reducing water
                           pollution. The more detailed issues of technical options and cost sharing will need to be addressed as part of the pilot. The project itself will not
                           have the resources that would be required to complete construction of wastewater treatment facilities to deal with the industrial zone sewerage.
                           Inclusion of this pilot scheme represents a decision to learn from working in an area with serious industrial pollution about what can be done to
                           promote stakeholder participation, improve understanding, and formulate options for addressing the issues.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                           MWRI prepared an ESMF ("Framework"), because site-specific EIAs/EMPs will be undertaken under Component 1 for each of the 3 pilots,
                           which will help determine, inter alia, the best set of SWM interventions. The SWM activities totaling US$1.6m are not deemed part of the total
                           ESMF budget ($0.7m) because SWM is more of a core Project activity leading to its Project Development Objectives (PDO indicator No.3: the
                           number of WUAs trained on IWRM including water pollution control), rather than a mitigation of Project impact.

                           The project's GEF-financed incremental SWM activities (in Component 1) are mostly of the soft-type such as small equipment ($400,000 only in
                           Okda/Teleen), and TA and training (in all 3 pilots). Whereas, the hard-type/physical SWM interventions will be financed by IIIMP and NDP2 in
                           Nekla/Menesi and Khadraweya pilots respectively (TBD, based on the Site-specific EAs, e.g. BCWUA tractors, landfill works in Nekla; in-stream
Public Disclosure Copy




                           wetland for Khadraweya). The SWM-related activities for Khadraweya pilot will all be of the soft-type, GEF-financed (TA, training, monitoring,
                           for safe disposal of the liquid and solid wastes that will be captured by the to-be-selected physical intervention on the drain). Land for landfills
                           will be a public land or donated by the local elites. Hence, safeguards wise, the Project is categorized "B".

                           The purpose of these SWM activities is not processing the collected waste. The purpose (to fulfill the PDO) is to safely take away the wastes
                           from the irrigation and drainage canals supported by IIIMP and NDP2, so they can function as designed. However, if during Project
                           implementation, based on the findings of the site-specific EA, the Project finds that WUAs are interested in composting, reusing or selling
                           processed waste (and that these "by-products" essentially encourage them to keep the canals/drains clean), the Project would in this case
                           elevate its engagement in SWM by supporting the WUAs to implement waste processing and recycling/marketing in the 3 pilots. In this case,
                           there would be higher risks warranting different levels of prevention/mitigation/monitoring (currently not addressed in Project appraisal
                           documents); hence, in this case the Project would be restructured, and safeguards Category raised from B to A.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                            and implement the measures described.
                           The ESMF will focus on: (1) Monitor impacts on ambient water quality and public health in areas adjacent to the 3 pilot schemes including areas
                           close to the Northern Lakes (under Component 2, through NWRC coordinating with NDP2 and IIIMP M&E Units); (2) Empower MWRI's PS and
                           EMU of NDP2 to address the water-quality aspects of IWRM, including SWM. As such, the EMU of NDP2 could act as the EMU of GEF-EWMP
                           as regards the two drainage-related pilots: Khadraweya and Oqda/Teleen. It should to noted that the EWMP's incremental SWM activities (in
                           Component 1) are all of the soft-type such as TA and training; whereas the hard-type/physical SWM interventions like sludge drying, procuring
                           BCWUA tractors, or landfills will be financed by the ongoing IIIMP/ISSIP. Land for landfills or sludge drying will be public land or donated by the
                           local elites. Hence, safeguards wise, the Project is categorized B and not "A". Similarly, the SWM-related mitigation, monitoring or training
                           activities in the ESMF will thereby be of the soft-type. A key challenge for solid waste management is to find sustainable arrangements for local
                           O&M. The capacity and accountability of local government units, which are responsible for the solid waste management in rural areas, is
                           considered to be insufficient. Community Development Associations (CDAs) can provide a legal framework for such enterprises, though they
                           lack the legal authority to compel payment of fees. Another option would be for a BCWUA itself to take the responsibility. BCWUAs are also
                           constituted as voluntary associations, lacking the power to collect required payments, but they do have broad representation from all water
                           users, and institutional arrangements designed to deliver accountable services. The exact legal format for management of solid waste
                           management will be decided during the project. It could use a CDA approach, but may also explore the potential for working within the legal
                           framework of the BCWUA, and working in cooperation with local government units. At present, Egypt does not have arrangements for routine
                           oversight and technical support of decentralized solid waste management. The project will also provide a basis for looking more closely at the
                           kind of technical oversight and support which could best help assure effective services and aid problem-solving by locally managed solid waste
                           management activities.


                                                                                                                                                                    Page 6 of 7
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                               on potentially affected people.
                              Consultations on the 3 pilot schemes were completed in June and August 2011, and the participants fully supported the project (as documented
                              in the ESA/ESMF). To ensure full community support and involvement, it will be important to actively engage with all water users, including
                              women and men, head and tail end irrigators, and those who are poorer and those who are better-off, and the proposed budgets and schedules
                              are designed to make this possible. Training will be provided to agency staff, particularly in the IWMDs, to enhance their capacity to work with
                              stakeholders in facilitating BCWUA initiatives, resolving conflicts, and promoting understanding and cooperation in reducing pollution.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                            Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                              Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                           Yes
                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                              11-Oct-2011
                              Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                          27-Oct-2011
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                           08-Nov-2011
                              For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                              Directors
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                            disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                            C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                              Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?               Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]

                            OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                              Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                                          Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]

                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?               Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language       Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for    Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?               Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard     Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same         Yes [     ]       No [   ]          NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Signed and submitted by:                                                Name                                                    Date
                            Task Team Leader:                    Yoshiharu Kobayashi                                                         28-Nov-2011
                            Approved By:
                            Sector Manager:                      Francis Ato Brown (SM)                                                      28-Nov-2011
                            Comments:     The ISDS is cleared by the SMU




                                                                                                                                                                    Page 7 of 7
