                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC195

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Mar-2012
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 30-Apr-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Colombia                         Project ID:      P123879
                            Project Name:      Subnational Institutional Strengthening (P123879)
                            Task Team          Pedro Arizti
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          01-May-2013                      Estimated        16-Jul-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     LCSPS                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Central government administration (50%), Sub-national government
                                               administration (50%)
                            Theme(s):          Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (75%), Managing
                                               for development results (25%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     97.99                     Total Bank Financing:         95.75
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                                Financing Gap:                   0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      2.25
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        95.75
                              Total                                                                        97.99
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives


                           C. Project Description
                           The instrument to be used to support the Government fits better with the SIL’s objectives
                         The proposed operation would focus on the key challenges of strengthening SNGs ’ public
                         management capacities, improving the monitoring and coordination mechanisms among levels of
                         governments, and enhancing civil society oversight. The operation will support the implementation
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of Article 16 of the National Development Plan which creates a “Program for the Creation and
                         Strengthening of Institutional Capacities for Territorial Development?. The program’s objective is to
                         support SNGs and civil society organizations in the formulation of district, municipal and department
                         development plans aimed to reach the Millennium Development Goals, as well as to support the
                         preparation of strategic regional projects. The program details will be defined in a policy paper
                         (CONPES document) which is expected to be approved in December 2011. It is also anticipated that
                         DNP will create a special administrative body responsible for the implementation of this program
                         which will have as one of its main roles the implementation of this operation. The preparation of the
                         project requires that the mentioned institutional arrangements will be timely in place.

                         For the strengthening of SNGs’ public management capacities, the project will support selected
                         SNGs through the provision of capacity building activities, public management processes and
                         systems. The SNGs will be selected on the following basis:

                         •        A first selection, will include SNGs with weak fiscal performance identified by the MHCP
                         through the mechanisms stated in the “Fiscal Insolvency Framework?; SNGs with weak management
                         of SGP resources identified by MHCP through the “Decree 28 Framework to Monitor, Track and
                         Control SGP resources?; or, SNGs with weak management of royalties resources identified by DNP
                         or MHCP (the Law is currently under discussion in Congress) through the “Framework to Monitor,
                         Track and Control Royalties resources?.
                         •        Second, the project activities will be implemented progressively, prioritizing SNGs on the
                         basis of criteria that will include population, poverty and gaps on services coverage and quality
                         factors.

                         The first criterion has been chosen because it embodies all the current institutional framework for
                         coordination between the central and SNGs. Besides, these institutional frameworks allow the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         National and SNG to agree on performance management contracts which would include the capacity
                         building activities supported by this project (such as training in systems)

                         For the improvement of monitoring and coordination mechanisms among levels of governments the
                         project will support the further development and consolidation of the public bodies, regulations,
                         methodologies and processes required for the expansion of the Central Government’s oversight
                         mechanisms on SNGs stated in the “Fiscal insolvency Framework?, the “Decree 28 Framework to
                         Monitor, Track and Control SGP resources?, and the “Framework to Monitor, Track and Control
                         Royalties resources?. The project will also support the Central Government efforts to align the
                         National Development Plan goals with the formulation and implementation of plans, programs and
                         projects of all levels of government, and the creation of monitoring mechanisms for this purpose.

                         Colombia has 6 institutional arrangements for coordination among Central and SNGs aimed to
                         oversee, control and monitor the fulfillment of the service delivery goals stated in the National
                         Development Plan. The mechanisms to oversee the adequate use of resources in SNGs include the
                         fiscal insolvency framework that oversees the fiscal performance of SNGs; the Decree 28 framework
                         to monitor, track and control the resources form the transfer system (Sistema General de
                         Participaciones); the regime to monitor, track and control the royalties resources (which as
                         mentioned is being defined in the new royalties law currently in the Congress). New institutional
                         arrangements have been developed through the National Development Plan, including the “Program
                         for the Creation and Strengthening of Institutional Capacities for Territorial Development? which
                         includes mechanisms to enhance SNGs management capacities and civil society participation; the
                         Land Management Law which sets new mechanisms to strengthen regional coordination and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         investment; and the Formulario Unico Territorial, a tool aimed to structure the information required
                         from SNGs to oversee the use of public funds.

                         With the exception of the fiscal insolvency framework, these institutional arrangements have been
                         recently approved, mostly are being progressively implemented, and some of them require further
                         legislation and regulation to proceed to their implementation. All of them are responsibility of
                         different agencies in the Central Government and do not have a structured organization or approach
                         towards SNGs.

                         This operation will support the Government of Colombia in the definition of complementary
                         arrangements aimed to organize and structure operation of these mechanisms. This will improve the
                         central government oversight of SNGs performance in the delivery of services.

                         For the enhancement of civil society oversight the project will contribute to the implementation of a
                         second policy document (CONPES) on civil society oversight also expected in December 2011 as
                         mandated by the PND.




                         Component 1: Assessment of Management Tools for SNGs Public Administration and Coordination
                         among levels of Government (US$25 million)

                         This component will support the design and implementation of complementary regulations,
                         methodologies, processes and systems required for the strengthening of SNGs’ public management
                         capacities, improving the monitoring and coordination mechanisms among levels of government, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         enhancing civil society oversight. These institutional arrangements will be required to refine the
                         operational basis of the “Program for the Creation and Strengthening of Institutional Capacities for
                         Territorial Development?, which institutional details and management body will be approved in xxx
                         2012 through a CONPES document. The preliminary activities to be financed through this
                         component are:

                         •        Preparation of the “Methodology of Categorization of SNGs? (as explained in the second
                         criterion of the selection of SNGs) on the basis of population, poverty conditions, delivery of
                         services (coverage and quality), and governance environments.
                         •        Refinement of methodologies being used to support the improvement of SNGs management
                         capacities, including the “Rapid Assessments and Action Plan Methodology?, the methodology being
                         used in the Program “Unidos? and other ad-hoc methodologies for the assessment of administrative
                         capacities and management of the delivery of services.
                         •        Conceptualization, design and development of standard procedures and Management
                         Information Systems to support the improvement of the following public-sector administrative areas:
                         planning, investment, procurement, financial management, human resources, tax administration, debt
                         management, assets management, monitoring and control.
                         •        Identification of information required by the Central Government and SNGs to monitor the
                         National Development Plan’s strategic service delivery goals (responsibility of SNGs); and further
                         development of structured mechanisms and processes to collect information from SNGs. (like the
                         Formulario Unico Territorial)
                         •       Design and implementation of Central Government/SNGs single dashboard to monitor the
                         National Development Plan’s strategic service delivery goals which implementation is responsibility
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of SNGs.
                         •       Identification and assessment of mechanisms for citizens’ oversight current in place at the
                         national and local level. Further integration and development of citizens’ participatory and oversight
                         mechanisms and their regulations. This will include the design of mechanisms to integrate the
                         participatory instruments currently being used in Colombia, such as Participatory Planning,
                         Participatory Budgeting and Citizen’s Visible Audits.
                         •       Design of capacity building methodologies to enhance civil society oversight in public
                         service provision at local level.

                         The counterpart for this component would be the General Deputy of the MHCP and the NPD.

                         Component 2: Strengthening SNGs’ Managerial and Administrative Capacity (US$95 million)

                         This component will support the implementation of the methodologies, processes and systems to
                         improve administrative and service delivery management capacities (developed through Component
                         1). The Central Government will provide the technical assistance in the selected SNGs public-sector
                         administrative areas identified, such as: are planning, investment, procurement, financial
                         management, human resources, tax administration, debt management, assets management,
                         monitoring and control.

                         For this purpose the component will support the implementation of the public body responsiblefor
                         the provision of the technical assistance to SNGs. The Program for the Creation and Strengthening
                         of Institutional Capacities for Territorial Development will create a special administrative body
                         responsible for the management of the capacity building activities as well as for the implementation
                         of processes and information systems. The National Planning Department will define the inter-
                         institutional arrangements in the coming weeks.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Alternatives for this purpose are being assessed by the Government and the Bank team and include
                         the creation of special programs and the training of special teams in the Public Administration
                         National School. Hence, one of the alternatives being explored for the execution of capacity building
                         activities is the creation of special teams under the coordination of the national public administration
                         school (ESAP)

                         It is expected that this component will provide support to xxx SNGs (according to the criteria
                         explained in project description and component 1) consisting in training systems, basic equipment
                         and technical assistance and supervision for its implementation.
                         The counterparts for this component would be the General Deputy of the MHCP and the DNP.

                         Component 3: Coordinate Central Government’s existing mechanisms regarding Monitoring and
                         Control of the Delivery of Services provided by SNGs (US$20 million)

                         This component will support the improvement and coordination of existing monitoring and
                         coordination mechanisms among levels of governments. For this purpose the component will support
                         the further development and consolidation of the public bodies, regulations, methodologies and
                         processes required for the expansion of the Central Government’s oversight mechanisms on SNGs
                         including the following:
                         Enhancing Monitoring and Control of the Transfer System – SGP. Technical assistance and IT
                         solutions will support the Directorate of Fiscal Support (DAF) and sector ministries to develop or
Public Disclosure Copy




                         strengthen the procedures, tools and operations used to monitor and control the coverage and quality
                         goals of services financed with resources of the SGP.

                         Enhancing Monitoring and Control of the Royalties System. Technical assistance and IT solutions
                         will support the DNP and sector ministries to develop the tools authorized in the Royalties Law to
                         monitor and control the use of royalties.

                         Enhancing Monitoring and Control of Fiscal Performance. Technical assistance and IT solutions will
                         support the DAF to strengthen the procedures, tools and operations used to monitor and control fiscal
                         performance of SNGs. The counterpart for this sub-component would be the DAF at the MHCP.

                         Identify information, discuss it with the sector Ministries and define indicators in order to ensure
                         quality and timely service delivery especially of the information oriented towards results.

                         Improving Information Collection. Rationalization of the sub-national information gathering and
                         reporting tools across all sectors through the improved design, scope, formats, and periodicity of
                         SNG reporting based where possible on existing tools and including training activities. The
                         counterparts for this sub-component would be the MHCP, DNP and the General Comptroller Office.

                         Implementation of the public body responsible for the “Program for the Creation and Strengthening
                         of Institutional Capacities for Territorial Development?. This will support the implementation of the
                         institutional framework at the National Government level responsible for the provision of capacity
                         building support to SNGs, the identification of local partners at sub-national level which may
                         participate in the implementation of capacity building activities; and the implementation of the
                         capacity building programs. The counterpart for this component would be the General Deputy of the
                         MHCP and the National Planning Department.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Support the implementation of the “Comisión de Ordenamiento,? a technical and advisory body that
                         will supervise the quality and execution of regional projects; and the design and implementation of
                         the regulatory framework for the “contratos-plan,? an inter-governmental coordinating tool by which
                         the Central Government delegates to regional and provincial associations the capacity to undertake
                         projects that meet national priorities. The counterpart for this component would be the National
                         Planning Department. During project preparation the scope of the activities to be financed under this
                         subcomponent will be furthered developed to clarify if any safeguards are needed are needed to be
                         triggered and/or its justification.

                         Component 4: Strengthening Citizens Participation Mechanisms (US$7 million)

                         This component will support the implementation of standardized mechanisms aimed at promoting
                         and enhancing citizen participation along the whole SNG investment cycle, including the planning,
                         budgeting, investment, execution and evaluation of the use of public resources. It will also aim to
                         improve coordination and integration among various Central Government demand side programs.
                         During project preparations the teams will make sure the mechanisms are accessible and relevant.

                         The component will also support the development of an open data platform that leads to a SNG open
                         Government implementation, taking advantage of the ICT systems developed in component 2. The
                           available information, together with capacity building activities, will allow citizens to effectively
                           monitor and control the use of local public resources. The counterpart for this component would be
                           the National Planning Department and the Ministry of the Interior.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Component 5: Project Management (US$3 million)

                           This component would support the administration and coordination of the project, as well the
                           implementation and follow-up of the project’s monitoring and evaluation framework. The
                           counterpart of this component would be the Project’s Administration Unit. The counterparts for this
                           component would be the General Deputy of the MHCP and the NPD.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Bogota, Colombia

                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         TBD             The project will not support construction or
                           BP 4.01                                              design activities. However, a subcomponent of
                                                                                Component 3 supports the implementation of
                                                                                the “Comisión de Ordenamiento,? a technical
                                                                                and advisory body that will supervise the quality
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                and execution of regional projects;and the
                                                                                design and implementation of the regulatory
                                                                                framework for the “contratos-plan,? an inter-
                                                                                governmental coordinating tool by which the
                                                                                Central Government delegates to regional and
                                                                                provincial associations the capacity to undertake
                                                                                projects that meet national priorities. Thus, the
                                                                                team, with support from an environmental
                                                                                specialist will review the proposed project
                                                                                components to assess potential impacts, and
                                                                                provide a more detailed description and
                                                                                justification at appraisal stage.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No              No physical works are being financed under the
                                                                                project, so habitats will not be affected.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No              No physical works are being financed under the
                                                                                project, so forests will not be affected.
                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No                            The project does not involve the use of
                                                                                                                                 pesticides and hence does not require pest
                                                                                                                                 management.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No                            There are no physical cultural resources in the
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         location of project implementation.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     TBD                           The project does not focus on indigenous
                                                                                                                                 communities.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            The project does not involve physical works or
                                 4.12                                                                                            other type of use of land, so no resettlements
                                                                                                                                 will occur.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            Project activities will not occur in the vicinity of
                                                                                                                                 dams and therefore not affect safety of dams.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The project will not affect international
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             It is not expected that project locations include
                                 7.60                                                                                            disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-May-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      During project preparation March 201w-June 2012
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Pedro Arizti
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name:                                                                                                                      Date:
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Arturo Herrera Gutierrez (SM)                                                                                        Date: 30-Apr-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
