                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC1388

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Oct-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Afghanistan                      Project ID:      P132742
                            Project Name:      Afghanistan - Second Skills Development Project (P132742)
                            Task Team          Leopold Remi Sarr
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          15-Jan-2013                      Estimated        15-Mar-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASED                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector:         Vocational training (83%), Central government administration (17%)
                            Theme:          Education for the knowledge economy (67%), Improving labor markets (33%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            5.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                  25.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund                                        55.00
                              Financing Gap                                                                 0.00
                              Total                                                                        85.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed Project Development Objective for ASDP II is `to increase employability of a skilled
                           workforce'. The PDO of ASDP II has been simplified to focus more on the employability of the
                           workforce, which is the need of the hour in Afghanistan. The PDO will be achieved through a three
                           pronged strategy that will focus on (a) relating skills and competencies to market demand and thus to
                           increase the Assurance level of employers, (b) institutional reforms underpinning quality TVET
                           delivery, and (c) affirmative action to attract boys and girls to TVET programs.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed Project Development Objective for ASDP II is `to increase employability of a skilled
                         workforce'.
                         ASDP and the current project ASDP II differ principally in terms of the overall approach and the
                         identification of focus areas. Strategic issues that came to the fore during ASDP implementation have
Public Disclosure Copy




                         been identified in this follow-on project as specific sub-components. There will thus be three main
                         components in ASDP II  (1) Enhance Quality of Formal TVET Delivery, (2) Enhance Quality of
                         and Access to Informal TVET, and (3) Technical Support and Project Management.
                         Component 1(Institutional Development in Formal TVET) - this component will have two sub-
                         components; (a) Quality enhancement of Formal TVET delivery. This is proposed to be achieved
                         through (i) institutional reform of selected TVET Schools-the institutions being selected through a
                         two stage process that will highlight their inherent capacity for process and structural reforms. In the
                         first phase, institutions that have demonstrated Good Practice in institutional and academic
                         management would be Recognized, and a minor award would be made in kind. In the second phase
                         of Development Support, the Recognized institutions would be invited to submit Institutional
                         Development proposals, and the most promising Proposals would be selected for development
                         support. While such proposals may also include minor renovation/reconstruction for the purpose of
                         improving the learning environment, no civil works of any substantial nature would be supported.
                         Very specific criteria will be used both for the Recognition phase as well as the Development
                         Support Phase. Disbursements will be linked to specific steps and deliverables as agreed upon in
                         terms of the Development proposals. Technical Assistance will be provided in terms of Workshops
                         and consultant services etc to assist the institutions to prepare the proposals. Ongoing support to the
                         National Institute of Management and Administration set up under ASDP, and the Afghanistan
                         National Institute of Music, will be continued as these institutions have clearly demonstrated their
                         commitment to continuous institutional improvements and implemented governance reforms as
                         required under ASDP mandates (ii) quality improvement of TVET Teachers and Trainers- which will
                         establish an in-service Technical Teachers Training Program in cooperation with other ongoing
                         donor initiatives. This sub-component will also establish a Technical Teachers Training Institute. The
                         overall program will include on-site as well as distance-learning options for Teacher Training. The
                         project envisages the payment of one-time bonuses to teachers who demonstrate application of their
                         learning in the Institute in teaching in their schools, and an award to the school. The evaluation will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         be done by a third party. Such an evaluation will be holistic and will include specifically the
                         performance of the school in providing placements to the students(b) Institutionalized Incentives for
                         Further Training for students- this will be concerned with providing incentives that will increase
                         attractiveness of the Formal sector, including Voucher Programs to meritorious and financially
                         challenged students (ensuring equitable outreach to girls) who wish to pursue further training for
                         acquiring professional certifications and licenses.
                         Component 2(Enhance Quality of and Access to Informal TVET)- this component has two sub-
                         components; (1) Quality enhancement of Informal TVET Service Delivery, which will include
                         Performance linked support to TVET service providers (including Vocational Training Centers under
                         the MOLSAMD) for enhancement of quality of service delivery and improved placement activities;
                         (2) Affirmative action in informal TVET, which is to be directed towards a dual purpose 
                         encouraging persons (especially from vulnerable and economically disadvantaged groups) to TVET
                         so that they have an opportunity to engage in decent work, providing opportunities for them to get
                         self-employed, etc. Focus will be maintained on gender and the physically disabled. Alternative
                         vehicles for conditional cash transfer (as envisaged in the National Priority Program) will be
                         explored during the design phase. Support to informal TVET will also include Literacy programs and
                         pilot training programs for households as training units.
                         Component 3(Technical Support and Project Management)  this component will have three sub-
                         components of (a) Framework Development and Applied Research (b) M&E, and (c) Project
                         Management. Framework Development and Applied Research will continue the work of
                           development of the National Qualifications Framework for TVET (as was envisaged under the
                           ASDP), and Research to both (a) support Framework development and (b) assess the impact of the
                           project itself. Under M&E, in addition to generation of data on the impact of the project itself, a
Public Disclosure Copy




                           regular and continuing program of data collection on the Labor Market, and analysis and
                           dissemination of the same will be undertaken. Development of an appropriate EMIS will also be part
                           of this subcomponent. Project Management will include a component on the provision of
                           Certification for both formal and informal TVET through a recognized international third party
                           which will work on the basis of the NOSS that are in the process of being developed. This process
                           initiative is expected to lead to the establishment of a TVET Board in the near future.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the           safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project component I (formal TVET) will be implemented to cover all TVET institutes, while
                           component II, the informal training is aimed at addressing specific needs of informal Vocational
                           Education Training in rural areas in five provinces includes Parwan, Nangrahar, Bamyan, Balkh and
                           Heart provinces. These provinces are also covered by the AREDP project.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Ministry of Education (MoE) and the Ministry of Labor, Social Affairs and Martyred and
                           Disabled (MOLSAMD) will be the implementing agencies for their respective components,
                           responsible for planning, programming and budgeting of the project.
                           The capacity of both entities, particularly MoE, which will implement component I of the program is
                           limited and requires strengthening for planning and implementation. The PIUs at MoE will recruit an
                           environmental safeguard expert and social and gender expert to ensure safeguard and gender
                           compliance in TVET. The safeguard and gender team members will receive training on safeguard
                           and gender aspects, particularly the will receive on job training on preparation and supervision of
                           site-specific ESMP.

                           The project will be in Environmental Category B, with no land acquisition will take place under the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           project therefore, resettlement and further related planning would not require to consider. The
                           Environmental Assessment safeguard (OP 4.01) will be triggered and an environmental and Social
                           Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared for the Project based on progress in identifying
                           target vocation training institutions. The framework would include the appropriate environmental and
                           social measures for mitigating impacts of small-scale construction including worker health and safety
                           (consistent with IFC/ World Bank Group Environment Health, and Safety Guidelines (2007)). The
                           framework will also include a complain management system. It will provide trainees, teachers as
                           well as labors a formal venue for raising their grievances and concerns, as well as a mechanism for
                           timely and adequate solution or mitigation of these. Further, through the Third Party Monitoring
                           proposed in the project, environmental and social risks will be monitored on regular basis.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Asta Olesen (SASDS)
                           Mohammad Arif Rasuli (SASDI)
                           Mohammad Yasin Noori (SASDS)
                           Obaidullah Hidayat (SASDI)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                                 Environmental Assessment OP/                                      Yes                           OP/BP 4.01 is triggered. The renovation and
                                 BP 4.01                                                                                         minor construction work of the TVET institutes
                                                                                                                                 is expected to have insignificant environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 impacts because physical work is limited to
                                                                                                                                 renovation of existing buildings and minor
                                                                                                                                 construction work. The anticipated
                                                                                                                                 environmental impacts of the project primarily
                                                                                                                                 comprise issues relating to environmental and
                                                                                                                                 personnel safety.
                                                                                                                                 The PIU at MoE is responsible for ensuring that
                                                                                                                                 the debris will be disposed in a suitable place.
                                                                                                                                 Site specific ESMPs should be prepared and
                                                                                                                                 implemented by the PIU, to manage
                                                                                                                                 construction waste disposal, minimize dust
                                                                                                                                 hazards for workers, staff and nearby
                                                                                                                                 communities.
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No
                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            The project will need no land acquisition
                                 4.12                                                                                            because all physical works relate to renovation
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 and new construction will be carried out within
                                                                                                                                 the available land belong to the Ministry of
                                                                                                                                 Education. The implementing agency will
                                                                                                                                 ensure that the required land is free ofany
                                                                                                                                 squatters and other claims. OP 4.12 will not be
                                                                                                                                 triggered.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Jan-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             A.    Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage
                             ISDS would be prepared: n/a
Public Disclosure Copy




                             B.     For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
                             ISDS: xx

                             C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                             The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:      Name: Leopold Remi Sarr

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Sanjay Srivastava (RSA)                           Date: 03-Oct-2012
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Amit Dar (SM)                                     Date: 02-Oct-2012
Public Disclosure Copy
