                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                          Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSR5101
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-Aug-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 07-Aug-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            St. Vincent and the Grenadines Project ID:                         P124939
                                                                                             Additional
                                                                                             Project ID
                                                                                             (if any):
                            Project Name: Hurricane Tomas Emergency Recovery Loan (P124939)
                            Task Team       Justin Taylor Locke
                            Leader:
                            Estimated                                       Estimated       13-Jan-2011
                            Appraisal Date:                                 Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: LCSDU                            Lending         Emergency Recovery Loan
                                                                            Instrument:
                            Sector:         General education sector (37%), Flood protection (25%), Other social services
                                                (13%), Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (13%), Public
                                                administration- Water, sanitation and flood protection (12%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Theme:              Natural disaster management (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                                            No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         5.00           Total Bank Financing:                                             5.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                   Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                         0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                                5.00
                              Total                                                                                                      5.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?



                                                                                  Page 1 of 7
                          2. Current Project Development Objectives
                         The development objectives are to support the Recipient's efforts to: i) rehabilitate damaged and
                         vulnerable infrastructure, causedby the passage of Hurricane Tomas; and, ii) strengthen the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Recipient's ability to analyze location specific risks.
                          3. Project Description
                         Component 1 – Rehabilitation of Vulnerable and Damaged Infrastructure
                         Carrying out the rehabilitation and reconstruction of damaged infrastructure, including, inter alia,
                         school buildings and associated school infrastructure, community centers, strengthening a river
                         defense site, stock-piling gabion baskets, and transport infrastructure, through the provision of works,
                         technical advisory services and goods.

                         Component 2 – Institutional Strengthening and Hazard and Risk Analysis
                         Improving the capacity of the Ministry of Housing, Informal Human Settlements, Lands and Surveys
                         and Physical Planning (MoHILP), and the National Emergency Management Organization (NEMO),
                         for evaluation of natural hazard and climate change risks, through the provision of training to the
                         respective staff of MoHLP and NEMO, provision of technical advisory services and acquisition of
                         goods.

                         Component 3 – Project Management and Implementation Support
                         Strengthening and developing the institutional capacity of the Public Sector Investment Program
                         Management Unit for Project management and execution, including procurement, financial
                         management and supervision of Project activities, through the acquisition of goods, provision of
                         technical advisory services, training, and operating costs.

                         The original project design will remain intact. The project is being restructured to trigger OP 4.12 –
                         the Bank’s Involuntary Resettlement safeguard policy.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis (if known)
                         Project activities are located throughout the capital island of Saint Vincent. The project activities
                         included for financing under the emergency loan have been limited to the most urgent rehabilitation
                         and reconstruction activities. Activities include the rehabilitation of three schools, four community
                         shelters, one vulnerable riverbank and one road intervention. Namely:

                         • Rehabilitation and reconstruction of damaged schools, including: a) Georgetown Secondary; b)
                         Georgetown Primary; and c) Troumaca Secondary
                         • Rehabilitation and reconstruction of damaged community centers, including: a) Rose Hall; b) Rose
                         Bank; and c) Rillan Hill
                         • Strengthening of the Marriaqua River Defense (Teviot River)
                         • Stock-piling of gabion baskets
                         • Rehabilitation of Hopewell Road

                         The project is an Environmental Risk Category B. Under the restructuring the Category B rating will
                         remain the same.

                         No land acquisition was anticipated at appraisal and therefore no social safeguards were triggered.
                         However, during construction on-site conditions at the Hopewell-Teviot sub-project (involving road


                                                                       Page 2 of 7
                         rehabilitation, slope stabilization and river bank enhancement) led to a subsequent encroachment on
                         the lands of two land owners. As result, the affected owners were compensated for garden crops and
                         loss of agricultural land use following OP 4.12 requirements through a Remedial Abbreviated
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Resettlement Action Plan.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         M. Yaa Pokua Afriyie Oppong (LCSSO)
                         Michael J. Darr (LCSEN)

                         6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes              An Environmental Assessment was conducted for
                         BP 4.01                                             this project in compliance with World Bank
                                                                             requirements as presented in OP 4.01,
                                                                             Environmental Assessment and includes relevant
                                                                             considerations as presented in the World Bank
                                                                             Safeguards for Natural Habitats, OP/BP 4.04 and
                                                                             Physical Cultural Resources, OP/BP 4.11, for
                                                                             Category B projects. The Assessment was a
                                                                             project level assessment and reflects an analysis
                                                                             of the general impacts and mitigations to be
                                                                             applied during project execution. The assessment
                                                                             was conducted with emphasis on impacts
                                                                             reasonably expected based on the nature of the
                                                                             activities and the development of an
                                                                             Environmental Management Plan (EMP) to be
                                                                             applied during project execution.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No               All physical works under the project relate to the
                                                                             repair and rehabilitation of existing structures
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             with no new constructions included under the
                                                                             project. However, due to the fact there were some
                                                                             river defense works in a natural forest habitat,
                                                                             OP/BP 4.04 was triggered and sub-project
                                                                             specific EMPs have been developed to ensure that
                                                                             there is no impact to natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No               All physical works under the project relate to the
                                                                             repair and rehabilitation of existing structures
                                                                             with no new constructions included under the
                                                                             project. Therefore, the project will not finance
                                                                             activities that will affect forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09            No               All physical works under the project relate to the
                                                                             repair and rehabilitation of existing structures
                                                                             with no new constructions included under the
                                                                             project. Therefore the project will not finance the
                                                                             purchase or use of pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No               This policy is not triggered as there are no project
                         BP 4.11                                             activities that will impact the quality or




                                                                     Page 3 of 7
                                                                                management of physical cultural resources as
                                                                                defined under the policy.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No               This policy is not triggered since there are no
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                indigenous peoples as defined by OP 4.10 present
                                                                                in the project area of influence.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     Yes              On November 30, 2012, the Central Planning
                            4.12                                                Division (CPD) of the Ministry of Finance of the
                                                                                Government of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
                                                                                officially communicated to the Bank that land
                                                                                acquisition, involving two affected parties, had
                                                                                occurred at the Hopewell-Teviot sub-project. The
                                                                                road realignment and subsequent encroachment
                                                                                were unanticipated when works began and were
                                                                                necessitated by on-site conditions - including soil
                                                                                erosion, due to heavy rainfalls experienced during
                                                                                construction in October 2012. Two families (four
                                                                                project affected persons-PAP) were identified as
                                                                                having lost a section of their respective land and
                                                                                one of the families also lost crops. A Remedial
                                                                                Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan and a
                                                                                Project Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
                                                                                was subsequently prepared by the CPD and
                                                                                officially submitted to the Bank on June 19, 2013
                                                                                for No Objection – following which the Bank
                                                                                gave its No Objection to the Remedial
                                                                                Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan and RPF
                                                                                on June 25, 2013.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No               This policy is not triggered since the project will
                                                                                not finance any dams nor will rely on the
                                                                                operations of existing dams.
                            Projects on International          No               This policy is not triggered since the project will
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                not finance activities that affect any international
                                                                                waterways as defined under the policy.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 This policy is not triggered as the project will not
                            7.60                                                finance activities in disputed areas as defined
                                                                                under the policy.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               On November 30, 2012, the Central Planning Division (CPD) of the Ministry of Finance of the
                              Government of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines officially communicated to the Bank that land
                              acquisition, involving two affected parties, had occurred at the Hopewell-Teviot sub-project. The
                              road realignment and subsequent encroachment were unanticipated when works began and were
                              necessitated by on-site conditions - including soil erosion, due to heavy rainfalls experienced


                                                                        Page 4 of 7
                           during construction in October 2012. Two landowners were identified as having lost a section of
                           their respective land and one of the landowners also lost crops. A Remedial Abbreviated
                           Resettlement Action Plan and a Project Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was subsequently
Public Disclosure Copy




                           prepared by the CPD and officially submitted to the Bank on June 19, 2013 for No Objection –
                           following which the Bank gave its No Objection to the Remedial Abbreviated Resettlement Action
                           Plan and RPF on June 25, 2013.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             The first landowner lost 3,064 sq. ft. and the second one lost 297 sq. ft. of land, representing 40
                           percent and 1 percent of the affected landowner land assets respectively. No future activities or
                           further impacts are anticipated.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             The road realignment and subsequent encroachment were unanticipated when works began and
                           were necessitated by on-site conditions - including soil erosion, due to heavy rainfalls experienced
                           during construction in October 2012. The Bank was informed of the encroachment on November
                           30, 2012. In discussing potential options with LCSDE the only option proposed was to restructure
                           the project in order to put in place the necessary instruments – namely 1) Remedial Abbreviated
                           Resettlement Action Plan, and 2) a Resettlement Policy Framework, to deal with the land
                           acquisition.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             At appraisal, the project did not have any social safeguards instruments (e.g. RPF) in place as
                           land acquisition was unanticipated. In order to address the issue of land encroachment which
                           occurred during implementation, the borrower has prepared and disclosed a RPF as well as a
                           Remedial Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan for the Hopewell-Teviot sub-project. The
                           Resettlement Instruments have been reviewed and cleared by the Bank for public disclosure. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                           total land acquisition and crop compensation costs were approximately EC$20,000 or US$7,600.
                           Project proceeds were not used for compensation – as the government used their own resources to
                           compensate the two PAPs. This was already completed and is documented in the Remedial
                           Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan.

                           Borrower Capacity:
                           Borrower’s agency responsible for managing all resettlement and land acquisition under the
                           project is the Central Planning Division within the Ministry of Financing and Economic Planning,
                           which manages all internationally funded projects. Within the Central Planning Division, there is
                           one staff member responsible for ensuring World Bank social safeguards. This staff member
                           reports directly to the Project Coordinator in matrix with the Director of the Central Planning
                           Division. The Borrower’s capacity to plan and implement the social safeguards policy on land
                           acquisition (OP/BP 4.12) is low but steadily improving. The Bank is supporting the Borrower’s
                           capacity through frequent supervision missions and planned supplemental safeguards trainings.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The key stakeholders are the four PAPs identified above. The stakeholders have been extensively
                           consulted with by both the Borrower and the Bank in the assessment of impacts as well as
                           discussions of compensation options. The affected parties were further consulted on the content of



                                                                      Page 5 of 7
                           the Remedial Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan prior to Remedial Abbreviated Resettlement
                           Action Plan submission to the Bank and subsequent public disclosure.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   NA
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      19-Jun-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   16-Jul-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           St. Vincent and the Grenadines                                   VC
                           Comments: The project-wide Environmental Assessment can be found on the Government's
                                         website.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   No
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      19-Jun-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   16-Jul-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           St. Vincent and the Grenadines                                   VC
                           Comments: The Remedial Resettlement Action Plan and Ressettlement Policy Framework can be
                                         found on the Government's website.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies



                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Justin Taylor Locke
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                          Date: 06-Aug-2013
                            Coordinator:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Wambui G. Gichuri (SM)                         Date: 07-Aug-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 7 of 7
