                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC5555

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Sep-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Sep-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           India                            Project ID:      P145778
                            Project Name:      Mizoram State Roads II- Regional Transport Connectivity Project (P145778)
                            Task Team          Diep Nguyen-Van Houtte
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          11-Nov-2013                      Estimated        27-Feb-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASDT                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (70%), Other domestic and
                                               international trade (30%)
                            Theme(s):          Trade facilitation and market access (30%), Rural services and infrastructure
                                               (70%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    220.00                     Total Bank Financing:        200.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            20.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                  200.00
                              Total                                                                        220.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed Project Development Objective is to improve intra-state connectivity for Mizoram
                           residents and regional road connectivity for Mizoram and NE India to Bangladesh and Myanmar.

                           Residents of Mizoram will benefit from the increased connectivity both within the state and potential
                           regional connectivity to Bangladesh and Myanmar. The residents of the North East Region,
                         Bangladesh and Myanmar and countries beyond should benefit from the increased regional
                         connectivity which is expected to result in increased trade and economic development over the
                         longer term.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Project Description
                         1.       The project centers on the mountainous state of Mizoram located at the southern end of the
                         North East Region, bordering with Bangladesh and Myanmar. With a population of just over 1.9
                         million people and an area of about 21,087 square km, Mizoram is one of the least densely populated
                         but poorest states in India—it ranks 26th of 28 states in terms of GDP per capita. The entire
                         population is designated as “Scheduled Tribes?, as per Schedule VI of the Constitution. Using the
                         route through the “Chicken’s Neck?, Mizoram is the state farthest away from mainland India. Its
                         capital, Aizwal, is 2425 km from Delhi and 1547 km to the nearest Indian port, Kolkata, impacting
                         connectivity to larger markets, contributing to their current state of economic stagnation.

                         2.       As a result of this lack of connectivity, prices for basic staples can cost as much as three
                         times in Mizoram as compared to most cities in mainland India. Price differences with neighboring
                         countries are similarly large. For example, a bag of chips (processed food) costs Taka 20 at
                         Thegamukh, Bangladesh while across the border the residents of Tlabung, Kawrpucchuah, and
                         Lunglei, on the Mizoram side pay Taka 50 for the same. Most of the price difference can be
                         attributed to the high transport costs for goods to travel to and from Mizoram. The nearest major city
                         from Aizawl is Guwahati (Assam State), about 500 km away, and it takes about two days to cover
                         this distance because of the under-developed and poor condition of the road network. Ironically,
                         Aizawl is only 507 km from Chittagong Port in Bangladesh and about 700 km from Sittwe Port in
                         Myanmar. In fact, Chittagong served as the natural seaport for the states in the North East before
                         they were cut off following the Partition of India. Improved road connectivity achieved under the
                         Project can also help realize the potential of increased trade between India, Bangladesh and
                         Myanmar.

                         3.       The Mizoram State Roads II Regional Connectivity Project aims to increase intra-state
Public Disclosure Copy




                         connectivity for the residents of Mizoram. The Government of India has requested the World Bank to
                         provide financing for about 450 km of roads that enhance connectivity in Mizoram. However, since
                         the roads are of varying degrees of readiness, this proposed Project will fund the 157 km of roads
                         that are design-ready, as well as funding for preparation studies for the remaining 270-290 km of
                         road which could be considered for a follow-on project or additional financing when the designs are
                         ready.

                         The Project’s total cost is about US$220 million, to be financed by IDA.

                         Component A: Widening and Strengthening of 157km of Road and Preparation Studies for 270km of
                         Road (USD 210 million). Group I Roads: Widening and strengthening of three sections of road
                         totaling 157 km including the (i) 87.8 km Lunglei – Tlabung – Kawrpucchuah Road; (ii) 27.5km
                         Champhai-Zowthowkar road; and (iii) the 41.7km Lungsen-Chawngte North-South alignment.
                         Group II Roads: Concurrently, the project would fund detailed studies and designs for another
                         270km of road in the North-South Corridor. The alignment starts at Junction NH44A (Origination)
                         passing through Chungtlang, Darlung, Buarpui, Thenlum, Zawlpui, Phairuangkai andChawngte.

                         Component B: Institutional Development, Road Sector Modernization and Performance
                         Enhancement (USD 10 million): This component will support implementation of a Road Sector
                         Modernization Plan (RSMP) to carry-forward the on-going institutional development initiatives to
                         support improving the policy framework, modernizing engineering practices and business
                         procedures, sustainable asset management, institutional and human resource development including
                         for development of the State’s marketing and trade promotion skills, and road safety management.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The roads proposed under the project are in Aizawl, Mamit, Serchhip and Lunglei districts of
                         Mizoram. The terrain is predominately hilly or mountainous with fragile slopes. Although road exist
                         in most parts, current road width needs to be widened from about 6 m to 12 m wide. In several
                         sections, new road sections or re-alignment is proposed. This may lead to loss of private and
                         community assets and land acquisition. The roads at various sections pass through wooded areas and
                         riverine forests, and along rivers. The project also includes construction of bridges. Construction is
                         likely to use blasting and heavy machines. Potential environmental issues include slope stability
                         (related to landslides & erosion and water management), management of huge amount of excavated
                         materials, impacts on forests, and construction period issues (e.g. noise, dust, health & safety,
                         damage to crops and assets, sanitation & labor camps, etc). Other potential issues related to incidence
                         of Malaria and HIV/AIDs closer to international borders.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The Public Works Department (PWD) of Mizoram is the principal agency for execution and
                         maintenance of road and bridge works. The Mizoram I Project proved to be an important learning
                         experience for the PWD in management of environmental and social issues. The project has already
                         set up a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) at Aizawl and is in the process of mobilizing the key staff
                         for the same. The PIU would need additional, time-limited support for the preparation and
                         implementation phase of the project. The PIU has deputed an Assistant Engineer (AE) as
                         Environmental focal person, and engaged consultants for preparing environmental safeguard
                         documents. The PIU, with the help of consultants, is preparing detailed environmental screening,
                         Environmental Assessment (EA) and Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for the 3 road
                         segments with full design, incorporating lessons learned from the predecessor project will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                         completed prior to Appraisal. An Environmental Management Framework (EMF) will be prepared to
                         guide preparation of the remaining segments of roads that will have final designs prepared during
                         implementation. PIU /PWD plans to prepare and disclose the Environmental Screening Reports,
                         EAs/EMPs, and EMF by end-October 2013 and obtain environmental clearance from MoEF by
                         December 2013.

                         Although about 270 ha. of land acquisition is envisaged under the project, the impact on structures is
                         being avoided along the habitation areas. The impact is expected to be largely related to partial loss
                         of land in strips resulting in loss of trees, crops and small structures on the affected portion only.
                         Displacement and landlessness is expected to be limited wherein the resettlement would need to be
                         managed in close consultation with the affected person and the community in a culturally appropriate
                         way. The Resettlement and Rehabilitation (R&R) issues in the project would involve those of tribal
                         households. Therefore, to address the R&R and Indigenous issues a combined Resettlement and
                         Indigenous Peoples Development Plan (R&IPDP) shall need to be prepared by Appraisal for the sub-
                         projects to be procured for implementation in the first year. The R&IPDP shall be prepared based on
                         the detailed social assessment and free, prior and informed consultation with the affected community
                         and other relevant stakeholders. All such consultations will be conducted by the project officials with
                         the support of consultants and village heads in culturally appropriate manner to ascertain broad
                         community support. Any objections raised during such consultation shall be recorded and
                         documented. In addition to R&R measures, activities would be identified to enhance the capacity of
                           these communities to defend their interests, participate in and benefit from development. While the
                           road sections proposed under the project are expected to facilitate trade across borders, these roads
                           also may have the potential to boost local trade and improve linkages of the villages in the interiors
Public Disclosure Copy




                           with the local and regional markets. A Social Management Framework (SMF) shall also be prepared
                           to guide the preparation of remaining sub-projects during the implementation phase of the project.
                           These safeguard documents are expected to be prepared and disclosed in country by end-October,
                           2013.

                           A Special Land Acquisition Officer is already on board. The process on an average may take 10 to
                           18 months as per the country’s legal framework. The land acquisition process has been initiated on
                           August 14, 2013 for all the three project roads. The project also intends to use the method of
                           negotiation to arrive at early settlement of compensation.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Srihari Gopalaswamy (SASDS)
                           Sita Ramakrishna Addepalli (SASDI)
                           Drona Raj Ghimire (SASDI)
                           Sangeeta Kumari (SASDS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             Potential environmental issues include
                           BP 4.01                                              management of huge amount of excavated spoil
                                                                                materials, landslide/ slope instability risks in the
                                                                                fragile hill, impacts of blasting, construction
                                                                                nuisances including dusts and noise, labor &
                                                                                labor camp issues. Potential mitigations include
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                no haphazard disposal of excavated material
                                                                                (spoil management in designated sites with
                                                                                protection works), controlled blasting, slope and
                                                                                erosion control measures including bio-
                                                                                engineering works, workers and community
                                                                                health and safety , management of construction
                                                                                nuisances including dust, noise, and pressure on
                                                                                local water sources, etc.). Environmental
                                                                                screening, Environmental Assessment (EA) and
                                                                                Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for the
                                                                                3 road segments with full design, incorporating
                                                                                lessons learned from the predecessor project,
                                                                                will be completed prior to Appraisal. An
                                                                                Environmental Management Framework (EMF)
                                                                                will be prepared to guide preparation of the
                                                                                remaining segments of roads that will have final
                                                                                designs prepared during implementation. The
                                                                                Environmental Screening Reports, EAs/EMPs,
                                                                                and EMF will be disclosed by end-October 2013
                                                                 and environmental clearance from MoEF by
                                                                 December 2013.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes   The roads at various sections pass through
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 wooded areas and reverine forests, and along
                                                                 rivers. Group II roads are unlikely to have
                                                                 impact on protected area. Blue Mountain
                                                                 National Park is close to one of the Group I
                                                                 road, Other protected areas in Mizoram are far
                                                                 away (Dampa Tiger Reserve which is about 50
                                                                 km away from Group II road, other PAs are
                                                                 farther than this) from the proposed
                                                                 roads’locations. The EA will assess potential
                                                                 impacts on the protected areas, bio-diversity and
                                                                 protected species and proposed mitigation
                                                                 measures.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes   The roads at various sections pass through
                                                                 wooded areas and reverine forests, and along
                                                                 rivers. Group I roads are unlikely to have direct
                                                                 impact on natural forests. However, road
                                                                 segments in Group II roads pass through at least
                                                                 two riverine natural forests. The EA will assess
                                                                 potential direct and indirect impacts of roads on
                                                                 the forests and will propose management and
                                                                 enforcement measures to control and mitigate
                                                                 impacts on forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The project does not foresee use of any
                                                                 pesticides during construction or operation
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 phases.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   There are no known physical cultural sites of
                         BP 4.11                                 national or international significance along or in
                                                                 the vicinity of proposed roads. However, there
                                                                 are cultural sites of local significance such as
                                                                 graveyards. Screening and EA will identify all
                                                                 such sites and propose measures to protect these
                                                                 sites. Environmental Management Framework
                                                                 (EMF) will provide guidance in managing any
                                                                 'Chance Find', if found during construction.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   The entire population is designated as
                                                                 “Scheduled Tribes?, as per Schedule VI of the
                                                                 Constitution. People living closer to Bangladesh
                                                                 border are actually part of one traditional tribe,
                                                                 the Chakma. A combined Resettlement and
                                                                 Indigenous Peoples Development Plan shall be
                                                                 prepared for each of the sub-projects based on
                                                                 detailed social assessment. Free prior and
                                                                 informed consultations is planned to ascertain
                                                                                                                                 broad community support and formulate the
                                                                                                                                 Tribal Development Plan.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           Most of the habitations is likely to be avoided
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 4.12                                                                                            through design alternatives. However, land
                                                                                                                                 acquisition in small strips is expected
                                                                                                                                 throughout the alignment for about 275
                                                                                                                                 hectares. A combined Resettlement and
                                                                                                                                 Indigenous Peoples Development Plan shall be
                                                                                                                                 prepared for each of the sub-projects as almost
                                                                                                                                 the entire likely affected population is tribal. A
                                                                                                                                 Social Management Framework (SMF) shall
                                                                                                                                 also be prepared to guide the preparation of
                                                                                                                                 remaining sub-projects during the
                                                                                                                                 implementation phase of the project. These
                                                                                                                                 safeguard documents are expected to be
                                                                                                                                 prepared and disclosed in country by end-
                                                                                                                                 October, 2013.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            Project proposal does not include construction
                                                                                                                                 of any dam or project is not dependent on any
                                                                                                                                 existing or proposed dam.
                                 Projects on International                                         TBD                           Champhai-Zokhawthar road for about 5 km
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            passes within 0.5 km along the border river
                                                                                                                                 (Tiau River) with Myanmar. Another road ends
                                                                                                                                 at Karnaphuly River, which is border with
                                                                                                                                 Bangladesh. Road construction is unlikely to
                                                                                                                                 affect the quantity of water in this river.
                                                                                                                                 Possible effects on the river water quality will
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 be further reviewed during preparation.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             Project is not part of disputed territory.
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Oct-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      - Environmental and Social Screening Reports of Group I Roads by September 20, 2013;
                                      - Environmental Management Framework (EMF) and Environmental Management Plans (EMPs)
                                      by end-October, 2013;
                                      - Submission of Draft Environmental Assessments (EAs) and Environmental Management Plans
                                      (EMPs) to MoEF after public hearing by State Pollution Control Board (SPCB) of Group I roads
                                      by November 30, 2013;
                                      - Obtain environmental clearance from MoEF by December 2013.
                                      - Social Assessment, Social Management Framework (SMF) and Resettlement and Indigenous
                                      Peoples Development Plan (R&IPDP) for sub-projects by end-October, 2013.
                         IV. APPROVALS



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Task Team Leader:   Name: Diep Nguyen-Van Houtte

                         Approved By:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Regional Safeguards Name:                                Date:
                         Coordinator:
                         Sector Manager:     Name: Karla Gonzalez Carvajal (SM)   Date: 17-Sep-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
