                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC2521

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-May-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Jun-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Uganda                          Project ID:      P133780
                            Project Name:       Uganda Global Partnership for Education Project (P133780)
                            Task Team           Andreas Blom
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           03-Jul-2013                     Estimated        10-Jan-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      AFTEE                           Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Primary education (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for all (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       100.00                  Total Bank Financing:          0.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                                Financing Gap:                 0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      0.00
                              Education for All - Fast Track Initiative                                   100.00
                              Total                                                                       100.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed Project Development Objective is to support the government in improving critical
                           aspects of teacher and school effectiveness in the public primary education system.

                           The critical aspects of effectiveness to be improved are:
                           •       For teachers: presence in school, time on task, pedagogical approach for early reading and
                           numeracy, and availability of instructional material for teaching.
                           •       For schools: improved school governance, greater information availability at the school and
                         community level, and improved facilities.

                         The project beneficiaries will be:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         i.       Students in primary education who will benefit from more effective, motivated and present
                         teachers as well as improved teaching-learning inputs.
                         ii.      Students in pre-primary who will benefit from improved standards of pre-primary education
                         iii.     Current and future teachers in primary schools who will benefit through improved in-service
                         and pre-service training.
                         iv.      Head-teachers and school management committee members who will receive training and
                         resources for school improvement.
                         v.       Parents and communities with children in schools covered under the program who will
                         indirectly benefit from higher quality education, greater information and enhanced voice in school
                         management.
                         C. Project Description
                         This Project is based on consultations undertaken with the Local Education Group (LEG) in a
                         national workshop in Kampala in November 2012. The discussions yielded consensus around the
                         following proposed components: (i) Improving readiness to learn in primary school; (ii) Supporting
                         teachers to improve instruction; (iii) Strengthening teacher motivation; and (iv) Strengthening school
                         management and governance.

                         The project comprises of three components: (i) Component 1: A results-based component focused on
                         ‘Effective Teachers’; (ii) Component 2: A results-based component focused on ‘Effective Schools’.
                         This component will involve civil works in primary schools as further described below; and (iii)
                         Component 3: A Technical Assistance (TA) component which will finance essential advisory,
                         technical, and capacity-building support.

                         This project is centered on improving education service delivery at the classroom level to realize
                         meaningful gains in student achievement in primary grades. This objective necessitates a focus on
Public Disclosure Copy




                         improving teacher quality and performance because these are dimensions which are highly predictive
                         of student achievement and where considerable margins for improvement exist. This focus on
                         teachers will be buttressed by improvements in the overall school environment – in the form of
                         enhanced school management, accountability, and learning conditions. The complementary focus on
                         schools is aimed at enabling improved teacher competencies to most effectively translate into
                         improved education service delivery.

                         Taken as a whole, activities are formulated to yield returns in the short term in terms of perceptible
                         improvements in education service delivery. However, they are also expected to promote well-
                         performing, robust, sustainable institutions and administrative systems that would generate returns
                         over the medium to long term.

                         Component 1: Effective Teachers

                         1.1      Under the project, teacher effectiveness is expected to be promoted directly through a
                         coherent and coordinated mix of initiatives related to (i) teacher competency, (ii) teacher resources,
                         and (iii) teacher motivation and accountability.

                         1.2    Initiatives under this component include:
                         Teacher competency
                         (a)      Enhancing effectiveness of early grade instruction through provision of training to in-service
                         teachers and ECE instructors (DLI 1). Related DLIs will be linked to numbers of teachers trained.
                         Teacher resources
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (b)      Provision of instructional materials (including teacher reference materials) on the new
                         thematic primary curriculum. (DLI 2). Related DLIs will be linked to numbers of schools with access
                         to these materials.
                         Teacher motivation and accountability
                         (c)      Strengthening the design and implementation of an ongoing merit-based promotion scheme
                         for teachers (DLI 3). Related DLIs will be linked to demonstrable improvements in design and
                         implementation of the scheme.
                         (d)      Strengthening the system of field-based advisory support to and accountability of teachers
                         through more effective inspections (DLI 4). Related DLIs will be linked to numbers of schools
                         inspected at least once during a term and system improvements in generating effective follow-up
                         with teachers.
                         (e)      Regular and objective assessments of teacher time-on-task and pedagogical practices,
                         undertaken by Uganda National Examinations Board (DLI 5). Related DLIs will be linked to number
                         of schools for which these data become available.

                         Component 2: Effective Schools

                         The above initiatives are designed to directly improve teacher performance. To provide a supportive
                         enabling environment for these changes to take root, the project will also include a direct focus on
                         school effectiveness through initiatives related to: (1) school leadership and management, (2) school
                         accountability to the community, and (3) school learning environment.

                         2.1      Initiatives under this component include:
                         (a)      Increasing the capacity and autonomy of head-teachers and school management committees
                         (SMCs) to support and monitor teacher and student performance (DLI 6). Related DLIs will be
                         linked to number of schools with trained head-teachers and SMCs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (b)      Increasing availability and use of credible information on student, teacher, and school
                         performance to internal and external stakeholders, particularly communities - for planning,
                         transparency, and accountability (DLI 7). Related DLIs will be linked to number of schools where
                         this information is publically available to communities.
                         (c)      Provision of needs-based but performance-linked school facility grants to help meet
                         prioritized basic input standards at the school level (DLI 8) . This sub component will involve civil
                         works which will entail construction and rehabilitation of class rooms and pit latrines through school
                         (facility) grants. Schools to be supported are expected to be in rural areas and will use pit latrines
                         which do not require use of water. Such pit latrines are emptied when full using cesspools and the
                         waste taken to urban sewage treatment plants for further degradation and disposal. All civil works
                         will be undertaken on public land and associated with the existing schools. Further, construction will
                         follow standard norms and be gender sensitive.No land acquisition is envisaged.

                         Component 3: Technical Assistance

                         This component will finance advisory, technical, and capacity-building support in order to reach
                         project objectives, including:
                         (a)      Evaluation, review and dissemination of the education sector Early Childhood Development
                         policy and operational standards (including associated capacity building and awareness raising
                         activities).
                         (b)     Capacity building for Monitoring and Evaluation.
                         (c)     Strengthen design and implementation of Educators of Excellence Awards.
                         (d)     Technical assistance to improve the functioning of the current teacher payroll system.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (e)     Technical assistance for a strong and well-crafted communication strategy relating to
                         different aspects of the program.
                         (f)     Technical assistance for generating ESSP for the next cycle.

                         Financing Instrument
                         The proposed Operation will be financed through a Specific Investment Loan/Grant (SIL) modality,
                         in which the team will explore the option of a results-based financing approach using disbursement-
                         linked indicators. Consequently, the disbursements would be contingent on the satisfactory
                         achievement of agreed program implementation progress and performance results which will be
                         referred to as Disbursement-Linked Indicators (DLIs). The DLIs to be used will be finalized based
                         on the following criteria: (i) to the extent possible, the selected DLIs will reflect the priority elements
                         in the ESSP; (ii) they will include intermediate results, implementation performance targets or
                         institutional change indicators that build incrementally over the life of the Project to improve quality
                         of basic education service delivery; (iii) the DLIs will capture results that are critical to achieving the
                         Project‘s development outcomes; (iv) DLIs will be independent of each other from a disbursement
                         point of view. Disbursements will be based on (i) expenditure reports and (ii) perfor mance reports to
                         track accomplishment of agreed DLIs. The Bank‘s guidelines on FM and procurement will be
                         applicable. This lending approach has three main features. Disbursements would reimburse
                         government’s expenditures, normally specific budget lines, such as salaries for teachers. These
                         expenditures would be referred to as the eligible-expenditure program (EEP) which would have to be
                         procured (if procurable items are included) following practices acceptable to the Bank and be
                         accounted for in satisfactory manners.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is to be implemented across Uganda, with civil works targeted at already existing public
Public Disclosure Copy




                         primary schools. There will be no acquisition of land. The sites drawn from the national public list of
                         schools will be selected using agreed scientific criteria informed by infrastructure needs assessments
                         that have been undertaken by the Ministry of Education and Sports; but also cautious ofregional
                         balance for equity. Specific project sites by name and location will be selected by May 2013 for
                         parliamentary approval.

                         The project will include the following civil works: construction and rehabilitation of classrooms and
                         sanitation facilities through school (facility) grants.

                         The scope of civil works by project site will be elaborated by appraisal and reflected in the PAD.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The implementing agency for this project, the Ministry of Education and Sports (MoES) will adopt,
                         revise and apply to this project the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and
                         Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) previously prepared and used for the ongoing World Bank
                         supported Universal Post Primary Education and Training (UPPET) project to address the
                         environmental and social safeguard considerations associated with the proposed operation. Based on
                         the outcomes of the screening and SA (should the project sites include IPs areas), an IPPF would be
                         prepared with free and prior informed consultations with the respective groups. The Borrower's
                         sector team is conversant with environmental and social safeguard policy requirements and
                           implementation procedures of the aforementioned safeguard instruments. Technical assistance will
                           be provided to enable preparation of a set of Project Briefs for site specific environmental and social
                           impact assessments if and when required and will follow the guidelines presented in the project's
Public Disclosure Copy




                           ESMF. ESMPs shall be included in the Project Briefs. In addition, the Ministry of Education and
                           Sports, will undertake an internal review of its current capacity to manage the tasks of implementing
                           the environmental and social safeguards satisfactorily. It is expected that technical assistance will be
                           provided throughout project implementation to ensure environmental and social due diligence and
                           compliance with Bank's policies and national legislation.

                           The project in implementing the mitigation measures will utilize the national environmental
                           management system, in which the semi-autonomous National Environment Management Authority
                           play a pivotal role in close collaboration with the respective District Environment Officers and
                           Community Development officers.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Yasmin Tayyab (AFTCS)
                           Martin Fodor (AFTN3)
                           Herbert Oule (AFTN3)
                           Constance Nekessa-Ouma (AFTCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              OP/BP 4.01 is triggered because the project will
                           BP 4.01                                               support civil works activities.

                                                                                 For selected public primary schools,
                                                                                 construction and rehabilitation of classrooms
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 and sanitation facilities is planned. The schools
                                                                                 to be selected are in rural areas and the
                                                                                 sanitation facilities to be constructed are pit
                                                                                 latrines which will not require use of water. The
                                                                                 waste (faeces) generated will be confined in pits
                                                                                 which can be emptied when full. Management
                                                                                 measures of the waste generated will be guided
                                                                                 in the ESMF and ESMPs. All the structures to
                                                                                 be constructed and/or rehabilitated shall follow
                                                                                 standard construction norms, including gender
                                                                                 and disability requirements.

                                                                                 The UPPET project ESMF will be adopted,
                                                                                 revised by the Borrower and applied to this
                                                                                 project to guide implementation of
                                                                                 environmental and social aspects of the project.
                                                                                 Upon confirmation of the project locations, the
                                                                                 sub projects will be grouped by district and
                                                                                 respective sets of Project Briefs prepared by the
                                                                                 Borrower. ESMPs will be developed under each
                                                                 Project Brief to guide site implementation of
                                                                 mitigation measures. Mechanisms for
                                                                 implementation of the safeguard instruments
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 shall be included in the PIM and project
                                                                 financing agreements.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No    The project has no adverse impact on natural
                                                                 habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    The project is not expected to affect the
                                                                 management of forests and neither will it
                                                                 support forest nor logging operations.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The project will not involve use of pesticides.

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   This is triggered because project investments
                         BP 4.11                                 involve civil works and may affect physical
                                                                 cultural resources. At this stage, the project
                                                                 ESMF will include provisions for chance finds
                                                                 and their management. The respective ESIAs to
                                                                 be undertaken (compilation of Project Briefs &
                                                                 ESMPs) will include PCRs investigation,
                                                                 assessment and management.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     TBD   A screening and social assessment has been
                                                                 commissioned to determine the presence of the
                                                                 IPs in the districts of operation. A final list of
                                                                 sub-projects by location will determine the IPs
                                                                 that may be affected/ to be involved in the
                                                                 project and the need for an IPPF preparation and
                                                                 subsequent IPDPs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   The project is to be implemented at already
                         4.12                                    existing public primary schools. There will be
                                                                 no acquisition of land. However, there may be
                                                                 displacement of land uses due to civil works
                                                                 (expansive/rehabilitation). Therefore, a
                                                                 resettlement policy framework (RPF) used
                                                                 under UPPET project will be adopted, revised
                                                                 and applied to this project . The RPF and PAD
                                                                 will also describe land tenure arrangements and
                                                                 any social impacts that could affect access to
                                                                 resources and livelihoods as a result of the
                                                                 project. Since the specific project sites will be
                                                                 known by end of May 2013, knowing that no
                                                                 large scale resettlement is envisioned and
                                                                 management of any likely displacement of land
                                                                 uses guided in the RPF, ARAPs will be
                                                                 prepared by the Borrower as and when required.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No    The project will not support or depend on dams.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             No impact on international waters is envisaged.
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             Inclusion of disputed areas is not envisaged.
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 14-Jun-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The ESMF and RPF of UPPET project will be adopted, revised by the Borrower and applied to
                                      this project to guide implementation of environmental and social aspects of the project. The
                                      Borrower will revise the UPPET ESMF and RPF in May – June 2013 and these will be disclosed
                                      in July 2013 both in country and at infoshop. The sub projects will be grouped district-wise and a
                                      set of Project Briefs will be prepared (ESIAs). The Project Briefs will be undertaken after
                                      confirmation of the project sites and a selected number disclosed in July 2013 both in country and
                                      at infoshop. Based on the outcomes of the screening and SA (should the project sites include IPs
                                      areas), an IPPF would be prepared with free and prior informed consultations with the respective
                                      groups; and disclosed in July 2013 both in country and at infoshop.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Andreas Blom

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name:                                                                                                                      Date:
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Barbara Weber (SM)                                                                                                   Date: 19-Jun-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
