                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA3615
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Aug-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Sep-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Mali                              Project ID:    P129516
                            Project Name:     NATURAL RESOURCES MANAGEMENT IN A CHANGING CLIMATE IN
                                              MALI (P129516)
                            Task Team         Maman-Sani Issa
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       10-Jul-2013                         Estimated   24-Oct-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: AFTN2                                Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            GEF Focal
                                              Multi-focal area
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (70%), Sub-national government
                                              administration (15%), Flood protection (10%), Other Renewable Energy (5%)
                            Theme(s):         Biodiversity (30%), Climate change (30%), Natural disaster management (20%),
                                              Other environment and natural resources management (10% ), Decentralization
Public Disclosure Copy




                                              (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      21.43           Total Bank Financing:                 0.00
                            Financing Gap:           12.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                       1.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                        8.43
                              Total                                                                                    9.43
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?



                                                                      Page 1 of 9
                         2. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                         The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to expand the adoption of sustainable land and water
                         management practices in targeted communes in Mali.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Project Description
                         The project will be implemented through the following 04 components:
                         •      Component 1: Knowledge management, Governance and Communication
                         •      Component 2: Scaling-up Sustainable land management (SLWM) practices
                         •      Component 3: Diversification of local livelihoods
                         •      Component 4: Project coordination, monitoring and evaluation

                         Component 1: Knowledge management, Governance and communication (Total US$ 3.60 million:
                         IDA 2.90; GoM 0.70)
                         Sub-component 1.1: Information system and knowledge sharing (US$ 1.04 million: IDA 0.91; GoM
                         0.12)
                         The sub-component will contribute to the capacity building of the national information system for
                         adaptation to climate change. Main activities will be the following: (i) Strengthening the existing
                         National Environmental information Management System (the ’SNGIE’); (ii) Supporting the sharing
                         of climate hazards and adaptation data and knowledge; (iii) Training and sensitizing on the use of
                         seasonal hydrological and meteorological forecasts by food crop producers; (iv) Strengthening the
                         capacity of local food crop producers in the use of simple climate change adaptation technologies
                         and practices; (v) Building the capacity of national institutions and local stakeholders in the planning
                         of SLWM and adaptation to climate change strategies.

                         Sub-component 1.2: Natural Resources Management (NRM) Governance at local level (US$ 1.97
                         million: IDA 1.45; GoM 0.52)
                         The objective is (a) to remove barriers and disincentives preventing local stakeholders from
                         managing their resource in an efficient, participatory, transparent and accountable manner, (b) to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         strengthen mechanisms preventing competition, over-exploitation and degradation of the resource
                         itself, and (c) to define clear and equitable regulations concerning the access to and use of local
                         resources (such as the regulations concerning the importance of mobility in pastoral areas, as this is
                         stressed by the recent Mali’s ‘Pastoral Charter’). The main activities will support: (i) the preparation
                         and adoption of participatory community resource use plans, which include resilience objectives,
                         SLWM issues and biodiversity conservation, for their integration in the commune development plans
                         -PDESC-; (ii) the review and revision of the Communes development plans (PDESC) for the purpose
                         of integration of SLWM, biodiversity conservation adaptation to climate changes; (iii) the
                         implementation of pilot activities of PDESC including the strengthening of transparency and
                         accountability in NRM through the translation and dissemination of key regulations governing land
                         use, biodiversity conservation and natural resources management.

                         Sub-component 1.3: Communication for the resilience enhancement (US$ 0.580 million: IDA 0.52;
                         GoM 0.05)
                         The national communication strategy for the awareness raising and education on SLWM climate
                         change challenges has been adopted in 2011. The sub-component will contribute to its
                         implementation by supporting the following activities: (i) Sensitizing communities and decision
                         makers on the risks and challenges of climate changes, including their impacts on natural resources,
                         socioeconomic activities and livelihoods in rural areas; (ii) Carrying out of awareness raising and
                         education activities for promoting discussion platforms among local stakeholders and extension


                                                                       Page 2 of 9
                         services (agriculture, pastoralism, etc.) on the appropriate SLWM and biodiversity conservation
                         solutions in each beneficiary commune.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2: Scaling-up Sustainable land management practices (Total US$ 8.00 million: GEF
                         6.24; LDCF 1.75)
                         This component will contribute to enhancing the targeted stakeholders (national and local levels)
                         resilience to climate change challenges and risks. It will combine support to the preparation and
                         adoption of management tools and skills, as well as the financing of communal pilot initiatives for
                         the promotion of SLWM practices planned under the PDESC.

                         Sub-component 2.1: Conservation and valorization of biodiversity (US$ 1.37 million: GEF 1.37)
                         This sub-component aims at contributing to the knowledge and management of the whole
                         biodiversity wealth in the project target areas by: (i) Promoting sustainable management of
                         biodiversity in accordance with an ecosystem-based adaptation approach; (ii) Supporting the
                         promotion of indigenous sustainable modes of production and consumption including low-carbon
                         energy and woodless construction technologies; (iii) Supporting community-based reforestation
                         initiatives.

                         Sub-component 2.2: Forests and rangelands management (US$ 6.63 million: GEF 4.87; LDCF 1.75)
                         The sub-component will provide assistance to the development tools and skills to the sustainable
                         management of the three targeted forests in the project area (Lorack Bane, Gadjiaba Khadiel and
                         Ouagadou). In addition substantial contribution to the management of rangelands including
                         pastoralism corridors will be provide to lower the pressure of pastoralism on forest ecosystem. The
                         following main activities will be financed: (i) Supporting the preparation, adoption and
                         implementation of participatory management plans of the Ouagadou, the Gadjaba Khadiel and the
                         Lorack Bane forest ecosystems; (ii) Promoting the use of improved agroforestry and other related
                         SLWM technology packages in the adjacent lands of the three beneficiary forests (Ouagadou, the
                         Gadjaba Khadiel and the Lorack Bane); (iii) Supporting the management of rangelands considering
                         climate change challenges; (iv) Strengthening the capacity of local NRM committees in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         integrated management of bushfires.

                         Component 3: Diversification of local livelihoods (Total US$ 7.00 million: IDA 7.00)
                         The activities are as follow: (i) Financing sound income generating activities (IGA) which do not
                         threaten the conservation of biodiversity; (ii) Training the beneficiaries of funded IGA on
                         management (procurement, accounting, saving and reinvestment for business development), and the
                         demonstration of opportunities from sustainable management of forest and non-timber forest
                         products.

                         Component 4: Project coordination, monitoring and evaluation (Total US$ 2.82 million: IDA 2.1;
                         GEF 0.32; LDCF 0.92; GoM 0.30)

                         Sub-component 4.1: Monitoring and Evaluation (US$ 1.05 million: IDA 0.75; GEF 0.20; LDCF
                         0.092)
                         The following activities will be financed: (i) Setting up the M&E system; (ii) Supporting the staffing
                         of the AEDD M&E, Fiduciary and internal auditing units;; (iii) Collecting, analyzing and sharing any
                         appropriate information on lessons learned including carbon sequestration trends; (iv) Environmental
                         and social safeguard management and monitoring; (v) Updating the GEF Management Effectiveness
                         Tracking Tools (METT).



                                                                      Page 3 of 9
                         Sub-component 4.2: Project coordination (US$ 1.76 million: IDA 1.34; GEF 0.12; GoM 0.30)
                         The following activities will be financed: (i) the Project launching workshop; (ii) Organizing the
                         Steering Committee sessions; (iii) Preparing the consolidated annual work and budgeting plan
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (AWBP); (iv) Managing the implementation memoranda signed with the key institutions (DNEF,
                         DNA and DNPIA) responsible of the execution of components/major activities; (v) Training the
                         project team in management (monitoring & evaluation, procurement, financial management,
                         environmental and social safeguard, etc.) as approved through the training plan; (vi) Coordinating the
                         implementation activities at national and local levels; (vii) the operating costs.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project intervention area covers 14 communes of three ‘’Cercles’’ (Nioro, Banamba and Nara)
                         located in two regions (Kayes and Koulikoro) of the western Sahel of Mali. As general features, the
                         area receives 200 to 600 mm of annual rainfall, and hosting a semi-arid ecosystems consisting mostly
                         of grassy and shrubby steppes with density of less than 10m3 of wood per hectare; there is a
                         dominance of the thorny Acacia, associated with Combretum and Boscia species. The landscape
                         almost flat and made of mosaic of cereal farmlands, rangelands, agropastoral areas encroaching three
                         forests (Ouagadou, Gadjiaba Khadiel and Lorack Bane) of which the latter (Lorack Bane) is totally
                         protected.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Lucienne M. M'Baipor (AFTCS)
                         Abdoul Ganyi Bachabi Alidou (AFTTR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes                The ESMF conclude that communal initiatives,
                          BP 4.01                                             afforestation/reforestation activities as well
                                                                              income generating activities supported by the
                                                                              project could induce minor to moderate adverse
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              impacts/risks on the environment and social side:
                                                                              inadvertent introduction of alien species,
                                                                              increasing of illegal poaching, risk of waterborne
                                                                              disease around new multi-purposes water points,
                                                                              social conflict arising deficit of governance in
                                                                              allocating project benefits, etc. But these risks/
                                                                              impacts are largely outweighed by the positive
                                                                              impacts on biodiversity conservation, reversal of
                                                                              land degradation, recreation of habitat, reveal of
                                                                              opportunities around natural wealth (ecotourism,
                                                                              increasing of non-timber revenues, etc.).
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        Yes                The project aims to promote environmentally
                                                                              sustainable development by supporting the
                                                                              protection, conservation, maintenance, and if
                                                                              necessary rehabilitation of some natural habitats
                                                                              and their functions.
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                 Yes                The project will promote sustainable Forest
                                                                              Management practices through the preparation
                                                                              and approval of 03 Participatory Forest


                                                                      Page 4 of 9
                                                                                Management Plans, and the development of
                                                                                community based forestry including firewood
                                                                                plantations.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Pest Management OP 4.09            Yes               The support to agriculture especially
                                                                                agroforestry and commercial production of
                                                                                vegetable could lead to increased use of
                                                                                pesticides.
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/    Yes               The ESMF came out with no evidence of
                            BP 4.11                                             significant physical cultural resources or sacred
                                                                                sites/resources in the project intervention area.
                                                                                Notwithstanding, some civil works (e.g.
                                                                                construction/rehabilitation of multi-purpose water
                                                                                points) may reveal uncovered artifacts since the
                                                                                country is covering ancient kingdom areas. The
                                                                                chance find procedure is recommended in any
                                                                                civil work contract to be signed under the project.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No                There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
                                                                                area.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     Yes               The support to the management of three gazette/
                            4.12                                                protected forests will result in a restriction of
                                                                                access to natural resources. Further, the activities
                                                                                aimed at supporting sustainable land management
                                                                                such as community forests, pastoralism corridor,
                                                                                etc. could necessitate land acquisition or
                                                                                reallocation.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No                The proposed project will not finance any
                                                                                activities related to the construction of dams, nor
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                does it depend on the performance of any existing
                                                                                dam.
                            Projects on International          No                There are no activities in the Niger Basin
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                including the irrigation activities and multi-
                                                                                purpose water point areas.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  The project will not support any activity in
                            7.60                                                disputed areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The project is classified category B. Its environmental and social impacts are mainly related to
                              the implementation of components 2 and 3 which activities may raise concerns. Therefore, the
                              following policies have been triggered: OP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment; OP 4.04 on
                              Natural Habitats; OP 4.09 on Pest Management; OP 4.11 on Physical Cultural Resources; OP 4.12
                              on Involuntary Resettlement; and OP 4.36 on Forests. The environmental and social analysis
                              confirmed that the project impacts are not of significance importance or irreversible, the ones to
                              monitor being: (i) water pollution and prevalence of waterborne disease around small irrigation or

                                                                        Page 5 of 9
                           multi-purpose water point areas; (ii) increasing in illegal poaching following the publication of the
                           wildlife inventory results; (iii) introduction of inadequate plant species for afforestation; (iv)
                           restriction of access to some forest products; (v) loss of property/assets and physical displacement;
Public Disclosure Copy




                           (vi) risk of social conflict arising from the improper limitation of access. According to the
                           analysis, no archaeological or cultural resources have been identified in the project areas, and no
                           significant or irreversible negative impacts are expected. In reverse, the project will induce many
                           positive impacts on the environmental and social side including: (i) improvement of livelihoods;
                           (ii) reduction of resources use conflict; (iii) strengthening of social cohesion; (iv) reduction of
                           unemployment rate among unqualified youth; (v) increasing of knowledge base and improvement
                           of production practices.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             The ESMF prepared for the project presented the risks of social conflict for improper limitation
                           of the local population access to biological resources. But in aiming at improving the quality of
                           life of the communities surrounding protected areas through support to alternative income
                           generating activities/initiatives, the project will transform these potential adverse impacts into
                           positive impacts.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             NA
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Pest Management Plan
                           (PMP) have been prepared, consulted upon, approved on May 2sd, 2013, disclosed in-country on
                           June 11, 2013 and at the Bank’s Infoshop on June 12, 2013. Also, a Resettlement Policy
                           Framework (RPF) including a Process Framework (PF), has been approved on May 2sd, 2013, and
                           disclosed in-country on June 11, 2013 and at the Bank’s Infoshop on August 06th, 2013.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The screening procedure approved under the Environmental and Social Management Framework
                           (ESMF) will ensure an early stage identification of land acquisition, while the Resettlement Policy
                           Framework (RPF) provides guidance on the preparation, consultation, disclosure and execution of
                           Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) at any time case arises. During the preparation and approval of
                           the participatory forest management plans, the Process Framework provisions will serve guiding
                           the stakeholders for the negotiation of restriction of access and potential compensation. Along
                           with the sensitization on SLWM practices, the PMP will be disseminated for the purpose of
                           alerting on the risks and hazards of synthetized chemicals, and the benefit of biological control
                           approaches. Further, the investments under components 2 and 3 will be processed only on conflict-
                           free piece of lands. A total amount of US$ 120,000.00 is provisioned in the project budget for the
                           duly implementation of the safeguards measures and recommendations.

                           The national legal framework for environmental management in Mali specifies the roles and
                           responsibilities of government ministries, departments, and agencies, as well as other stakeholders.
                           Progress is being made at national level. Notwithstanding this progress, institutional and technical
                           capacity for environmental management still needs to be strengthened at many levels. A review of
                           the implementing institutions found that capacity of the AEDD has to be strengthened in the
                           safeguard implementation aspects. Therefore, a capacity building of the stakeholders (AEDD,



                                                                      Page 6 of 9
                            DNA, DNPIA, and DNEF) on the implementation of safeguard instruments, in compliance with
                         5. the Bank requirements,
                             Identify                 was included
                                      the key stakeholders            in the environmental
                                                               and describe                and social
                                                                               the mechanisms         mitigations.and disclosure
                                                                                                for consultation
                            on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              At the national level, all the sector institutions with a mandate related to natural resources
                            management and decentralization are involved with the project as well as the federation civil
                            society organizations and NGOs. But at the sub-national levels the stakeholders are composed of
                            various institutions and entities: the committees of orientation and monitoring of socioeconomic
                            development activities at regional, provincial and communal levels, the communal authorities,
                            producer organizations, civil society organizations, herders, pastoralists, women, youth and
                            displaced people, and line departments of involved ministries at national level.

                           These stakeholders were involved in the preparation of the project and consulted during the
                           preparation of the safeguards documents (ESMF, RPF, PF and PMP). Public consultations were
                           organized in the commune of Banamba and Bellen and populations’ views were considered and
                           incorporated. The final drafts were consulted upon on March and July 2013, with national
                           stakeholders and representative of communities from 17 communes.

                           The consultation process started with the validation workshop held on May 2sd, 2013 under the
                           leadership of the DNACPN. The approved safeguards documents were disclosed in-country on
                           June 11, 2013, and availed at the involved ministries (agriculture, environment livestock and
                           fisheries, water, and decentralization) and local governments’ offices, and websites (e.g. www.
                           environnement.gov.ml). Further, the summaries will be made available, both in French and local
                           languages, on the annual platform called ‘’Espace quinzaine de l’environnement? organized each
                           year in June by the Ministry of Environment and Sanitation (MES); the documents will also be
                           indexed in the numerical library of the Ministry.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                          10-May-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                       12-Jun-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Mali                                                                 11-Jun-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                          10-May-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                       06-Aug-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Mali                                                                 11-Jun-2013
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                       Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                          10-May-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                       12-Jun-2013

                                                                       Page 7 of 9
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Mali                                                             11-Jun-2013
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?


                                                                      Page 8 of 9
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Maman-Sani Issa
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                    Date: 08-Sep-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Jonathan S. Kamkwalala (SM)                    Date: 12-Sep-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 9 of 9
