                                             INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                      CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                    Report No.: ISDSC4869

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Jul-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 24-Jul-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             South Sudan                         Project ID:        P145581
                            Project Name:        Energy Sector Technical Assistance Project (P145581)
                            Task Team            Rahul Kitchlu
                            Leader:
                            Estimated                                                Estimated          15-Jul-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                          Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:       AFTG1                               Lending            Technical Assistance Loan
                                                                                     Instrument:
                            Sector(s):           General energy sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):            Infrastructure services for private sector development (50%), Other environment
                                                 and natural resources management (25%), Other public sector governance (25%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      4.00                          Total Bank Financing:              4.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                                     Financing Gap:                     0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                   Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                   0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                          4.00
                              Total                                                                                4.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a            No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           Development Objectives

                           The project development objective (PDO) of the Energy Sector Technical Assistance Project
                           (ESTAP) is to strengthen the capacity of the GRSS to facilitate the development of its (i) energy
                           sector planning capabilities, (ii) electrical distribution efficiency, and (iii) off-grid electrification
                           programs.
                         Beneficiaries
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The primary beneficiaries of the ESTAP Project will be the implementing agencies, MOED and
                         SSEC, through the program of technical assistance and capacity building. Indirectly, the energy
                         sector, as a whole, will benefit from better long term planning, increased efficiency, and improved
                         performance. Furthermore, the South Sudanese people will benefit due to improved efficiency and
                         the introduction of off-grid renewable energy solutions.
                         C. Project Description
                         For the GRSS to lay the foundation for the development of the energy sector, it needs to focus on the
                         following four key areas in the coming years: (i) improving sector planning, (ii) building sector
                         capacity, (iii) improving distribution system efficiency, and (iv) initiating off-grid energy access
                         enhancement programs. The ESTAP Project will address all of these four key areas identified as part
                         of the ESSN report development process and the ensuing discussions with the Government. The
                         ESTAP Project will be part of continued World Bank support to improve sector performance, and
                         contribution to growth and sustainable development for the years to come in South Sudan’s energy
                         sector.

                         While the ESTAP Project is proposed to be financed as an IDA Credit, it is also likely to receive
                         support from Bank-executed trust funds and programs, such as: Africa Renewable Energy Access
                         Program - II (AFREA II), Lighting Africa, ACCES, etc. Applications for funding from various Bank-
                         executed trust funds are under review and subject to approval.

                         The proposed ESTAP Project consists of the following four components:

                         Component 1: Least Cost Investment Plan (Indicative Cost: $1.35M): In order to design the electric
                         power generation system of the future in South Sudan, it is important to carry out detailed technical
                         planning - which has not yet been carried out in South Sudan. There have been some specific
Public Disclosure Copy




                         technical studies conducted by donor organizations (Such as: NRECA Mini Grid Study in 2007,
                         Norfund FRHPP Study in 2009, NBI/NELSAP Hydropower Expansion and Regional Integration
                         Study in 2013, etc.) and the recent Energy Sector Strategy Note (ESSN) by the World Bank.
                         However, a detailed least cost investment plan (LCIP) is needed to develop a framework that could
                         assist the Government to attract financing for infrastructure development as well as effectively
                         coordinate with donor partners.

                         The LCIP will include an assessment of demand and load forecasting using market and household
                         surveys as well as economic growth and consumption patterns. Associated to this task would be the
                         development of to plan for a generation expansion plan that not only considers the cost and
                         availability of generation resources in South Sudan, but also considers the appropriate plant
                         availability (sufficient reserve margin), reliability (low supply interruption frequency), diversity of
                         the generation mix (risk mitigation), and respect for the environment (renewable energy). Further, a
                         distribution network expansion plan considering appropriate capacity of lines and substation will be
                         developed. The plan would also consider available regional interconnections and describe the long
                         term plans to develop a transmission back-bone in the country. The overall objectives of the LCIP
                         are to kick-start a program for future investment to increase energy access that would contribute to
                         poverty reduction and boost the economic development of the country.

                         Component 2: Capacity Building Program (Indicative Cost: $1.35M): A comprehensive capacity
                         building program will be initiated under ESTAP for improved technical, managerial, and operational
                         skills. This Component will support the development of a comprehensive capacity building program,
                         based on the recently carried out needs assessment report, and will also support the implementation
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of the program activities. Despite employing a large number of people, skilled manpower base is not
                         available to the sector.

                         Focused training, based on the recommendations of the recently carried out needs assessment report,
                         will improve the efficiency and capacity of the sector. This would include areas such as planning and
                         design of infrastructure project, project implementation, procurement management, financial
                         management, management tools and systems, and environmental and social safeguards management,
                         etc. As the sector anticipates growth that would increase the size of the national utility in a very short
                         period, it is important to plan for the future when implementing a capacity building program.

                         As a first IDA operation in the energy sector in South Sudan, this Component will also provide
                         implementation support for the ESTAP Project by providing appropriate expertise to the Project
                         Implementation Unit (PIU). Lessons learned in post-conflict fragile states such as Liberia, have
                         highlighted the need to invest early on in project planning life cycles for the establishment of PIUs
                         that can assist with the planning, design and execution of complex infrastructure projects. With the
                         anticipated growth in the sector and the possible further investments, the support provided to the PIU
                         will not only assist in execution of the ESTAP project but will also aide the long term development
                         of the sector.

                         Component 3: Distribution Efficiency Improvement Pilot Program (Indicative Cost: $1.1M): The
                         grid-based electricity situation in South Sudan is characterized by routine power outages and lack of
                         efficiency in the distribution system. Many consumers do not have meters, or have meters that have
                         not been calibrated, cleaned, nor received any form of maintenance in at least ten years. According to
                         SSEC, their outdated equipment causes large system losses estimated to be over 30%, however, this
                         claim remains to be verified as the measurement systems are inadequate. Furthermore, commercial
                         losses due to theft and low bill collection rate (estimated to be around 40-50%) are also high. If left
Public Disclosure Copy




                         unchecked, the inefficiency will continue to propagate in the grid network.

                         This Component will finance the development of a program for distribution network efficiency
                         improvement, based on the recommendations of the report on distribution network efficiency
                         improvement program. The Component will also include support for launch of a pilot program for
                         pre-paid energy meters in Juba area. The efficiency program under this Component will support the
                         development of sound principles for operating and maintaining the grid network. The program will
                         also build consumer awareness for theft prevention.

                         Component 4: Off-Grid Energy Access Pilot Program (Indicative Cost: $0.7M): While universal
                         electrification is the long term vision of the GRSS, incorporation of off-grid renewable energy
                         solutions for rural electrification is a very viable and cost-effective way of providing modern energy
                         services to remote parts of South Sudan.

                         This Component will finance an analysis of possible off-grid energy access programs. Following the
                         analysis, a program for off-grid access enhancement will be development. This Component will also
                         support the preparation and launch of pilot projects, based on the recommendation of the analytical
                         studies. Initiatives such as: efficient lighting (Lighting Africa), clean cooking (ACCES), as well as
                         other activities such as mini-grid implementation programs will be supported.
                           Project Costs

                           Total cost of the four Components described above is expected to be approximately US$ 4.5 million,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           of which, up to US$ 4.0 million will likely be financed by IDA as a TA Credit (terms TBD). The
                           remaining amount, US$ 0.5 million will likely be financed by Bank-executed trust funds and
                           programs (such as: AFREA II/Lighting Africa/ACCES).
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Project engagement will be national level with respect to putting place policy, systems and
                           procedures. Some pilots will be implemented in the field but are currently unknown.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Borrower currently has limited institutional capacity to manage environmental and social
                           safeguards. An important objective of the project is the setting up of country system for
                           environmental social safeguards management in the energy sector to include the organizational
                           structure, policy, and institutional strengthening. The proposed project involves capacity building and
                           technical assistance and no physical work activities are expected that generate adverse and
                           irreversible environmental and social impacts during implementation of the project. However, the
                           project will finance the preparation of a Sectoral Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) to
                           help the client examine ways in which to strengthen capacity and lay the foundation for a sound
                           environmental and social safeguards management of the country's energy sector.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Varalakshmi Vemuru (AFTCS)
                           Bedilu Amare Reta (AFTA3)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             The proposed project mainly focused on
                           BP 4.01                                              technical support and capacity building. No
                                                                                adverse and irreversible environmental or social
                                                                                impacts are expected to be generated due to the
                                                                                implementation the proposed project. The
                                                                                activities in Component 4 have negligible to
                                                                                minimal environmental and social impacts and
                                                                                may be implemented according to national and
                                                                                local laws and procedures.
                                                                                To strengthen the capacity of the client and lay
                                                                                foundation on the sectoral safeguards
                                                                                management that enables to ensure sound
                                                                                environmental and social safeguards
                                                                                implementation, the client will prepare a SESA
                                                                                and create awareness and intervene in
                                                                                safeguards capacity enhancement activities
                                                                                during implementation of the project. The ToRs
                                                                                for the SESA will be prepared, consulted upon,
                                                                                and disclosed before appraisal.
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No                            The proposed project does not include any
                                                                                                                                 activities that would trigger this policy.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No                            No project activities are expected to affect
                                                                                                                                 Forest resources and would trigger this policy.
                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No                            The proposed project does not involve activities
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         that affect PCR. Therefore this policy is not
                                                                                                                                 triggered.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            No activities for field level implementation are
                                                                                                                                 envisaged under the project that will require
                                                                                                                                 community involvement.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            No construction and/or land acquisition is
                                 4.12                                                                                            envisaged.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 03-Mar-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      N/A
Public Disclosure Copy




                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Rahul Kitchlu

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name:                                                                                                                      Date:
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Vladislav Vucetic (SM)                                                                                               Date: 24-Jul-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
