                                                                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                             CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC327
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Nov-2011

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        China                                    Project ID:                       P126210
                              Project Name:                   Chongqing Urban-Rural Integration Project II-Health (P126210)
                              Task Team Leader:               Hope C. Phillips Volker
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 20-Feb-2012                                    Estimated Board Date:             31-May-2012
                              Managing Unit:                  EASHH                                    Lending Instrument:               Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                         Health (100%)
                              Theme:                          Health system performance (100%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                        Amount
                                   Borrower                                                                                                                   45.00
                                   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                                     100.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                     145.00
                              Environmental Category:         B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              B. Project Objectives

                              The current PDO is to support urban and rural integrated development through increased access to health services, efficiency of service delivery,
                              and quality of care at county/district level. This meets the request of the Borrower that the PDO remains in linewith the first Project, CURIP I.
                              Consequently the team is currently working with a final PDO will need to (a) respond to the Municipality request; and (b) be focused on the
                              proposed outcomes once there is more clarity on the "soft" aspects which the Project will support.

                              C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                              The proposed Project, in response to a request from the Municipality of Chongqing, will primarily support construction of district/county level
                              hospitals. The World Bank has been discussing with the Municipality the need for adopting an integrated approach under the proposed Project,
                              which includes addressing some of the "soft" constraints as well. Discussions have also taken place on the need to consider whether, given the
                              current health reform and shifting health needs of the population, it would be prudent to follow a hospital-centered system on the scale envisaged.
                              The task team has been working with the Municipality, and the Health Bureau, to explain the importance of investing not simply in hardware (i.e.,
                              facilities), but also in the other aspects (i.e., improved staff capacity, hospital management to free up resources, etc.) which contribute to improved
                              care. The proposed Project, as currently envisaged, will comprise three components covering the aspects discussed with the Municipality: (a)
                              Strengthening Health Service Management; (b) Improvement of County/District Level Health Services; and (c) Monitoring and Evaluation and
                              Project Implementation Support. Each of these is designed to address challenges facing the delivery of health services at the county-level: (a)
                              insufficient appropriately trained service providers, lack of information systems which provide relevant data for decision making, capacity to
                              manage hospitals, as well as pool referral system and care coordination among different levels; (b) shortage of service supply (in- and out-patient
                              facilities) and (c) support to monitoring and evaluation, and project implementation not financed from other sources.

                              Strengthening Health Service Management. In recognition that the lack of qualified medical professionals (which are key to improving delivery
                              capacity of rural health services) are currently a bottleneck to provision of rural health service, the proposed Project would also support increasing
                              the number of qualified health professionals at sites proposed for support under this Project. Focus of the training will be on management and
                              specialist training, covering topics such as (a) macro policy of hospital management and reform; (b) micro management of hospitals; and (c)
                              building of specialties and training of specialists. Since training plans for both rural and urban area general practitioners have been prepared and
                              will be invested by government, the proposed Project support will complement this effort. This component could also support piloting of efforts to
                              strengthen the referral system from village to County/District level and improve the coordination of care provision at different levels. Scaling up of
                              successful pilots being tested under the World Bank supported Rural Health Project will also be considered. It is commonly acknowledged that
                              one mechanism for increasing efficiency in the management of hospitals is having a modern management information system. The proposed sites
                              have varied capacities in this area, and CURIP II aims to support this aspect. In addition, to reduce the gap in the provision of health care at the
                              county level and rural areas, support for telemedicine is also being considered. This will include not only the provision of necessary hardware and
                              software, but also the preparation of guidelines, training of staff, and the establishment of a network as well as development of programs on tele-
                              diagnosis and/or tele-training.

                              Improvement of County/District Level Health Services. Health facilities in selected counties will be supported by civil works to increase access.
                              This will provide additional outpatient and bed space at the County/District level with the aim to provide quality and lower cost services in local rural
                              settings and thus reduce the crowding currently experienced in urban areas. Of the nine counties currently selected, only two are in the one-hour
                              economic circle, and these counties are located on the edge of the circle (one to the east, and one in the northwest), and of the remaining seven,
                           two are located in the southeast wing, and five are located in the northeast wing. The feasibility (from a siting and financial point of view) of
                           building energy efficient structures is currently under discussion

                           Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) and Project Implementation Support. The final component will support aspects relating to institutional and
                           capacity strengthening, monitoring and evaluation, as well as management of the proposed Project. Financing will be available to support
                           coordination among the various stakeholders of the proposed Project, for other health-related activities ongoing nationally and within the
                           municipality. Other activities which will be supported include building the capacity for project implementation and supervision (including technical
Public Disclosure Copy




                           support for procurement management, for ensuring implementation of relevant mitigation plans for safeguards, energy efficient specialists to
                           provide advice if this option is pursued, and in the telemedicine aspects to guide facilities in preparing for this approach).

                            D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                           The Counties/Districts proposed to receive support from the Project for construction of additional outpatient/inpatient capacity include Changkou,
                           Dianjiang, Tongnan, Fengjie, Fuling, Qianjiang, Wanzhou, Wushan, and Youyang.

                            E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

                           Chongqing, through implementation of the on-going CURIP, has experience in World Bank requirements associated with environment, and
                           resettlement aspects. However, provision will be made by the Municipality to contract relevant specialists to prepare any plans deemed necessary
                           for the proposed Project. With the provision of additional hospital beds and the attendant facilities, the issue of health care waste management will
                           also be considered in the design, including necessary equipment to handle waste generated, of each site. Specialists in public participation and
                           gender mainstreaming will also be contracted to prepare relevant documents. Professional consulting teams will be hired to prepare instruments
                           such as an abbreviated resettlement action plan and ethnic minority development plan for addressing limited land acquisition and house
                           demolition, and documents if necessary for the development and participation of ethnic minorities under the proposed Project. Financing will be
                           available during implementation to contract relevant skills to build the capacity of participating Districts/Counties with respect to safeguard aspects.
                           In the event the Municipality opts to construct one or more energy efficient hospitals, the preparation of such designs will be made by specialists in
                           this field, with guidance from a specialist contracted by the World Bank task team.

                            F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

                           Chongwu Sun (EASCS)
                           Zong-Cheng Lin (EASCS)
                           Meixiang Zhou (EASCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

                            Safeguard Policies Triggered                      Yes         No       TBD                                  Explanation
                            Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                 ✖                           As indicated in the project description, one of the major proposed
                                                                                                            project components will improve county-level health facilities in
                                                                                                            selected counties/districts through civil works/ construction to
                                                                                                            increase access (including bed capacity), thereby providing
                                                                                                            additional outpatient and bed space. Therefore, this policy is
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                            triggered.
                                                                                                            The environment specialist in the task team conducted a preliminary
                                                                                                            environmental screening during the identification. It was noted that
                                                                                                            more than half of nine county-level health facilities proposed for
                                                                                                            World Bank financing will be constructed within existing hospital
                                                                                                            locations, and the remainder will be built on new sites, and
                                                                                                            according to the information provided, are not special ecological and
                                                                                                            culturally sensitive sites (natural habitat, protected area or physical
                                                                                                            cultural resources). Potential environmental issues that will be
                                                                                                            addressed in the environmental impact assessment (EIA) include:
                                                                                                            (a) construction related nuisances (e.g., dust, noise, management of
                                                                                                            excavated soil and construction materials, etc.) associated with the
                                                                                                            component one during the construction phase; and (b) wastewater
                                                                                                            management and medical waste management during operation.
                                                                                                            Such impacts are site-specific, unlikely to be significant or
                                                                                                            irreversible, and mitigation measures can be readily designed with
                                                                                                            known engineering and good management practices. Therefore, the
                                                                                                            project is proposed as a Category B project as per OP4.01.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                   ✖                 The proposed Project activities are mainly in the urban setting and
                                                                                                            areas disturbed by intensive human activities. According to the
                                                                                                            preliminary environmental screening, there are no ecological
                                                                                                            sensitive areas and natural reserved. This policy is not triggered.
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                                            ✖                 The proposed Project does not involve forests resources. This policy
                                                                                                            is not triggered.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09                                       ✖                 The proposed Project will not lead to purchase or use of any
                                                                                                            pesticides. This policy is not triggered.
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                                   ✖      Based on currently available information, there are no physical
                                                                                                            cultural resources identified to be affected by the proposed Project.
                                                                                                            Since the detailed EIA preparation and social survey will be carried
                            Safeguard Policies Triggered                                      Yes           No           TBD                                             Explanation
                                                                                                                                    out, the task team proposes TBD at this stage. This will be
                                                                                                                                    reconfirmed based on more detailed information in EIA.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                                    ✖                      The policy is not triggered because based on the screening
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                    undertaken by the Task Team, no Indigenous Peoples as defined in
                                                                                                                                    OP4.10 are present in, or have collective attachment to, the project
                                                                                                                                    areas.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                                 ✖                                   The policy is triggered because there will be limited land acquisition
                                                                                                                                    in one or two of the proposed project sites under component 3,
                                                                                                                                    Improvement of County/District Level Health Services.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                                        ✖                      The proposed Project will not involve impacts to any dams in the
                                                                                                                                    project area. This policy is not triggered.
                            Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                                        ✖                      The proposed Project will not involve trans-boundary rivers. The
                            7.50                                                                                                    policy is not triggered.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                                            ✖                      The proposed Project is not located in any disputed areas. The
                                                                                                                                    policy is not triggered.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                           A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 22-Feb-2012
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
                              should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                1. An Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA, including EMP) will be prepared prior to appraisal for the project. The EIA will be prepared
                                based on applicable Chinese laws and regulations, OP4.01, and take into account the IFC Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines for
                                Health Care Facilities to assess their applicability to the project. The following aspects will be included in the EIA:

                                (a) On-site handling, collection, storage, off-site transport and disposal/charge of hazardous and non-hazardous medical wastes generated
                                during the operation phase of the health facilities to be constructed under the project. If existing on-site or off-site waste management facilities
                                are to be used, due diligence review of their capacity and environmental performance according to both Chinese and Bank standards will be
                                undertaken;

                                (b) When necessary, traffic analysis in the areas in vicinity of the planned subprojects for the development of traffic management measures
                                during construction phase;

                                (c) Siting of the off-site ancillary aspects of the subprojects, especially concerning the civil infrastructures needed for those subprojects which
                                locate in new developing areas (see also para 1 above);
Public Disclosure Copy




                                (d) Social impacts that may represent concerns to the local population but the scope of which go beyond that of OP4.12 Involuntary
                                Resettlement;

                                (e) An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) will include: (i) Site-specific mitigation measures for design and construction; (ii) Standard
                                environmental specifications for contractors to manage general construction-related impacts, including disruption to daily hospital operation
                                during construction period; (iii) mitigation measures for those social impacts which are beyond the scope of OP4.12 [see also point (d)]; (iii)
                                Chance Find Procedures for Physical Cultural Resources; and (iv) budge, institutional arrangements, monitoring and reporting requirements
                                for the implementation of the EMP;

                                (f) Documentation of public consultation undertaken for the EIA, including issues raised, how they will be addressed/have been addressed.

                                2. Resettlement Action Plan (RAP). There will be limited land acquisition in one or two of the proposed project sites under component 2,
                                Improvement of County/District Level Health Services. The World Bank Involuntary Resettlement Policy (OP4.12) will be triggered. Prior to
                                appraisal, Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) or Abbreviated RAPs will be prepared for project sites where land acquisition is needed; For
                                project sites where land has already been acquired, due diligence review will be undertaken and documented. The above resettlement action
                                plan, and due diligence review report, will be made ready and disclosed to the public before the Project appraisal.

                         IV. APPROVALS
                            Signed and submitted by:
                            Task Team Leader:                                Name: Hope C. Phillips Volker                                                                         Date: 12-Dec-2011
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                 Name: John R. Butler (RSA)                                                                            Date: 19-Dec-2011
                            Comments:
                            Sector Manager:                                  Name: Toomas Palu (SM)                                                                                Date: 13-Dec-2011
                            Comments:




                            1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                             form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
