                                                                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                            APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA354
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Nov-2011

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        Ethiopia                                Project ID:                       P129151
                              Project Name:                   Ethiopia Disaster Risk Management Country Plan Project, Phase I (P129151)
                              Task Team Leader:               Wolter Soer
                              Estimated Appraisal Date:                                               Estimated Board Date:             01-Dec-2011
                              Managing Unit:                  AFTSP                                   Lending Instrument:               Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                         Public administration- Other social services (100%)
                              Theme:                          Natural disaster management (50%), Vulnerability assessment and monitoring (30%), Other social protection and
                                                              risk management (20%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                       Amount
                                   Borrower                                                                                                                    0.00
                                   Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery                                                                         1.28
                                   Total                                                                                                                       1.28
                              Environmental Category:         B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              The development objective of Phase I of the programmatic Support to the Ethiopian DRM Country Plan is to improve the capcity of DRMFSS in
                              early warning, disaster risk assesment and disaster prepardness.

                              3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                              The DRM Country Plan Phase I project will support the following three component activities:
                              . Woreda Disaster Risk Profiling
                              . Contingency Planning
                              . Regional Connectivity Implementation

                              The project also contains an additional component to reinforce risk and vulnerability assessments, and early warning systems, including further
                              development of the LEAP Livelihood Early Warning and Protection system. However, this Grant Application (GA) covers only the first three
                              components.

                              A. Woreda Disaster Risk Profiling (US$533,000)
                              This activity would provide specialized technical assistance, ICT components, training, workshops, field survey and data collection, profile
                              publication. Woreda Disaster Risk Profiles (WDRP) is representations of information regarding a population, place or system#s exposure,
                              sensitivity and resilience to given hazards that can be applied to disaster risk management strategies. The project adopts the conceptual
                              framework as outlined in the Hyogo Framework of Action, wherein vulnerability, hazards and capacity to cope are three basic elements of disaster
                              risk.These profiles would be developed for selected 35 rural districts (Woredas) in the country. These will help decision makers at all levels to be
                              better informed about the nature, magnitude and key factors that render people, livelihoods, environment, political systems and infrastructure
                              vulnerable to disasters. The proposed project is intended to feed into all DRM strategies and programs of the country helps in the preparation of
                              contingency plan, among other things.

                              B. Contingency Planning (US$172,000)
                              This activity would provide specialized technical assistance, trainings, workshops and preparation and publication of contingency plan for each
                              selected Woreda. It involves analyzing of disaster risks; identifying, defining and prioritizing contingencies; analyzing scenarios, and preparation of
                              Contingency Planning (CP) for each selected scenario. It is part of the preparedness activities for disasters. The Contingency Planning results in
                              organized and coordinated courses of action with clearly identified institutional roles and resources, information processes, and operational
                              arrangements for specific actors at times of need. Based on scenarios of possible emergency conditions or disaster events, it allows key actors to
                              envision, anticipate and solve problems that can arise during crises. Thus, it helps decision makers and implementing agencies in ensuring that in
                              the event of a crisis, the response will be rapid, appropriate and effective. The contingency plan will be prepared for 35 rural Woredas.

                              C. Regional Connectivity Implementation (US$565,000)
                              The Woreda-Net Connectivity Project will streamline the transfer of early warning data through various administrative levels. The project will be
                              implemented in, 35 Woredas, and 3 Central strategic warehouses. The project has basic activities such as field work assessments, network,
                              database system setting and ICT components as well as trainings.

                                                                                                                                                                          Page 1 of 5
                         A smooth flow of information is an essential element of any development process, particularly in the field of DRM, where in most cases timely
                         decisions can save millions of lives, livelihoods and property. The proposed project will contribute to improvement of data quality and supporting
                         data transfers and exchanges between woredas, zones, regions and the federal level DRMFSS offices, the most severely drought-affected
                         Woredas, and the strategic warehouses. It also enables exchange of information among government and international organizations and
                         facilitates coordination. This will ultimately result in a strengthened and effective early warning system.

                         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project is located in Ethiopia, which is exposed to a range of risks, particularly those arising from multiple weather-related hazards, including
                         both droughts and floods. Around 85% of the population are engaged in subsistence farming # either sedentary or pastoralist - and are therefore
                         particularly vulnerable to natural disasters. Floods and epidemics are frequent disasters, with drought affecting by far the largest number of people.

                         Eco-Climatic Zones and Potential Environmental Sensitivities

                         High Dega Wurch
                         Very high elevation areas (>3200 m), particularly in Wollo, Gonder and Gojam in Amhara; dominated by grassland landscapes; rainfall is
                         1000-1600 mm.

                         Regeneration of natural resources in the high elevation zones need to recognize the limited plant species adapted to these highland conditions
                         and the slower growth rates, potential for rapid rainfall runoff and the vulnerability to overgrazing and other human uses.

                         Dega
                         High elevation areas (2000-3200 m) particularly in Tigray, Wollo, Gonder and Gojam in Amhara, and Harrege, Arsi and Bale in Oromiya; typically
                         mixed coniferous shrubs and trees; rainfall is 1000-2000 mm.

                         The elevation changes, the relatively high rainfall and the potential high soil erosion rates present opportunities and constraints for environmental
                         rehabilitation and management of increasing land use pressures in the Dega zone.

                         Weyna Dega
                         Mid-elevation areas (1500-2400 m) particularly in western Ethiopia including parts of Amhara, Oromiya, SNNP and Tigray; typically mixed
                         temperate forests and shrubs and riparian and other vegetation associated with the Abbay River and Awash River; rainfall is 800-1600 mm.

                         The relatively high level of ecosystem productivity and biotic diversity provides for significant natural resources and the pressures of human uses,
                         along with the presence of important and sensitive natural habitats but with generally high recovery rates if managed properly.

                         Kolla
                         Low elevation semi-arid areas (500-1500 m), notably in western Tigray, western Gonder in Amhara, southern Oromiya and northern Somali; dry
                         savanna landscapes; rainfall is in the range of 200-800 mm.

                         The semi-arid, dry savanna Kolla landscapes are vulnerable to deforestation and overgrazing, variable rainfall, slower rates of recovery and
                         wildfire potential; soils are generally nutrient poor and moderate-high erodability.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Bereha
                         Low elevation arid areas in Afar, Somali, Benshangul, Gumuz and Gambella and the western parts of Tigray and Gonder in Amhara, and eastern
                         Oromiya (Harrerege and Bale); arid and dry savanna landscapes; rainfall is generally less than 200 mm.

                         Moisture and nutrient limitations, poor water holding capacity of soils, high livestock grazing pressures and slow recovery rates present constraints
                         in these mostly Arid landscapes that generally have low soil quality, high erosion potential and vulnerability to pastoral livelihoods.

                         Social Sensitivities:

                         Due to the widespread and intensive nature of subsistence farming in the highlands and long-standing traditional grazing patterns in the pastoral
                         lowlands, physical activities such as civil works that involve changes in land-use, and any changes in settlement patterns, can also give rise to
                         negative social impacts requiring the application of social safeguards.

                         Development and Implementation of Environmental and Social Safeguards in Ethiopia:

                         In 1995 Ethiopia established a decentralized federal government system with semi-autonomous regional states. Most responsibilities for the
                         planning and implementation of development policies and programs were decentralized to this level. Each region has its own set of government
                         institutions, which largely replicate those at federal level. Resources have been moved to this regional and woreda (district) level. There is a
                         particular desire to improve the communication and cooperation between the national, regional and woreda DRM agencies. While development
                         and approval of environmental and social safeguards instruments are generally effected at the federal level, implementation of environmental and
                         social safeguards for any projects other than national-level infrastructure projects typically takes place at regional, or, more commonly, woreda
                         level. Several internationally-financed programmes and projects have triggered the development of Environmental and Social Management
                         Frameworks (ESMF), training for which is often given through cascade training down to woreda and kebele levels. In view of the number of ESMFs
                         presently in use at woreda level, there is currently a move to harmonise the ESMFs, with a v iew to achieving some measure of standardization in
                         the future, particularly in respect of community-level activities.

                         The use of such ESMFs at the woreda level has become quite widespread since 2005, particularly within the agriculture and food security sectors.
                         A new National Policy and Strategy on Disaster Risk Management has been drafted, and new institutional arrangements have been established in
                         which the Disaster Risk Management and Food Security Sector (DRMFSS) of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MoARD) now
                         hosts the Food Security Program Directorate and the Early Warning and Response Directorate. It is therefore desirable that any safeguards
                         instruments relating to DRR/ DRM activities should be harmonized with those already in use on agriculture and food security, including
                         arrangements for training.


                                                                                                                                                                    Page 2 of 5
                               5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                               Ian Leslie Campbell (AFTSP)
                               Asferachew Abate Abebe (AFTEN)

                               6. Safeguard Policies                          Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                               Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01            Yes             OP/BP 4.01 is triggered for two reasons:
                                                                                              (i)         The Regional Connectivity subproject: Although no activities with large-
                                                                                              scale or irreversible impact are anticipated, the Connectivity component activities
                                                                                              could have limited, localised impacts associated with the laying or suspension of
                                                                                              cables, the construction of transmission towers, or the installation of hardware
                                                                                              such as dishes.
                                                                                              (ii)        Activities undertaken as a consequence of the various DRR/DRM Plans:
                                                                                              Such activities # notably any that might involve civil works, such as food-for-work
                                                                                              activities or flood protection barriers - could potentially have negative
                                                                                              environmental or social impacts, particularly if not designed and implemented
                                                                                              following good practice. However, since these activities will be localized and
                                                                                              typically at community level, the impacts will be limited.
                               Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                    No              This policy is not triggered because no activities likely to impact on natural habitats
                                                                                              have been identified or are anticipated under the project.
                               Forests OP/BP 4.36                             No              This policy is not triggered because no activities likely to impact on forests have
                                                                                              been identified or are anticipated under the project.
                               Pest Management OP 4.09                        No              This policy is not triggered because no activities likely to involve use of pesticides
                                                                                              have been identified or are anticipated under the project.
                               Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11         No              This policy is not triggered because no activities likely to impact on physical
                                                                                              cultural resources have been identified or are anticipated under the project,
                                                                                              beyond those covered by para. 3 of OP/BP 4.01.
                               Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                  No              This policy is not triggered because no activities likely to impact on indigenous
                                                                                              peoples have been identified or are anticipated under the project.
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12            No              This policy is not triggered because no activities likely to lead to involuntary
                                                                                              resettlement have been identified under the project.
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                      No              This policy is not triggered because no dam construction works have have been
                                                                                              identified or are anticipated under the project.
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP      No              This policy is not triggered because no activities likely to impact on international
                               7.50                                                           waterways have been identified or are anticipated under the project.
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60          No              This policy is not triggered because no activities in disputed areas have been
                                                                                              identified or are anticipated under the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                   The Regional Connectivity subproject: The Connectivity subproject activities could have limited, localised impacts associated with the laying or
                                 suspension of cables, the construction of transmission towers, or the installation of hardware such as dishes. However, none of these will be
                                 large-scale, significant or irreversible.

                                 Activities undertaken as a consequence of the various DRM Plans: Such activities # notably any that might involve civil works, such as food-for-
                                 work activities or flood protection barriers - could potentially have negative environmental or social impacts, particularly if not designed and
                                 implemented following good practice. Since these activities are expected to be localized and typically at community level, the impacts will be
                                 limited. Nonetheless, strategies and plans for disaster preparedness and emergency response inevitably have a high degree of unpredictability
                                 in terms of the location and nature of the activities that it may be necessary to undertake. Thus it is necessary to incorporate further checks on
                                 the nature and extent of the likely impacts when the strategies and plans are being developed. See Section 4 below.
                               2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                                   The project will support the development of a range of strategies and plans for Disaster Risk Assessment, Early Warning, and Disaster Risk
                                 Preparedness, Reduction, Management and Financing (hereafter known collectively as #DRM Plans#). Only limited physical works will be
                                 directly supported by the project, notably extension of telecommunications connectivity, principally at woreda (district) offices. However, the
                                 DRM Plans to be developed may be expected to trigger physical activities in due course as required, such as, for example, food-for-work
                                 activities, or flood protection work, contingency and emergency responses. The specific location and design of these post-DRM Plan activities,
                                 many of which are likely to be small-scale and micro-scale, cannot be defined at this stage. Some will be determined within the development of
                                 the DRM Plans, and in some cases they will remain unpredictable, such as responses to disasters such as earthquakes or epidemics. Thus
                                 there is a requirement for these plans to incorporate provisions for environmental and social safeguards as part of the planning, design and
                                 implementation of the activities and responses, as appropriate.

                                 In the event that such activities (such as emergency relocation of a community away from a potential or actual disaster area) were to be
                                 recommended as a possible strategy in a DRM Contingency Plan, any potential indirect or long-term impacts will be addressed through the
                                 ESMF developed for the DRM Plan concerned, based on guidance provided in the DRM Plan Phase I ESMF.

                                                                                                                                                                          Page 3 of 5
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                             Alternative activities will be considered within the Contingency Plan ESMF, as appropriate.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                            and implement the measures described.
                             (i)          The Regional Connectivity subproject: A Screening procedure will be followed by responsible staff, for each site installation, as it
                           arises. This procedure consists of a checklist of potential environmental and social issues that might occur. If it is determined any significant
Public Disclosure Copy




                           impacts are likely, the installation will need to be modified and/or mitigating measures implemented. These procedures are set out in the DRM
                           Regional Connectivity ESMF designed for federal, regional and woreda staff concerned with the Regional Connectivity sub-project.
                           (ii)       Activities anticipated as a consequence of the various DRM Contingency Plans: In order to ensure that these activities will be subject
                           to appropriate safeguards, the DRM Contingency Plan produced by the project is required to incorporate an ESMF as part of the document.
                           The ESMF will contain a procedure for ensuring that the location and design of the activities and initiatives recommended in the plan follow
                           good practice, and that any potential negative environmental or social impacts are avoided or mitigated. Guidance for designing the
                           Contingency Plan ESMF as set out in the DRM Plan Phase I ESMF will be supplemented by Bank Task Team guidance and support during
                           development of the Contingency Plan(s). The most frequent disasters in Ethiopia are drought-induced food shocks, the response for which will
                           be to include the affected persons as beneficiaries of the ongoing Productive Safety Net Programme, which addresses the needs of those
                           suffering from chronic or transitory food insecurity. Safeguards for the PSNP are fully covered by the PSNP ESMF, which has been in operation
                           for six years, and is backed up by a government capacity-building program. The PSNP ESMF is therefore incorporated into the DRM Plan
                           Phase I ESMF (Annex V).

                           As mentioned above, strategies and plans for disaster preparedness and emergency response inevitably have a high degree of unpredictability
                           in terms of the location and nature of the activities that it may be necessary to undertake. Furthermore, it is only when the various types of risk
                           (such as earthquakes or floods) are analysed and mapped that the possible need for triggering safeguard policies additional to OP/BP 4.01 can
                           be identified. Thus as part of the Contingency Planning, the borrower will undertake a safeguard policy re-triggering exercise, based on the
                           mapping and analysis of the likely risks. In the event that additional procedures (such as Resettlement Plans or Frameworks) will be required,
                           these will be incorporated in the Contingency Plan ESMF procedures.

                           In the event that the activities to be conducted fall under the category of emergency, the safeguards procedures for Emergency Operations
                           under OP 8.00, Rapid Responses to Crises and Emergencies, will apply, and will be specified in the concerned Contingency Plan ESMF.


                           Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

                           Ethiopia has progressive EIA legislation covering individual projects with significant impact, and a number of ESMFs are implemented in the
                           Regions, principally covering woreda-, kebele- and community-level activities. In addition, the Regional Environmental Protection Authorities
                           often participate in awareness-creation and training courses for the ESMFs, on occasions assisting with training. Although there is room for
                           improvement in the rate and standards of ESMF implementation on the various projects and programs concerned, there is a basic awareness,
                           familiarity and capacity in place to conduct and monitor ESMF implementation at the various levels. Furthermore, the PSNP ESMF, which will
                           form the core of the response to drought-induced food shocks, is well established and supported by a regular capacity-building program.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                            on potentially affected people.
Public Disclosure Copy




                             The key stakeholders are the communities in all areas of Ethiopia, the Government of Ethiopia (Federal and Regional), civil society and
                           international development partners, notably The World Bank, the World Food Program, UNDP.

                           Consultation and disclosure on the development of safeguards instruments and related documents will be conducted as an integral part of the
                           development of the ESMP and the ESMFs. It will involve consultations at community level (facilitated by Development Agents, kebele- and
                           woreda-level. Disclosure at regional level will be through depositing documents for public access at regional offices. Disclosure at Federal level
                           will be through public access to national newspapers and the despositing of concerned documents World Bank in Addis Ababa.

                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                              No
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                 14-Jun-2011
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                             24-Nov-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                              23-Nov-2011
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                           Directors
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                         disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         N/A

                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                           Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                  Yes [        ]   No [    ]       NA [     ]

                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information

                                                                                                                                                                   Page 4 of 5
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?              Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language      Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for   Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?              Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard    Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same        Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Task Team Leader:                    Wolter Soer
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:     Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                        Date: 19-Mar-2012
                            Sector Manager:                      Name Lynne D. Sherburne-Benz (SM)                                        Date: 30-Nov-2011
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                                               Page 5 of 5
