                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSC352

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-May-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            China                            Project ID:      P127036
                            Project Name:       China GEF Large-City Congestion and Carbon Reduction Project (P127036)
                            Task Team           Zhi Liu
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           25-Jun-2012                      Estimated        15-Nov-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      EASCS                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Focal Area:         Climate change

                            Sector:             General transportation sector (100%)
                            Theme:              Climate change (50%), Other urban development (25%), Pollution management
                                                and environmental health (25%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                             86.33
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                              18.18
                              Total                                                                         104.51
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            B. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                           The development objective of the project is to alleviate traffic congestion and to achieve GHG
                           emission reduction in selected large cities in China, through demonstration of options for public
                           transport improvement and travel demand management.
                           C. Project Description
                           In response to the congestion issues and accompanying GHG emissions that large Chinese cities are
                           facing, the Ministry of Transport (MOT) is determined to develop policy framework and action plans
                           that would stimulate public transport development and discourage private car usage throughout
                           China. Three pilot cities, Suzhou, Harbin and Chengdu, have been selected to demonstrate the
                           implementation of these policies and measures. Therefore, the project is designed to include
                         technical assistance at the national level, as well as specific pilot demonstration programs at the local
                         level.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Technical Assistance at the National Level. This component will provide technical
                         assistance to MOT for developing a package of policies, guidelines and action plan to tackle
                         congestion issues; and establishing the national standardized baselines and mechanism for
                         monitoring and evaluating urban transport CO2 emissions. It would include the following 3 sub-
                         components.

                         a) Development of Travel Demand Management (TDM) policies and guidelines. This would include:
                         (i) a national guiding note on urban traffic congestion reduction; (ii) performance indicator and
                         evaluation method for urban traffic congestion; (iii) TDM manual for Chinese cities (including
                         performance evaluation method); and (iv) proposal for congestion pricing scheme.

                         b) Development of Public Transit Metropolis (PTM) Action Plan. This would include: (i) policy
                         framework and evaluation method for the implementation of PTM; (ii) national polices and measures
                         for promoting public transport priority and (iii) technical and operational guideline for Advanced
                         Public Transport System (APTS).

                         c) Establishment of urban transport CO2 emission M&E platform. This would include:

                         (i)      Establishment of standardized baselines.
                         (ii) M&E mechanism. The establishment of an M&E mechanism at the national level would include
                         (ii. a) M&E manual on data submission, recording, filing and etc.; and (ii. b) QC /QA plan and
                         annual reports.
                         (iii) Online database of urban transport CO2 emission modeling indicators to be used for emission
                         reduction calculations for selected cities.

                         Component 2: Pilot Demonstration in three large cities. This component would introduce
Public Disclosure Copy




                         international best practices to the pilot cities, focusing on various aspects of public transport
                         improvement and travel demand management, to demonstrate the impact and global environment
                         benefits, as well as to provide referential experience for improving the works at the national level.

                         Pilot Demonstration in Suzhou

                         d) Public Transport Improvement. This aims to improve public transport services to attract more
                         people to use it, through: (i) optimization of Suzhou’s public transport information service system;
                         (ii) construction of 2 BRT lines; (iii) clean energy bus procurement; and (iv) pilot demonstration of
                         public transport accessibility improvements.

                         e) Travel Demand Management. This aims to establish and launch a policy framework and an
                         implementation plan that would discourage private vehicle usage, through: (i) Suzhou urban TDM
                         study including evaluation method; (ii) formulation and pilot implementation of a differential parking
                         policy, including demand analysis, parking planning and pricing policy; and (iii) development of an
                         implementation plan for congestion charging in Suzhou’s Old Town.

                         f) Capacity Building. This would ensure the long-term sustainability of the project, through: (i)
                         Suzhou PTM implementation plan; (ii) urban transport M&E system based on data integration; (iii)
                         TOD study in Suzhou; (iv) urban transport CO2 emission database for Suzhou; and (v) project
                         management, including daily operation of the Suzhou PMO, establishment of project website and
                         M&E of project outcomes.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pilot Demonstration in Chengdu

                         a) Public Transport Improvement. This component aims to enhance public transport operation and
                         services, through: (i) bus priority at the junctions, including bus signal priority and junction
                         channelization, to further maximize the benefits of the city’s extensive dedicated bus lanes; and (ii)
                         bus stop improvement, including bus platform upgrading and pedestrian access improvement.

                         b) Travel Demand Management. This component aims to introduce TDM practices to achieve a
                         balance between different modes, through: (i) congestion hotspot mitigation using real-time traffic
                         data; and (ii) parking management and differential pricing.

                         c) Capacity Building. This component would support Chengdu’s capacity development for urban
                         transport planning and development, through: (i) Comprehensive Sustainable Urban Mobility Plan,
                         to address issues raise by the city such as land use planning, comprehensive transport planning
                         (including trams and slow mode transport), junction design, public transport fare and etc.; (ii)
                         technical assistance on integrated urban transport database and modeling, by mobilizing international
                         experts to fill the gap of the works carried out by domestic team; (iii) domestic and international
                         training; (iv) urban transport CO2 emission database for Chengdu; and (v) M&E of project outcomes.

                         Pilot Demonstration in Harbin

                         a) Public Transport Improvement. This component aims to improve public transport services and
                         accessibility through: (i) bus dedicated lanes along selected corridors; (ii) public transport
                         accessibility improvement; (iii) park and ride (P+R) scheme at suitable locations, (iv) bus integration
                         with new urban rail line; and (v) public transport dispatch center.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         b) Travel Demand Management. This component aims to introduce the TDM practices to restrain
                         private car usage in the central city, through: (i) parking management policy study and
                         implementation; and (ii) junction channelization and traffic management.

                         c) Capacity Building. This would develop the city’s capacity in dealing with urban transport issues,
                         through: (i) technical assistance on the integration of various APTSs and taxi management system;
                         (ii) domestic and international training; (iii) urban transport CO2 emission database for Harbin; and
                         (iv) M&E of project outcomes

                         Component 3: Capacity Building. This would include: (i) construction of the project website; (ii)
                         technical assistance on TDM, parking management, congestion pricing and public transport service
                         improvement and transport CO2 emission M&E; and (iii) workshops and knowledge dissemination;
                         and (iv) training for national and local officials and technical staff.

                         Component 4: Monitoring & Evaluation. This would include: (i) M&E of project progress; (ii) M&E
                         of urban transport CO2 emission reduction from 3 pilot cities; and (iii) regular review and
                         dissemination of project intermediate outcomes.

                         Component 5: Project Management. This would include staffing for National PMO, project
                           management, project website maintenance, implementation advisory to pilot cities, organization of
                           workshops and conferences, etc.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the           safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                           analysis (if known)
                           The proposed project will support above-mentioned components activities in three cities in China, i.
                           e. Suzhou, Chengdu and Harbin.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           A Project Steering Group has been established in MOT for overseeing project preparation and
                           implementation, consisting senior officials from MOT, MOF, NDRC, the Provincial Transport
                           Departments of Jiangsu/Heilongjiang/Sichuan, the municipal governments of Suzhou/Harbin/
                           Chengdu and the Transport Bureau/Commissions of Suzhou/Harbin/Chengdu. One national Project
                           Management Office (PMO) will be set up at the Ministry of Transport and three local PMOs at the
                           Transport Bureau/Commission(s) of the 3 pilot cities, respectively.

                           The safeguards concerns would be associated with limited infrastructure activities in the project
                           cities. As major cities with advanced social and economic development in China, there exist
                           established legal procedures and institutional capacity to manage the safeguards issues related to
                           urban construction activities. The Bank task team will provide safeguards training on the Bank’s
                           safeguards policies during the project preparation and supervise the implementation through periodic
                           supervision missions.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Zhefu Liu (EASCS)
                           Peishen Wang (EASIN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             Given the limited civil works under the
                           BP 4.01                                             proposed project (i.e. junction channelization,
                                                                               bus stop improvement, bus dedicated line, BRT
                                                                               lines), the project will have limited
                                                                               environmental impacts, mainly related to the
                                                                               construction activities, such as traffic and
                                                                               accessibility disturbance, nuisance of dust and
                                                                               noise, waste management and safety issues.
                                                                               Such impacts will be of small scale and site-
                                                                               specific, and can be readily avoided/mitigated
                                                                               with good management practices for
                                                                               construction and operation. Therefore, the
                                                                               proposed project is Category B as per OP4.01.

                                                                               EA documents will be prepared in accordance
                                                                               with national laws/regulations and the World
                                                                               Bank safeguards policies. Given the minor
                                                                               environmental impacts envisaged, the EA
                                                                               documents will directly be Environmental
                                                                 Management Plans (EMPs), which will include
                                                                 screening of the site-specific potential
                                                                 environmental and social impacts, design of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 site-specific mitigation measures if warranted,
                                                                 followed by generic environmental
                                                                 specifications for construction management in
                                                                 urban areas. IFC’s EHS Guidelines for traffic
                                                                 safety issue will be incorporated into the EMPs.

                                                                 Potential issues to be addressed through the
                                                                 screening include:
                                                                 -        Environmental enhancement:
                                                                 Landscaping and greening opportunities
                                                                 -        Inclusive design (accessibility for
                                                                 handicapped)
                                                                 -        Accessibility to business and houses
                                                                 during construction
                                                                 -        Identification of critical areas: schools,
                                                                 hospitals,
                                                                 -        Affectation of green/recreational areas
                                                                 -        Direct and indirect impacts on historical
                                                                 buildings (vibration for instance)
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No    The project is mainly in the central urban areas,
                                                                 and there are no natural habitats involved. This
                                                                 policy is not triggered.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    The Project doesn’t involve forests resources.
                                                                 This policy is not triggered.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The Project will not lead to purchase or use of
                                                                 any pesticides. This policy is not triggered.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   At this stage, there is not detailed information
                         BP 4.11                                 about the specific sites or roads, therefore, TBD
                                                                 is suggested. Further screening will be
                                                                 conducted during the project preparation.
                                                                 Chance -find procedures will be included in the
                                                                 EMPs.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No    The Bank's Social Safeguards Specialist has
                                                                 already screened the project areas in the three
                                                                 engaged cities and determined that no minority
                                                                 communities defined by the Bank OP 4.10 are
                                                                 found in the project areas and therefore, OP
                                                                 4.10 will not be triggered. The projects in
                                                                 Suzhou and Chengdu city will focus on public
                                                                 transport improvement/priorities, travel demand
                                                                 management, institutional capacity
                                                                 development. No any minority communities
                                                                 defined by the OP 4.10 will be affected. In
                                                                                                                                 Harbin city, the Chinese Man, Hui and Korea
                                                                                                                                 minorities are scattered. The Chinese Man and
                                                                                                                                 Hui were not identified as minorities that fall
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 into Bank minority definition. The Chinese
                                                                                                                                 Koreans were immigrants into Harbin since the
                                                                                                                                 World War II. Those Chinese minorities are not
                                                                                                                                 collectively attached to geographically ancestral
                                                                                                                                 territories in the project area.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           According to the information provided by the
                                 4.12                                                                                            pilot cities, the proposed civil works, including
                                                                                                                                 dedicated bus lanes, junction improvement, bus
                                                                                                                                 rapid transit lines, public transport integration,
                                                                                                                                 bus platform improvement, pedestrian access
                                                                                                                                 improvement, and park and ride facilities, will
                                                                                                                                 be carried out on existing right-of-ways or
                                                                                                                                 available public land. No land acquisition and
                                                                                                                                 resettlement are expected for the three cities
                                                                                                                                 under the project. However, the team will
                                                                                                                                 undertake due diligence reviews of the land
                                                                                                                                 acquisition and resettlement of the selected Park
                                                                                                                                 and Ride facilities in Harbin, and advise the city
                                                                                                                                 to prepare a RPF to deal with any emerging
                                                                                                                                 minor land acquisitions and resettlement.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project will not involve impacts to any
                                                                                                                                 dams in the project area. This policy is not
                                                                                                                                 triggered.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The project will not involve trans-boundary
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            rivers. The policy is not triggered.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project is not located in any disputed areas.
                                 7.60                                                                                            The policy is not triggered.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Jun-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The safeguard-related studies are on-going by the client cities, and are expected to be completed
                                      by end of May 2012.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Zhi Liu

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: John R. Butler (RSA)                                                                                                 Date: 30-May-2012
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Mark R. Lundell (SM)                                                                                                 Date: 18-May-2012



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
