                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC735

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Aug-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Vietnam                          Project ID:    P128072
                            Project Name:     VN - Central Highlands Poverty Reduction Project (CHPov) (P128072)
                            Task Team         Sean Bradley
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         04-Mar-2013                      Estimated      25-Jul-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    EASVS                            Lending        Specific Investment Loan
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector:           General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%), Other social services
                                              (30%), Sub-national government administration (20%), P ublic administration-
                                              Other social services (10%)
                            Theme:            Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Other human development (30%),
                                              Participation and civic engagement (30%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                         Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                         20.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                               150.00
                              International Fund for Agriculture Development                             30.00
                              Total                                                                     200.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed Central Highlands Poverty Reduction project (CHPov) would have as a development
                           objective to enhance livelihoods opportunities among poor households and communities in the
                           highland areas of Central Vietnam.
                           C. Project Description
                           The CHPov would build on previous experiences and lessons learned by the World Bank and other
                           development partners working with EM communities in the Central Highlands and other regions of
                         the country in supporting livelihoods and basic service provision to theseand other beneficiary
                         groups through participatory and demand-driven processes. Specifically, the task team and
                         Government will draw on past experiences from the previous Bank-supported Community Based
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Rural Infrastructure Project the P135-Phase II, Northern Mountains Poverty Reduction Project (I and
                         II), as well as relevant projects supported by the ADB, IFAD and other organizations.

                         The proposed project would focus on 26 very poor districts in the six contiguous provinces of Dak
                         Lak, Dak Nong, Gia Lai, Kon Tum, Quang Nam and Quang Ngai in the Central Region. These
                         districts have an estimated average poverty incidence of 49 percent and cover a target beneficiary
                         population of approximately 1.2 million people, of whom it is estimated that more than 50 percent
                         are ethnic minorities.

                         The project would seek to enhance the livelihood opportunities for poor households and communities
                         by: improving access to basic services at community level particularly related to farm production and
                         income earning capacity; addressing constraints to accessing natural resources and market
                         opportunities; and supporting sub-national investments (district level downward) to enhance
                         connectivity. It would seek to strengthen the participation of and benefits for poorer communities in
                         new or on-going economic development initiatives of government within the region and also
                         strengthen the involvement of these communities with selected initiatives being led by the private
                         sector.

                         Strategies to help ensure the above outcomes would include: improving the voice and agency of EMs
                         in deciding on and managing local level development resources; integrating employment generation
                         and basic occupational skills development support and infrastructure upgrading/maintenance at local
                         level; better linking poorer communities with emerging strategies and programs for ‘sustainable’
                         commodity development, promoting measures to better manage weather-related and other livelihood
                         risks; targeting support that improves access to off-farm opportunities in and around regional growth
                         poles; capacity building of district level staff to improve integrated medium-term socio-economic
                         development planning; and enhancing linkages and synergies with complementary regional services
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and programs such as rural roads, rural finance, social protection, etc.

                         Based on the outcome of the identification mission conducted in late 2011 and subsequent
                         discussions, the principal components and preliminary estimates of Bank financing for the CHPov
                         are presented below. These components and indicative levels of financing would be reviewed and
                         confirmed during project preparation.

                         a)       Component 1: Commune-level productive and social infrastructure and support; consisting
                         of construction or repair of village and commune level infrastructure (such as simple access roads,
                         terracing; irrigation/water supply, basic/essential social infrastructure, etc.), linked to labor-based
                         employment and occupational skills training targeting local youth (and others) for both construction
                         and maintenance. Building upon recently (or soon to be) completed New Rural Areas communal
                         plans, sub-projects would be prioritized through a participatory planning process and managed by
                         commune and village authorities with the help of community facilitators. Training and capacity
                         building for village, commune and district level personnel would be included as part of the
                         component. Also included would be support to youth groups and others to form the nuclei of
                         cooperatives or small enterprises for future work in infrastructure contracting. Estimated value of
                         US$ 50-60 million (excluding local government counterpart funds).

                         b) Component 2: Sustainable agriculture, food security and natural resources management;
                         potentially consisting of three sub-components (i) strengthening community and household land
                         tenure, and local land resource planning, (ii) promoting sustainable land/water management practices
                         and other measures for improved food security and risk management, and iii) supporting pro-poor
Public Disclosure Copy




                         agricultural value chain linkages; The component may also support partnering/twinning
                         arrangements between better off and poorer communes withinand across districts to promote
                         information exchange and learning to improve livelihoods strategies. Estimated value of US$ 30-40
                         million.

                         c)       Component 3: District capacity building and connective infrastructure; consisting of
                         selective inter-commune and district-level infrastructure that would seek to support productive inter-
                         connections within and related to local economic zones. The component would also support
                         integrated district socioeconomic planning and technical capacity building of district staff to support
                         infrastructure planning and implementation at commune levels. Estimated value of US$ 50 million
                         (excluding local government counterpart).

                         d) Component 4: Project Management, including the set-up and operation of coordination structures
                         at national level and implementation units/teams at provincial and district level, and operational costs
                         associated with project management. The component would also include a robust monitoring and
                         evaluation system and process to systematically measure outcomes and impacts related to the project
                         investments to better inform any proposed scale-up of the strategy. Estimated value of US$ 10
                         million.

                         The identification mission reached general agreement with the main Government counterpart, the
                         Ministry of Planning and Investment (MPI), on a number of core principles that would guide project
                         design and implementation, several of which would enhance previous government efforts to address
                         rural poverty. These are:

                         •         The project would use a "territorial economy" perspective that would seek to link local-level
                         productive opportunities with socio-economic initiatives and infrastructure at the inter-communal/
Public Disclosure Copy




                         district-level. An important goal would be to improve the physical and socio-economic connectivity
                         of poorer communities with nearby/area growth poles;

                         •       The project would support the implementation of the GoV’s initiative to decentralize socio-
                         economic development planning by strengthening the processes and capacities for participatory
                         planning at the district and communal levels. At the local level it would support an enhanced
                         participatory process of planning based on a strong understanding of the socio-cultural dynamics of
                         local EM groups;

                         •       The project would contribute to the implementation of the New Rural Areas Development
                         (NRAD) strategy, by seeking to adapt, and make the strategy more applicable to the poorer
                         communes (Zone 3 communes and Zone 2 communes in otherwise very poor districts)-- that is, the
                         project would have a "pro-poor" NRAD focus;

                         •      The project would target districts featuring an especially high incidence of poverty and ones
                         which are not otherwise attracting a significant amount of private sector or other commercial
                         investment;

                         •      The project would provide a significant per-capita level of investment, which will be scaled
                         based on poverty rates; and
                           •       The project would carefully analyze the outcomes and impacts of the program through a
                           robust monitoring system and impact evaluation process to better inform subsequent decisions about
Public Disclosure Copy




                           possible scaling up of the project approaches.

                           To the extent possible, the project would also seek explicit linkages with the proposed MOLISA
                           ‘minimum income support’ pilot project that would provide modest supplemental cash transfers to
                           the poorest households to encourage their increased use of key social services such as education,
                           health, and nutrition. Finally, it is also proposed to partner with IFAD, with IFAD potentially
                           supporting, through parallel financing, livelihoods strengthening initiatives in three additional
                           provinces, likely to be in the North Central coast. Through such a partnership the Bank team can
                           benefit from the experiences of the Fund from its work in the Central Highlands and elsewhere. A
                           preliminary review of the experiences to date under these two projects (3EM and TNSP) was carried
                           out as part of the CHPov identification mission. IFAD is also actively involved in supporting an
                           emerging public-private partnership program for sustainable coffee in the Central Highlands.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the           safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project will be implemented in 6 provinces of the Central Highland and Central regions,
                           including: Dak Lak, Dak Nong, Gia Lai, Kontum, Quang Nam and Quang Ngai.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Central Coordination Office housed at MPI and a number of participating provinces have
                           demonstrated its capacity for IDA project preparation and implementation, including safeguard
                           policies as they had implemented the Bank funded project on Community Based Rural Infrastructure
                           (closed in 2009).
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Nghi Quy Nguyen (EASVS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Thuy Cam Duong (EASVS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes              The CHPRP will finance small scale productive
                           BP 4.01                                             and social infrastructure (commune-to-village
                                                                               roads, bridges, local irrigation, water supply,
                                                                               market place, etc). The project may have
                                                                               potential environmental impacts during
                                                                               construction and operation; at marginal level
                                                                               though (e.g. air pollution, waste water and solid
                                                                               waste management). To address the
                                                                               requirements of OP 4.01, the project will
                                                                               prepare an Environmental and Social
                                                                               Management Framework (ESMF) which will
                                                                               lay out screening procedures for sub-projects
                                                                               and include general information on management
                                                                               of environmental and social issues in the
                                                                               project. In addition, since the types of
                                                             infrastructure to be supported by the proposed
                                                             project are of small scale and mostly known, a
                                                             set of Environmental codes of Practice
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             (ECOPs), covering mitigation measures for
                                                             generic impacts, would also be prepared for
                                                             each type of physical works known and as
                                                             summarized in Section A above. The ECOPs
                                                             will also have provisions for chance find
                                                             procedures and be included in the bidding
                                                             documents and construction contracts. For most
                                                             sub-projects, the ECOPs will be sufficient. If
                                                             there are any sub-projects with impacts and
                                                             mitigation measures not adequately covered by
                                                             the ECOPs, short Environmental Management
                                                             Plans (EMPs) would be prepared which would
                                                             in addition lay out site-specific mitigation
                                                             measure which would also have to be
                                                             considered for those sub-projects and
                                                             appropriately included in the bidding
                                                             documents.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   TBD   Subproject selection criteria will exclude any
                                                             potential investments having a significant
                                                             impact on natural habitats. It is thus quite
                                                             unlikely that this policy will be triggered but
                                                             since the project communes have not yet been
                                                             identified and details are not available on
                                                             potential connective infrastructure investments
                                                             under Component 3, the policy is considered
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             TBD at this time.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            TBD   The project aims to support management of
                                                             forest resources under livelihood strengthening
                                                             of component 2. The activities under this
                                                             proposed activity may result in changes in the
                                                             management, protection or utilization of natural
                                                             forest or plantation which would trigger OP
                                                             4.36. Pending further information on this
                                                             component, the triggering of the policy is
                                                             considered TBD at this stage.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       TBD   The project aims to support community food
                                                             security under livelihood strengthening of
                                                             component 2.The activities under this proposed
                                                             activity might include the improvement of
                                                             agriculture production which might lead to
                                                             increased use of chemicals (fertilizers and
                                                             pesticides). The trigger of OP 4.09 is TBD at
                                                             this stage and will be clarified during details
                                                             design of the project. If the policy is triggered,
                                                                 the ECOPs will include a set of guidelines on
                                                                 sustainable use of pesticides and fertilizers.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    As project communes have not yet been
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BP 4.11                                 identified, it is not known if the project would
                                                                 adversely affect known sites with archeological,
                                                                 paleontological, historical, religious, or unique
                                                                 natural values. If such sites were identified, the
                                                                 project would exclude them from financing.
                                                                 Nonetheless, chance find procedures will be
                                                                 incorporated into biding documents and
                                                                 construction contracts under the project.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   The participating communes (and therefore the
                                                                 specific beneficiaries) to be covered under the
                                                                 project are not yet known. Therefore, the exact
                                                                 ethnic minority population under the project
                                                                 area is not as yet precisely identified. Assuming
                                                                 that the overwhelming majority of direct
                                                                 beneficiaries are Indigenous Peoples (IP)
                                                                 communities (based on the social assessment
                                                                 (SA) to be prepared following the requirements
                                                                 defined under OP 4.10 Annex on SA), the
                                                                 project design would incorporate and define the
                                                                 measures to ensure that the IP communities will
                                                                 receive culturally appropriate social and
                                                                 economic benefits and identify the ways
                                                                 whereby the project will minimize, mitigate and
                                                                 compensate any adverse effects from all
                                                                 project's components. The SA will be disclosed
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 locally in the local language of the ethnic
                                                                 minorities (to the extent that local languages
                                                                 have a script that are read by community
                                                                 members) and in English in the Bank Infoshop
                                                                 prior to project appraisal.
                                                                 The project Operations Manual will include
                                                                 detailed process to be followed during
                                                                 implementation to ensure free prior and
                                                                 informed consultation leading to broad
                                                                 community support is achieved for all project
                                                                 activities, including for the investments
                                                                 proposed under component 3, including district
                                                                 and inter-commune level infrastructure that are
                                                                 not prepared and implemented by local
                                                                 communities.
                                                                 On the land, and forest resources the project
                                                                 would pay particular attention to the specific
                                                                 considerations regarding: (i) customary rights of
                                                                 IP communities, pertaining to lands and
                                                                territories; (ii) protection to such lands and
                                                                resources against any illegal intrusion or
                                                                encroachment; (iii) IP communities' cultural and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                spiritual values attributed to such land and
                                                                resources and (iv) IP communities natural
                                                                resources management. In the case of
                                                                involuntary land acquisition the project would
                                                                include all the provisions to ensure policy
                                                                requirements and objectives are met, as defined
                                                                in cases where IPs are project beneficiaries.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes   Small scale village, commune and district
                         4.12                                   infrastructures may require the acquisition of
                                                                residential or productive land, at marginal level
                                                                though. The project will prepare a Resettlement
                                                                Policy Framework (RPF) and individual
                                                                Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) for
                                                                individual subprojects will be prepared as
                                                                needed during implementation (or by Appraisal
                                                                for subprojects known by appraisal).
                                                                Voluntary land donation: Voluntary land
                                                                donation may be used for sub-projects
                                                                specifically or may already have been given as
                                                                part of the development of New Rural Areas
                                                                communal plans, which the sub-projects under
                                                                component 1 will build on. The SA should look
                                                                at the legal framework and process for the
                                                                development of New Rural Areas communal
                                                                plans to assess whether there may be legacy
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                issues concerning the provisions of OP 4.12.
                                                                Project design (and RPF and Operational
                                                                Manual) would include due diligent procedures
                                                                concerning project activities involving
                                                                voluntary land donations to ensure that (i) there
                                                                are no legacy issues; (ii) such donations meet
                                                                the Bank's criteria for voluntary land donations;
                                                                i.e. that they indeed are voluntary, made without
                                                                coercion and with a choice to say no; and (iii)
                                                                that in cases where land donations do not meet
                                                                the Bank's criteria measures are in place to fill
                                                                such gaps.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No    The policy is not triggered as the project will
                                                                not include activities involving dams.
                         Projects on International        No    No project components involve international
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                   waterways.
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No    The project is not located in any known
                         7.60                                   disputed area as defined under the policy.
                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 27-Feb-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Preparation for safeguards-related studies will be started around June 2012 and completed by
                                      October 2012.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Sean Bradley

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Vilija Kostelnickiene (RSA)                                                                                          Date: 28-Aug-2012
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Jennifer J. Sara (SM)                                                                                                Date: 27-Aug-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
