INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA769
b  Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-May-2012
0
1 1. BASIC INFORMATION
U)    1. Basic Project Data
0
0
.U,
Q      Country:               Morocco                      Project ID:             P125799
.      Project Name:         Judicial Performance Enhancement for Service to Citizen Project ("Mahkamati") (P125799)
Task Team Leader:      Philippe De Meneval
Estimated Appraisal Date: 19-Mar-2012               Estimated Board Date:   12-Jun-2012
Managing Unit:         MNSPS                        Lending Instrument:     Specific Investment Loan
Sector:                Law and justice (100%)
Theme:                Access to law and justice (60%), Other rule of law (40%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Financing Source                                                                      Amount
Borrower                                                                                 0.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                   15.80
Total                                                                                    15.80
Environmental Category: C - Not Required
Is this a Repeater project? No
2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective is to strengthen the capacity of the Borrower's justice sector to deliver efficient, timely and transparent services
to citizens and businesses through: (a) piloting of a participatory reform process involving judges, administrative staff, judicial auxiliaries and users
in selected courts in the Project Area; and (b) strengthening the institutional capacity of the central functions of the MdJL to better support and
monitor the court system.
>    3. Project Description
0
O      Component 1 - Improving the Court Performance (Estimated cost: 7.4 million Euros)
a)
M     Sub-component 1.1 - Improving of Court Administration and Case Management
0             Selecting pilot courts from the Casablanca, Kenitra and Settat judicial districts to develop Court Performance Improvement Plans
0     (PAPJs) according to the criteria and procedures described in the Project Operational Manual (POM).
*             Conducting court users surveys in the selected pilot courts.
o           Identifying issues and options for PAPJs through a participatory approach in the selected pilot courts.
*             Disseminating best international practices relevant for PAPJs through workshops.
*       Structuring of PAPJs and SRAs, including monitoring and evaluation mechanisms and indicators.
*      Assisting in the implementation of PAPJs and Annual Reform Strategies (SRAs) activities in the selected pilot courts.
Subcomponent 1.2 - Re-engineering of Administrative Processes for Improved Service Delivery
*      Assessing current organizational structures for providing services in the selected pilot courts.
*       Designing new service delivery processes by rationalizing court organization based on the separation of the "front office" and "back
office" functions.
*       Drafting an operation manual detailing the handling of all administrative tasks related to justice services delivery.
*       Providing training regarding the use of the new service delivery procedures.
*       Limited space reconfiguration and refurbishment (other than structural rehabilitation, enlargement or expansion of existing buildings)
inside the selected pilot courts' buildings for implementing the new service delivery processes and court layout.
Subcomponent 1.3 - Development of Innovative Court ICT Applications
Subcomponent 1.3.1 - Revamping of the Automated Case Management Systems
*      Assessing current procedural rules and milestones to determine the causes of recurrent delays and congestion, and identifying possible
solutions, including the improvement of the CMSs already operational.
*       Upgrading the existing CMS for effective monitoring and control of case status requests and pending judicial deadlines.
*       Training court personnel to ensure effective use of the upgraded automated CMS and procedures.
*       Ensuring that the new upgraded CMS generate reliable statistics on court performance in the pilot courts, and is gradually expanded to
other courts.
Page 1 of 5


﻿Subcomponent 1.3.2 - Development of Additional ICT Applications identified under the ICT Strategic Plan
*      Developing an electronic filing program allowing externally-originated documents to be added to the existing file.
*      Developing an information system by extending the connectivity between the central and regional court offices (intranet) in order to
improve the effective communication of policies, practices, and procedures.
*      Allowing user access in real time to a central registry for collateral registered in the commercial registry.
*      Enhancing digital systems for archiving electronic court records so as to improve access to court records using electronic retrieval
methods, and reduce physical space for storage of court records.
O     Component 2 - Upgrading the Strategic Planning and Management Capacities of the MdJL (Estimated cost: 3.7 million Euros)
a     Sub-component 2.1 - Strengthening of the MdJL's Planning, Coordination and Control Capacity
U)            Reviewing internal policies and procedures of MdJL.
0
*          Selecting appropriate job profiles for the revised planning, coordinating and control functions and responsibilities of MdJL's central
.U)    services.
*             Developing a performance and productivity assessment framework for central services.
*      Developing effective communication mechanisms among MdJL Directorates and Units for policy-making purposes.
.      Sub-component 2.2 - Developing Strategic Budget Planning through performance-based budgeting
*      Developing performance objectives, indicators and targets.
*      Developing and implementing an action plan for the MdJL's strategic budget planning.
*      Developing and implementing a training plan addressing the different dimensions of the budget reform with workshops in each judicial
district, and an annual seminar with participants.
*      Strengthening the budget and financial management capacities of the various units involved in the expenditure management process.
Sub-component 2.3: Supporting the Human Resources Development Plan of the MdJL
*      Designing and implementing standard performance evaluation mechanisms and parameters for the clerks and other administrative staff
and establishing new monitoring and evaluation (M&E) mechanisms to improve performance.
*      Designing specific training modules for the MdJL and the Superior Judicial Training Institute (ISM) to disseminate best practices in the
field of court management and performance, and support at the central and at the local levels the implementation of the PAPJs.
Sub-component 2.4 - Strengthening of M&E Tools for Court Performance
Subcomponent 2.4.1 - Supporting of MdJL in developing an upgraded system of Court Statistics
*      Reviewing the existing judicial statistics system and how its implementation in the pilot courts.
*      Upgrading and designing a statistical system with manual procedures and computerized applications compatible with the CMSs.
*      Assisting the pilot courts in the implementation of the new data system to ensure they generate reliable statistics about court
performance, and assist in gradually expanding this system to other courts.
Subcomponent 2.4.2 - Supporting MdJL to develop an ICT Strategy for Court Performance
*      Preparing a medium-term strategic ICT plan.
*      Reformulating the MdJL's policies on technological standards.
*      Assisting MdJL in supervising the implementation of the ICT action plan and new policies on technological standards.
0
C-)
a)    Subcomponent 2.5 - Improving MdJL's Communications with Users and Citizens
*      Improving the MdJL's communication strategy.
*      Providing training on communication techniques for MdJL's relevant units.
0
*             Carrying out workshops, training activities and publications for civil society, the private sector and the general public, and awareness
U)    campaigns about justice sector issues and citizens' rights among other state agencies.
o     *       Designing and implementing specific communication plans and activities in the pilot courts, linked with PAPJs and SARs.
 *    Undertaking nationally representative surveys aimed at assessing perceptions about justice services throughout the country, and access
3     to, and use of, the court system in Morocco.
Sub-component 2.6 - Modernizing Legal Drafting and Dissemination of Laws and Case Law
*      Developing a strategy and methodology for: (a) identifying legal reform needs relevant for improving court performance; (b) laying out
reform options and assessing their impact; (c) implementing a consultative process with stakeholders; (d) drafting legal reforms; and (e) managing
comments and reviews
*      Supporting the implementation of the strategy and methodology adopted through the development of information and communication
(ICT) applications, training and workshops.
*      Reviewing and updating the tools for disseminating laws, regulations and judicial decisions.
Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (Estimated cost: 0.9 million Euros)
Project management and implementation, including monitoring and evaluation.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)
Limited space reconfiguration and refurbishment inside the pilot courts' buildings for implementing the new service delivery processes and court
layout will take place within the existing buildings of the 10 to 12 pilot courts selected from the following jurisdictions in the Judicial Districts of
Casablanca, Kenitra, and Settat:
Court of Appeal (Cour d'Appel) of Casablanca
Court of Appeal (Cour d'Appel) of Kenitra
Court of Appeal (Cour d'Appel) of Settat
Court of Appeal of Commerce (Cour d'Appel de Commerce) of Casablanca
Court of Commerce (Cour de Commerce) of Casablanca
Page 2 of 5


﻿Court of First Instance (Tribunal de Premiire Instance) of Kenitra
Court of First Instance (Tribunal de Premiire Instance) of Settat
Court of First Instance (Tribunal de Premiire Instance) of Sidi Kacem
Courts of First Instance (Tribunal de Premiere Instance) for Penal Affairs of Casablanca
Court of First Instance (Tribunal de Premiire Instance) of Mohammedia
Court of First Instance (Tribunal de Premiire Instance) of Benslimane
Court of First Instance (Tribunal de Premiire Instance) of Sidi Slimane
Court of First Instance (Tribunal de Premiire Instance) of Ouazzane
0     Court of First Instance (Tribunal de Premiire Instance) of Souk Larbaa
a     5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
O     Gael Gregoire (MNSEN)
Q      6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered?  Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01  Yes       The proposed Project is rated Category C for environmental purposes. The
Project's activities will only include limited space reconfiguration and refurbishment
works. No new construction will be financed, only minor works in existing
infrastructure. No construction or land acquisition will be financed either. The
Project will not finance any works in any historical building or in any building where
asbestos is present. The Safeguard Policy (OP/BP 4.01) relating to environmental
assessments has been triggered so as to properly manage the work of contractors
and minimize any adverse impacts when such reconfiguration or refurbishment is
conducted. More specifically, in order to avoid the potential adverse environmental
impacts of such minor works, contractors will be required to observe the World
Bank Group Environmental, Health, and Safety General Guidelines as well as
Moroccans laws, regulations or guidelines.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No
Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No
Pest Management OP 4.09            No
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11  No
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12  No
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP  No
7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60  No
0
o  II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
a     A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
U      1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any potential I arge scale,
__       significant andlor irreversible impacts:
Q         The objective of component 1.2 ("Reengineering of administrative processes for improved service") is to better channel interactions between
stakeholders and court services' providers (i.e. court officials responsible for dealing with user requests, mostly at the clerical level). To this
end, internal administrative services will be reorganized in pilot courts by developing a modern structure of "front office" and "back office"
functions. No structural rehabilitation, enlargement or expansion of existing buildings will be carried out. Limited space reconfiguration and
refurbishment inside the pilot courts' buildings for implementing the new service delivery processes and court layout will take place within the
existing buildings of the pilot courts selected from the Judicial Districts of Casablanca, Kenitra, and Settat.
No new construction will be financed, only minor works in existing infrastructure. No construction or land acquisition will be financed either. The
Project will not finance any works in any historical building or in any building where asbestos is present. In order to avoid the potential adverse
environmental impacts of such minor works, contractors will be required to observe the World Bank environmental standards as well as
Moroccans laws, regulations or guidelines.
2. Describe any potential indirect andlor long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
There are no potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities of the proposed project.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
Not applicable
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
and implement the measures described.
It is not expected that the Project will have any significant negative environmental impacts. However, the Task Team triggered OP/BP 4.01 to
avoid any potential adverse impact on the environment as a result of the minor works planned under the Project. The Project Appraisal
document and the Project Operational Manual (POM) specify that in order to avoid the potential adverse environmental impacts of the minor
works foreseen for court refurbishment, contractors will be required to observe the World Bank Group Environmental, Health, and Safety
General Guidelines as well as Moroccans laws, regulations or guidelines.
Page 3 of 5


﻿The following provides a list of the environmental requirements that contractors will have to observe when such minor works are conducted.
These requirements will be referenced in the Project Operational Manual. When hiring contractors to carry out minor works, terms of reference,
bidding documents and contracts will include the following requirements in order to avoid any potential adverse environmental impact of the
proposed works. Specific additional references will be included as needed in the same documents to ensure that the implementation of the
planned minor works will be carried out according to the Bank environmental standards.
Requirements to be observed by contractors for the implementation of minor works under the Project will include the following:
O                Applicable laws, regulations and guidelines. Minor works for the rehabilitation, adaptation and modernization of infrastructure will be
implemented following national laws, regulations and guidelines for the treatment of the materials used, demolitions and management of all
direct and indirect effects of the minor works to avoid affecting the environment, including but not limited to:
0        *       Dahir no 1-03-194 (11 September 2003) for the Labor Code
.U       *       Law no28-00 on waste management (BO 7 d6cembre 2006)
Q        *       Inter-ministerial Order of the Minister of Labor and Vocational Training, the Minister of Health, the Minister of Commerce and New
o       Technologies, the Minister of Energy, Mines, Water and Environment no3352-10 (26 October 2010) determining asbestos standards
 *     Order of the Minister of Labor and Vocational Training no93-08 (12 May 2008) determining specific and general measures applicable
to the safety standards included in the Labor Code.
*       Safety: Contractors will: (i) use nets to contain bricks and building material to avoid accidents to third parties; (ii) ensure appropriate
signaling is used for pedestrians, workers and other persons in the work area or nearby; (iii) facilitate the transit of pedestrians, taking into
account their safety, and (iv) ensure safety rules are known and understood among construction workers to avoid accidents.
o       Solid waste and sanitation: Contractors will: (i) specify the location where dirt will be disposed of, as regulated by local environmental
laws, regulations or guidelines; (ii) specify the treatment of oils and liquids used by machinery and staff; (iii) determine the appropriate storage
of refurbishment materials during the refurbishment period; (iv) dispose of leftovers of food consumed by the workers, identify and ensure
availability of appropriate garbage pails; (v) ensure that the leftovers of the people that sell prepared food for the workers are disposed of to
avoid the accumulation of additional garbage in the work area; (vi) ensure the availability of appropriate toilet/sanitation facilities for the workers
during the period when the minor works are being carried out; and (vii) control and mitigate the effects of the dust produced by the works.
o       Work hours and noise: Contractors will adopt an adequate work schedule, ensure noise does not unduly affect neighbors, and
implement tools to control the noise produced by the minor works.
o       Municipal permits: Contractors will make the necessary arrangements to obtain permits as needed and comply with environmental
norm established by the relevant municipality.
The "Direction des Equipement et des Travaux" in the MdJL will coordinate the overall implementation process and will be in charge of
monitoring and evaluation.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
on potentially affected people.
The Project design is comprehensive and detailed, yet also flexible enough to effectively address the diverse set of institutional development
problems identified. It is built on extensive consultations with the civil society and judicial stakeholders, reviews ofpast studies, and diagnostic
O        studies and modernization plans made during Project preparation with Bank and donor assistance.
C-)
a)    B. Disclosure Requirements Date
.      Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
.U       Date of receipt by the Bank                                                     16-May-2012
.        Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                28-May-2012
M        Date of submission to InfoShop                                                 16-May-2012
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors
If the project triggers the Pest Management andlor Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Auditior EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
The Project is Category C - Disclosure to Infoshop only. The disclosed document, entitled "Kingdom of Morocco - Judicial Performance
Enhancement for Service to Citizen Project - Environmental, Health and Safety Requirements" is available in English and in French. The in-
country disclosure date above is the date the Project Appraisal Document was posted in the Infoshop.
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?  Yes [X]  No []  NA []
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language  Yes [] No [] NA [X]
that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Page 4 of 5


﻿Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for  Yes [ X ]  No [  ]  NA [
the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?  Yes [ X ]  No [  ]  NA [
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard  Yes [  No  NA[
impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
0        Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same  Yes X  No  NA[
Ca       been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?
0  Ill. APPROVALS
-      Task Team Leader:           Philippe De Meneval
o      Approved By:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Name:                                                Date:
Sector Manager:             Name Guenter Heidenhof (SM)                               Date: 29-May-2012
0
P
Pae )o


