                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC548

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Apr-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-May-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Lao People's Democratic             P129825
                                                                        Project ID:
                                                Republic
                            Project Name:       LAOSTAT-STRENGTHENING THE NATIONAL STATISTICAL SYSTEM
                                                PROJECT (P129825)
                            Task Team           Somneuk Davading
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       05-Dec-2012                           Estimated      29-Apr-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: EASPT                                  Lending        Technical Assistance Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Central government administration (100%)
                            Theme(s):           Economic statistics, modeling and forecasting (70%), Macroeconomic
                                                management (20%), Other economic management (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      8.00                        Total Bank Financing:      0.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                                   Financing Gap:             0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                     0.00
                              Statistics for Results Trust Fund                                            8.00
                              Foreign Multilateral Institutions (unidentified)                             0.00
                              Total                                                                        8.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives


                           C. Project Description
                         12.       The LAOSTAT project will support the implementation of the SDNSS in addressing key
                         weaknesses mentioned in paragraph 5 above, focusing particularly on: (1) improving policy,
                         regulation, organisational structure and institutional framework and its implementation; (2)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         upgrading and expanding statistical infrastructure; (3) revamping data development and
                         management; and (4) investing in physical infrastructure and equipment. These components are
                         briefly described below.
                         13.       The LAOSTAT is expected to be a [US$8m] project to be financed through a grant from the
                         Bank’s Statistics for Results Facility – Catalytic Fund. The project components are designed to
                         support the implementation of the four pillars (components) of the SDNSS. Note: the project will be
                         initially piloted in LSB at the center and some LSB’s provincial offices as well as a few key MDAs.
                         Specific support activities are outlined below under each SDNSS component.
                         14.       Component 1 - Improving the Policies, Regulations and Institutional Framework of the
                         National Statistical System. This component will support a number of activities including: 1)
                         strengthening the organizational structure of the NSS; 2) institutional capacity development
                         vertically (LSB) and horizontally (MDAs) including new staffing and comprehensive training at
                         central and provincial levels; 3) enforcing policy and regulations on statistics and eliminating
                         duplication of responsibilities between LSB and MDAs - reinforcing LSB’s role as a lead
                         coordinating institution; 4) strengthening medium and long term cooperation with the National
                         University to develop training curriculumm for statistics and produce trainers for training institutions
                         in the country; 5) upgrade staff qualifications to Master and Doctorate levels where possible; 6)
                         support LSB and TWG participation in various statistical technical meetings, seminars and
                         conferences at regional and global levels.
                         15.       Component 2- Developing a Statistical Infrastructure for the National Statistical System.
                         This component aims to strengthen the quality of data produced through: 1) adaptation of
                         internationally accepted standards and methodologies in data collection, compilation, and validation
                         by LSB and key MDAs; and 2) improvement of the basic elements of the statistical infrastructure,
                         particularly questionnaire design, statistical registers, sampling frames, classifications and
                         methodologies, statistical computer packages, and Geographical Information System (GIS) for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         statistical mapping.
                         16.       Component 3 - Promoting Data Development and Management within the National
                         Statistical System to ensure that it is able to generate and disseminate diversified products and
                         services, and responding to the needs of the planning, monitoring and evaluation of national
                         development programmes and its broad constituents of stakeholders. The primary activities of this
                         component includes: 1) development and improvement of national accounts (by expenditure), price
                         statistics and other macroeconomic and social statistics; 2) support poverty survey (LECS5) and
                         poverty data analysis and dissemination; 3) enhance capacity of GOL (LSB and MDAs) to produce
                         and disseminate relevant and good quality statistics (especially macroeconomic statistics including
                         macro modeling and medium term projections) to inform and guide their policy formulation and
                         program implementation; 4) develop a dissemination strategy as well as an agreed time schedule
                         between the MDAs and LSB for the release of the various administrative data and reports.
                         17.       Component 4 - Investment in Physical Infrastructure & Equipment within the National
                         Statistical system to ensure that LSB (at national and provincial levels) and collaborating statistical
                         units of line ministries and other stakeholders concerned have adequate physical infrastructure and
                         equipment that enhances access to data and other information available in the NSS to facilitate the
                         productivity of staff. To this end, it is necessary to: 1) provide a conducive working environment
                         (including office accommodation) to promote productivity in LSB and other MDAs; 2) strengthen
                         the information and communication infrastructure of LSB (including the statistical units at the
                         regional and district levels) and key MDAs to ensure the effective use of ICT to enhance the
                               productivity of the national statistical system; 3) develop a databank for MDAs and provinces linking
                               to a central databank at LSB Head Office to serve the data needs of the country.
                               18.      The project will build on ongoing technical assistance to the statistics sector in Lao PDR,
Public Disclosure Copy




                               currently being provided by DPs through various channels (mostly through separate, parallel
                               processes - on a bilateral basis). The partnershi pmechanism (Statistical Sector Working Group) has
                               been set up by the GOL and is chaired by the head of LSB and co-chaired by donor representative
                               (on behalf of DPs). Key donors who have expressed their commitment to support the implementation
                               of the SDNSS includ e: ADB, FAO, UNDP, UNFPA, UNICEF, WHO, PARIS21, SDC/Switzerland,
                               and World Bank. Other donors, such as EC, AusAID, JICA, GIZ could potentially become future
                               financiers to support the SDNSS.
                               D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                               analysis (if known)


                               E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


                               F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                               Viengkeo Phetnavongxay (EASTS)
                               Sybounheung Phandanouvong (EASTS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                                 Safeguard Policies                                                Triggered?                    Explanation (Optional)
                                 Environmental Assessment OP/                                      No
                                 BP 4.01
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No
                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Apr-2012



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                             If necessary the safeguard-related studies will be launched and completed in the second quarter of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             2012.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:      Name: Somneuk Davading

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                                Date: 16-May-2013
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Mathew A. Verghis (SM)                             Date: 26-May-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
