                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA780
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Apr-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 24-Apr-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Egypt, Arab Republic of           Project ID:    P117407
                            Project Name:      EG - Helwan South Power Project (P117407)
                            Task Team          Waleed Saleh I. Alsuraih
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          12-Sep-2012                       Estimated   18-Jun-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     MNSEG                             Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General energy sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       2404.40                  Total Bank Financing:      585.40
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                                 Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                     Amount
                              Borrower                                                                              921.80
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                 585.40
                              Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development                                         193.50
                              Islamic Development Bank                                                              449.90
                              KUWAIT Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development                                      213.80
                              OPEC FUND                                                                              40.00
                              Total                                                                                2404.40
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives



                                                                      Page 1 of 13
                         The project development objective is to increase power generation capacity in an efficient manner
                         within the Borrower’s territory.
                          3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project includes the following main components: (a) power plant; and (b) gas pipelines, as
                         described below.

                         Part A: Power plant (US$503.8 million): This component includes a 3x650-MW supercritical steam
                         technology power plant, fired by natural gas as the primary fuel and heavy fuel oil as a backup. The
                         plant comprises three identical units, each of 650 MW gross capacities. The plant will be cooled by
                         once-through cooling system using water from the Nile River. Each of the three units will include
                         the standard set of equipment: a 650-MW steam generator, a steam turbine, a condenser, and an
                         electricity generator; process and cooling water supply systems; an air and flue gas system; a fuel
                         supply system; and a number of auxiliary systems (condensate treatment; hydrogen generation;
                         compressed air; fire protection; emergency diesel generator; start-up power system; medium and low
                         voltage system; direct current power system for control and relays; and uninterruptible power
                         system). The plant will also include a distributed control system and a switchyard with step-up
                         transformers. Engineering and project management services for the power plant, as well as the
                         associated environmental and social impact mitigation plan will also be included in the project.

                         Part B: Gas pipelines (US$81.6 million): two gas pipelines capable of supplying about 12.5 million
                         cubic meters of gas per day. One pipeline, 36-inch in diameter and with length of 93 kilometres
                         (km), will connect the Helwan South power plant site, which is near the town of Atfeeh, to the
                         existing gas pipeline network at the compressor station at Dahshour. The other pipeline, 32-inch in
                         diameter 65 km in length, will strengthen the gas transmission network by eliminating a bottleneck
                         that would otherwise prevent normal gas supply to the Helwan South power plant. The pipeline will
                         run from Abu Hommos compressor station to El Nubaria compressor station. Both pipelines will be
                         designed for a maximum pressure of 32 bars. Pipeline inspection and cleaning facilities suitable for
                         use with on-line inspection vehicles and appropriate Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (SCADA) facilities will also be included. The two gas pipelines will enable transmission of gas
                         produced by Burullus, Rashid (Rosetta), and Western Desert gas fields to the Helwan South power
                         plant. The associated environmental and social impact mitigation plan will also be included in the
                         project.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The site of the proposed power project is located on the east side of the Nile, about 8 km south of the
                         Kureimat power plant complex. The site which covers about 90 feddans (378,000 m2) is owned by
                         the Upper Egypt Electricity Production Company (UEEPC), and has the shape of a trapezoid with the
                         shorter side (800 m) facing the Nile and the longer side (1 km) facing east. It is located on desert land
                         between the river and the main road. The distance from the west side of the site to the Nile ranges
                         from 150 to 300 meters, and the land in this area is farmed. The Upper Egypt Electricity Production
                         Company, which will implement the power plant component of the project, is negotiating voluntary
                         acquisition of this land -- about 35 fedans, 1quirat and 9 sahms (136,000 m2) -- owned or used by 32
                         families, for the water intake and discharge facilities. (Twenty nine plots, with total size of 29
                         fedans, 13 quirats, and 8 sahms are owned by the respective 29 families. Two plots, one 20 quirats in
                         size and the other 1 fedan and 17 quirats large, have been traditionally used by two families, but the
                         families have not been able to present proofs of ownership, so the plots are for the time being listed
                         as government-owned. One plot of 2 fedans 23 quirats and 1 sahm in size was given to a family


                                                                      Page 2 of 13
                         under the “agrarian reform". One fedan has 24 quirats, and one quirat has 24 sahms.).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         One of the two gas pipelines, 93 kilometers (km) long, will connect the Helwan South power plant to
                         the existing gas pipeline network at the compressor station at Dahshour. The other pipeline, 65 km in
                         length, will strengthen the gas transmission network by eliminating a bottleneck that would otherwise
                         prevent normal gas supply to the Helwan South power plant. The pipeline will run from Abous
                         Hommos compressor station to El Nubaria.

                         The 93 kilometers (km) long gas pipeline which will connect the Helwan South power plant to the
                         existing gas pipeline network runs mainly through a desert land, except for the areas closer to the
                         power plant and the Nile River. The other 65 km pipeline (Abous Hommos -- Nubaria) runs through
                         agricultural land in the Nile Delta.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Nina Bhatt (MNSSO)
                         Zia Al Jalaly (SARDE)
                         Sanjay Srivastava (AFTN3)
                         Africa Eshogba Olojoba (MNSEN)

                         6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              An Environmental and Social Impact
                         BP 4.01                                             Assessment (ESIA) has been prepared.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      Yes               The project triggered the Bank’s social
                         4.12                                                safeguard policy on Involuntary Resettlement
                                                                             (OP 4.12). The land acquisition needs for the
                                                                             project do not require relocation of housing and
                                                                             OP 4.12-related impacts are not major, as
                                                                             presented in more details below.
                                                                             Land Acquisition Impacts – The Power Plant:
                                                                             The largest land requirement is for the power
                                                                             plant itself, about 90 feddan (1 feddan = 1.03
                                                                             acres), or about 38 hectares, located on barren
                                                                             desert land, which was government owned and
                                                                             transferred to UEEPC through a Presidential
                                                                             Decree No. 43 of February 14, 2010 for the



                                                                     Page 3 of 13
                                 purpose of building the power plant. The site
                                 extends to the main road and thus there is no need
                                 to construct access roads to reach the site.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 However, there is a strip of farm land – about 35
                                 feddans -- 1quirat and 9 sahms (136,000 m2) --
                                 owned or used by 32 families, for the water
                                 intake and discharge facilities. UEEPC is in the
                                 process of acquiring this land, owned or used by
                                 about 32 families, on a "willing-buyer/willing-
                                 seller" basis. The Bank’s social safeguards
                                 specialist met on the site with five such
                                 landowners to confirm the nature of the
                                 transaction, including specifically their
                                 willingness to sell and to understand the reasons
                                 for doing so. The reasons are related to the
                                 generous land price offered by UEEPC and the
                                 agreement with UEEPC that the company will
                                 offer one permanent job for each 4 kirat (24 kirat
                                 = 1 feddan) of land.
                                 Land Acquisition Impacts – The Gas Pipelines.
                                 GASCO, which is the implementing agency for
                                 the two gas pipelines that are part of the project –
                                 the Dahshour-Atfeeh and the Abu Homos-
                                 Nubaria -- has prepared ESIAs and RPFs for the
                                 pipelines and will prepare corresponding RAPs
                                 closer to the start of the construction. Permanent
                                 land acquisition for the pipelines includes eight
                                 plots of land for eight valve rooms for each
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 pipeline (16 in total for both pipelines), which are
                                 spaced along the routes. Each valve room
                                 requires a plot of size of about 25 m x 45 m
                                 which GASCO hopes to acquire through willing
                                 buyer-willing seller transactions. There is also
                                 temporary land acquisition, during construction.
                                 Compensation for temporary land acquisition,
                                 including the permanent restrictions (easement
                                 along the Right-of Way (ROW), is negotiated and
                                 GASCO appears flexible enough on
                                 compensation rates to minimize the number of
                                 farmers that appeal the compensation amounts. A
                                 RAP instrument will be developed to cover all
                                 impacts associated with the gas pipeline.
                                 Land Acquisition Impacts –The Electricity
                                 Transmission Lines. The transmission lines will
                                 be implemented under a different project by
                                 EETC, and corresponding ESIA and RPFs have
                                 been prepared [satisfactory to the Bank].



                         Page 4 of 13
                                                                              Permanent land acquisition will be limited only
                                                                              for the foundations of the towers (four concrete
                                                                              foundations for each tower, each foundation
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              requiring about 4-16 m2 of land, depending on
                                                                              the tower type). Similarly as for the gas pipelines,
                                                                              compensation for the temporary land acquisition
                                                                              during construction and for the ROW will be
                                                                              made using the Egyptian crop compensation
                                                                              system administered by the Ministry of
                                                                              Agriculture. A RAP, which will cover both the
                                                                              permanent and the temporary impacts, will be
                                                                              prepared closer to the construction of the lines.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

                            Projects on International         Yes              The project triggers the policy on Projects on
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                              International Waterways (OP 7.50). The Bank
                                                                              notified the Nile River riparian states of the
                                                                              Helwan South project on October 13, 2011 and
                                                                              requested that their comments, if any, be provided
                                                                              to the Bank by November 14, 2011. No
                                                                              comments were received from any of the riparian
                                                                              states during the notification period or since.
                                                                              Pursuant to the requirements of OP 7.50 and on
                                                                              the basis of the Bank team’s assessment that the
                                                                              project activities will not cause appreciable harm
                                                                              to the other riparian states, the MNA regional
                                                                              Vice President gave approval on February 3,
                                                                              2012 to proceed with preparation of the project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              for Bank financing.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               In accordance with the requirement of a Category A project, a comprehensive ESIA was carried
                              for the Helwan South Power Plant. The site belongs to Upper Egypt Electricity Production
                              Company (UEEPC), which has been allocated to the UEEPC by a Presidential Decree dated 14
                              February 2010 for the development of the Helwan South power plant. The proposed power plant
                              will consist of three supercritical thermal steam units, with a nominal electricity generating
                              capacity of 650 megawatts (MWe) each. The overall generating capacity of the power plant will be
                              1950MWe. The power plant will utilize natural gas as its primary fuel, and also have the
                              capability to operate using mazout (heavy fuel oil).

                             The site is located within a bare sandy area of uncultivated land and is owned by the Upper Egypt
                             Electricity Production Company (UEEPC). Two physiographic zones occupy this area: a

                                                                      Page 5 of 13
                         floodplain adjacent to the Nile, and a rocky desert plateau east of the floodplain. The overall
                         proposed site area is approximately 378,000 m2. The site is predominantly desert with some
                         agricultural land adjacent to it located between the planned plant and the Nile river. There are no
Public Disclosure Copy




                         human settlements within two kilometer of the power plant site and no evidence of past industrial
                         or commercial activity. The field surveys have indicated that there are no floral and faunal
                         communities and/or species are of conservation value (rare or threatened), including natural
                         habitats or cultural properties within the project's area of influence.

                         The ESIA of power plant indicates that environment and social impacts will not be significant or
                         irreversible, which will be mitigated by effective implementation of an Environment and Social
                         mitigation and monitoring plan. Most impacts will be construction related, which will include dust
                         from construction activities, noise and vibration from construction activities and traffic disruptions
                         to road users.

                         The land acquisition needs for this project do not require relocation of anyone (no housing) and
                         OP 4.12 related impacts are minor. The project triggers the Bank’s social safeguard policy, OP
                         4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement, and the implementing agencies (EEHC/UEEPC and GASCO)
                         have prepared two Resettlement Policy Frameworks (RPFs), covering their respective project
                         components with RAP preparation underway. The largest land requirement is about 90 feddan (1
                         feddan = 1.03 acres) for the power plant itself. There is no need for permanent land acquisition for
                         the gas pipeline that supplies the power plant with fuel (except for 16 small plots for valve rooms)
                         or for the electric transmission line carrying away the electricity generated by the plant to the
                         national electric grid. There is a strip of farm land – 35 fedans, 1 quirat, and 9 sahm in size --
                         between the plant site and the Nile river, owned or used by 32 families . UEEPC is in the process
                         of acquiring this land on a “willing-buyer/willing-seller? basis. If for some reason UEEPC is
                         unable to acquire the land through “willing-buyer/willing-seller? transactions, it will resort (to the
                         extent necessary) to the process of involuntary acquisition and will prepare a RAP, consistent with
                         the RPF which has already been prepared. (One fedan has 24 quirats, and one quirat has 24
                         sahms. Twenty nine plots, with total size of 29 fedans, 13 quirats, and 8 sahms are owned by the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         respective 29 families. Two plots, one 20 quirats in size and the other 1 fedan and 17 quirats large,
                         have been traditionally used by two families, but the families have not been able to present proofs
                         of ownership, so the plots are for the time being listed as government-owned. One plot of 2 fedans
                         23 quirats and 1 sahm in size was given to a family under the “agrarian reform?).

                         The environmental impacts of associated infrastructure such as gas pipeline, transmission lines,
                         potable water connections and access road are expected to be localized, short lived, and reversible.
                         Mitigation measures have been provided by adequate institutional arrangements and budget for
                         effective implementation, supervision and monitoring. Mitigation, monitoring and management
                         measures proposed to be adopted by UEEPC are detailed in the tables in ESIA report. These
                         requirements will be included as conditions of contract on the contractor and any sub-contractors
                         employed to build or operate any part of the power plant.

                         The ESIA indicates availability of sufficient quantity of water from the Nile river for the proposed
                         project, as well as the existing power projects upstream and downstream of the Helwan South
                         power plant. The ESIA indicates that the water requirement is 82,861 m3/hr out of which cooling
                         water for the Helwan South power plant will be abstracted from the Nile River at the rate of 23
                         m3/sec per unit, i.e. 82,800 m3/hr. From 82,800 m3/hr amount of cooling water, 57.96 m3/hr is
                         consumed while the res t will be returned to the Nile river. This means that actual water
                         consumption is around 0.07% of the abstracted water. The flow in Nile river varies between

                                                                    Page 6 of 13
                         60-250 million m3/day with average seasonal flow of water in the Nile River is as follows:
                         Minimum flow (Winter time): 60 million m3/day at a MSL of 21.28m (6.63% of the Nile total).
                         Dominant flow (Average time): 90 million m3/day at a MSL of 23.63m (4.42% of the Nile total).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Maximum flow (Summer time): 250 million m3/day at a MSL of 24.36m (1.59% of the Nile total).
                         The ESIA indicates that water requirements (for both service and cooling) at Helwan South are not
                         expected to cause significant adverse environmental impacts or affect the capacity of other
                         downstream users

                         Potable water will be supplied to the power plant via the power plant water supply system.
                         Cooling water will be returned to the Nile River via a discharge structure whilst waste process
                         water will be disposed of after treatment via discharge system, which includes two pathways:
                         plantation irrigation network and Circulating Water Discharge System (CWDS). Sanitary waste
                         water will be disposed of after treatment via plantation irrigation network and the residual sludge
                         will be transported by trucks to the sewer treatment plant of El-Saff town. No ground water or
                         other surface water will be used during power plant construction and operation. The contractors
                         will be responsible for relevant water/toilet facilities during construction and the need to provide
                         appropriate services will be specified in their contracts. The key potential impacts of the power
                         plant on the aquatic environment will therefore be impacts to the aquatic flora and fauna during
                         power plant construction and operation.

                         During operation, exhaust gases, will be emitted into the atmosphere from the boilers’ stacks as a
                         result of fuel combustion. The EA indicates that the emissions from the combustion of natural gas
                         will include carbon dioxide (CO2), water vapor, carbon monoxide (CO) and nitrogen oxides
                         (NOx). Sulfur dioxide (SO2) and particulates which are typically associated with coal and oil
                         combustion, will only be produced in trace quantities during natural gas firing. In emergencies
                         when heavy fuel oil (mazout) is used instead of gas, SO2 and particulates will however be key
                         emissions from the power plant. These emissions will be within the emissions norms stipulated
                         under the World Bank guidelines, as well as the Egyptian environmental regulations. Heated
                         cooling water will be discharged into the River Nile via the cooling water discharge structure at a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         temperature within 3oC at the edge of mixing zone. Process waste water will be treated before
                         being discharged. Any oil and residual solids will be removed before discharge and the pH of
                         discharged water maintained at between 6 and 9. Chlorine will be added to the cooling water
                         system to control bacterial and algal growth on various surfaces and in the cooling water intake.
                         The cooling water discharge will contain residual quantities of chlorine at concentrations below
                         the World Bank standard for free chlorine of 0.2 mg/l. Small volumes of solid wastes will be
                         segregated, collected and disposed of by licensed waste disposal contractors. The power plant will
                         incorporate a range of measures to eliminate or reduce operational releases within its design and
                         layout, such as adoption of low NOx burners in the boilers, oil interceptors fitted to the site
                         drainage system and effluent treatment facilities to treat wastewater prior to discharge. As a result,
                         the power plant will be designed to meet international environmental standards and comply with
                         the emission limits of the Arab Republic of Egypt and the World Bank

                         The construction of the Helwan South power plant is expected to generate a maximum noise level
                         of 55 dB(A) during the day at the fence of the power plant and 50 dB(A) at night. These worst-
                         case construction noise levels are both within Egyptian and World Bank guidelines, and for most
                         of the construction periods, the noise levels will be lower than these values. No vibration impacts
                         are expected beyond 100 meters of the site.

                         The transmission lines will be implemented under a different project by the Egyptian Electricity

                                                                    Page 7 of 13
                         Transmission Company (EETC) and corresponding ESIA and RPFs have been prepared. These
                         have been reviewed and cleared for disclosure prior to appraisal of Helwan South Project in
                         September, 2012 and after incorporation of comments, will be re-disclosed. Permanent land
Public Disclosure Copy




                         acquisition will be limited only for the land needed for the towers (tower base). The largest tower
                         requires a parcel of land 25mx25m in size for its base. EETC practice is not to buy the land but to
                         enter into a long-term lease for tower bases. Each tower has four concrete foundations, with each
                         foundation requiring a piece of land at most 4mx4m in size; the rest of the tower base can be used
                         by the owners. A RAP will be prepared to cover all impacts ( both permanent and temporary),
                         translated and disclosed and compensations paid prior to the start of construction work.

                         Separate ESIAs for the two underground gas pipelines have been completed. The gas pipeline
                         from the Dahshour compression station to the power plant site will run generally parallel to the
                         existing 36'' Dahshour-El Koreimat pipeline and along an existing road. For a large section of the
                         pipeline that is expected to run through desert land, the ESIA does not indicate evidence of any
                         sensitive habitats; cultural properties, settlements or environmental receptors; or industrial or
                         commercial activities that may potentially get adversely affected due to construction or operation
                         of the gas pipeline. Construction of the gas pipeline will reportedly require 20 meter right-of-way
                         during construction, which may result in temporary inconvenience for farmers and residents in
                         such areas. The environmental and social impacts are expected to be limited to construction stage,
                         and may in certain areas include loss of top soil due to excavation, debris disposal, use and
                         disposal of concrete and brick waste, use and disposal of lubricants and waste oil, dust and noise
                         generation during construction, and potential damage to existing community/village roads due to
                         transportation of heavy machinery. The pipeline will be buried below the ground level at a depth
                         of 2-3 meters. After completion of works, the land will be fully restored to original condition, and
                         farmers will be allowed to cultivate. There will be some restriction within the right of way with
                         respect to any future construction of structures that may have potential to damage the pipeline. All
                         river and water body crossings for the pipeline will use horizontal directional drilling technique to
                         pass under the river bed, which is an internationally accepted standard practice to minimize
                         environmental obstruction to water course. The farmers would be compensated in line with
Public Disclosure Copy




                         established practice in Egypt, prior to initiating any construction works for any temporary loss of
                         agriculture, in case the losses are unavoidable. The exact alignment of the pipeline is not yet
                         finalized but communities have been consulted, and are reportedly supportive of the project. The
                         ESIA for the gas pipeline indicated that most of the impacts will be construction related, which
                         will be mitigated by implementing Environment and Social Management Plan (ESMP), including
                         Environment, Health and Safety requirement in conformance with the World Bank/IFC guidelines.

                         The ESIA for the other pipeline which runs from Abu Hommos compressor station to El Nubaria
                         was carried following the World Bank guidelines. The chosen alignment based on an analyses of
                         alternatives indicate that the pipeline will start from the outlet of a gas collection unit at Abo
                         Homos, and runs approximately southeast, parallel to an existing road going through the town of
                         Basantawy, intersecting El-Mahmoudiya canal, Cairo- Alexandria railway, and Cairo-Alexandria
                         road near the El-Azmaly estate. The pipeline will cross few roads, railways and canals, which will
                         be done using horizontal directional drilling techniques to pass under the river bed, which is an
                         internationally accepted standard practice to minimize environmental obstruction to water course.
                         As with the Dahshour-Atfeeh pipeline, the ESIA for Abu Hommos-El Nuberai pipeline does not
                         indicate evidence of any sensitive habitats; cultural properties, settlements or environmental
                         receptors; or industrial or commercial activities that may potentially get adversely affected due to
                         construction or operation of the gas pipeline. Following a similar construction practice, the
                         anticipated environmental and social impacts will be mitigated by implementing an Environment

                                                                   Page 8 of 13
                           and Social Management Plan, including Environment, Health and Safety requirement in
                           conformance with the World Bank/IFC guidelines. The farmers would be compensated in line
                           with established practice for crop compensation in Egypt, prior to initiating any construction
Public Disclosure Copy




                           works for any temporary loss of agriculture, in case the losses are unavoidable.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            No long-term or irreversible indirect impacts are anticipated from the project activities, provided
                           that the mitigation measures proposed in the ESMP are implemented.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            The “no-action? alternative was considered, which indicated that this option will result in the
                           huge increase in demand for electricity exceeding supply, with an increasing deficit as demand
                           increases in future years. A lack of a secure and reliable electricity generation and supply system
                           has significant social and economic implications, since it will: constrain existing and future
                           economic development and investment through lack of energy resources to meet industrial
                           demand; restrict socio-economic development through lack of electricity supply, or poor reliability
                           and shortages in electricity supply for domestic users, community and other public facilities and
                           public services; inhibit provision of social services, including public health and poverty
                           eradication. As a result, the "no action" option is not a viable or acceptable alternative to the
                           proposed project.

                          Before selecting gas/oil-fired combined cycle technological option for Helwan South Plant, the
                          ESIA analyzed various alternatives of fuel, (gas, oil etc); technology (such as gas/oil-fired steam
                          units; gas/oil-fired combined cycle units; gas/oil-fired simple cycle combustion turbine units;
                          pumped storage; nuclear generation; wind farms; and integrated solar-thermal generating units
                          etc). The ESIA also considered three alternative sites: Safaga, Sharm esh-Sheikh, and Helwan
                          South. The Helwan South was selected as the best compromise, considering various economic and
                          non-economic factors, including – inter alia – the scale and scope of environment and social
Public Disclosure Copy




                          impacts and overall infrastructure requirements and cost.

                           Other alternative technologies and fuels were considered in addition to other possible options such
                           as importing electricity: renewable energy; rehabilitation of existing power plants; transmission
                           and distribution investments; BOOTs/IPPs. It was determined that the optimal option would be the
                           gas/oil-fired supercritical steam units of a net 3x650 MWe generating capacity at Helwan South.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            The Project Management Units of the respective implementing agencies will have the overall
                           responsibility for implementation of Environment and Social Management Plan and the RPF.

                          During construction of the power plant, Project Management Unit/Environmental Management
                          Staff (PMU/EMS) and the Assistant Plant Manager in collaboration with the Consultant Site
                          Manager will ensure that all contracts with Contractors and sub-contractors stipulate all
                          construction management measures (as given in this ESMP), operational design criteria and
                          environment, health and safety standards which must be implemented at the project site.

                          During operation, direct responsibility for environmental compliance and the implementation of
                          the mitigation, management and monitoring measures will continue to be with the Plant


                                                                     Page 9 of 13
                           Environmental Staff under direct supervision of the Assistant Plant Manager. This position, will
                           report directly to the Chairman/General Manager of UEEPC/HPP. All staff employed at the plant
                           will be trained in general operation of the power plant; occupational health and safety; and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           contingency plans and emergency procedures.

                           The gas pipeline part shall be implemented by the Egyptian Natural Gas Company (GASCO), an
                           affiliate of the Egyptian Natural Gas Holding Company (EGAS), which owns a majority share.
                           The company has developed capacity at corporate level on Environment Management as part of its
                           long term involvement in the sector. The responsibility for environmental management falls under
                           a senior officer designated as Assistant Chairman for Safety and Environment, who supervises a
                           General Manager for Environmental Protection and five environmental specialists. The company
                           also has an Environmental Policy, which focus on continual improvement in EHS performance of
                           all activities of their business. The company will follow its corporate policy that requires regular
                           environmental audits and inspections to ensure that an Environmental Management System is
                           implemented according to set objectives and targets, as well as monthly and quarterly reporting on
                           environmental performance. As part of the project, GASCO will be responsible for
                           implementation and monitoring of environmental and social management plan, including
                           Resettlement Action Plan (as required) of the natural gas pipeline. The Environmental Department
                           of GASCO is staffed by 5 qualified environment specialists who are trained in environmental
                           auditing, environmental impact assessments for industrial establishments and environmental
                           legislation. These specialists will be responsible for ensuring effective implementation,
                           monitoring, reporting and consultation during each step of project designs, tenders evaluation,
                           phasing of implementation and construction of the project component.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             In order to ensure that the views and interests of all project stakeholders are taken into account,
                           public consultation was carried out according to the Egyptian guidelines, which require
                           coordination with other government agencies involved in the ESIA as well as obtaining views of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           local people and affected groups. The adopted methodology for the public consultation, which
                           conforms to Egyptian guidelines and World Bank requirements, comprises of:

                           (a) Consultation undertaken by ECG, EEHC and UEEPC with a variety of organizations to assist
                           them in the identification of environmental and social concerns and the overall development of the
                           project. The purpose of these consultations was primarily to provide information regarding the
                           project, identify published and non-published sources of relevant data and information relating to
                           the site and surrounding area, obtain views on the scope of the project, and open channels for
                           ongoing discussions.

                            (b)     Consultation during the ESIA Process: A scoping session for this ESIA undertaken by
                           ECG in collaboration with the EEHC and UEEPC, took place on Wednesday, 24 November 2010
                           during which a wide selection of personnel from different orientations contributed actively to its
                           activities. The key objectives of these consultations were to identify primary and secondary
                           stakeholders, ensure that they had received sufficient information about the project during earlier
                           consultation activities and to identify their immediate concerns.

                            (c)    Mini-meetings with Affected Stakeholders: Several mini-meetings were held with
                           different groups of affected stakeholders in order to take their viewpoints into consideration. Such
                           stakeholders included part-time fishermen along the Nile River at about 7-8 km downstream of the


                                                                     Page 10 of 13
                           proposed site, the Atfieh and El-Kureimat area representatives, Atfieh and other Associations for
                           Services, Local District Administration, General Authority for Fishery Development and three
                           active NGOs in the Helwan zone, Es-Saff town, and Es-Saff area. The objectives of these
Public Disclosure Copy




                           meetings were to: (i) inform interested groups and individuals about the proposed development, its
                           potential impacts, and measures which will be implemented to reduce adverse environmental and
                           social impacts. (ii) provide opportunities for timely feedback; (iii) clarify any misunderstandings
                           about the scope and impacts of the project and increase public confidence in the proposed
                           development; and (iv) contribute to an increased awareness and understanding of project plans and
                           activities.

                           A three-stage phase public consultations process was followed for the power plant to ensure that
                           all stakeholders and interested parties, have been fully informed of the proposed project, and to
                           give stakeholders the opportunity to voice their concerns. The first phase mentioned above,
                           focused on getting public inputs during the during scoping and preparation of this ESIA report,
                           including the organization of a Public Scoping Meeting on 24 November 2010, in the Helwan
                           Governorate. This was followed by continuous consultation including a series of mini-meetings
                           (see below) during the preparation of ESIA and the RPF. A final stage consultation was organized
                           on 16 March 2011, at the Kureimat Power Plant site, which was publicized through a press
                           advertisement in Al-Ahram Newspaper (on 7 March 2011) describing the project and inviting
                           interested parties to attend the public meeting and review the draft final ESIA Report. A Non
                           Technical Summary (in Arabic) was distributed along with an invitation letter prior to consultation
                           meeting. The ESIA was finally revised incorporating comments and suggestion received during
                           the consultation meeting. For Abu Hommos Nubaria pipeline a public consultation meeting was
                           held on Wednesday, May 25th, 2011 in the town of Damanhour. The meeting provided broad
                           support to the pipeline and the power project, including mitigation measures as outlined in the
                           ESIA report. A non-technical summary of the ESIA report was presented to a large group of
                           stakeholders, and questions and comments were received at the meeting were incorporated in the
                           revised ESIA. Finally, the draft ESIA Report and the Executive Summary, including ESMP and
                           the RPF were publicly disclosed locally and via the Bank Infoshop.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           For Abu Hommos Nubaria gas pipeline a public consultation meeting was held on Wednesday,
                           May 25th, 2011 in the town of Damanhour, and for Dahshour Atfeeh pipeline on Saturday, April
                           9, 2011 in Maymoun village, Beni Suef. The meetings provided broad support to the pipelines and
                           the power project, including mitigation measures as outlined in the ESIA report. Non-technical
                           summaries of the ESIA reports were presented to a large group of stakeholders, and questions and
                           comments were received at the meeting were incorporated to revise and disclose the ESIA reports.

                           The construction and implementation of this power plant triggers a World Bank Safeguards policy
                           on Projects on International Waterways (OP 7.50). Therefore, the Bank on October 13, 2011
                           notified the riparian states (Burundi, Democratic Republic of Congo, Ethiopia, Eritrea, Kenya,
                           Rwanda, Southern Sudan, Sudan, Tanzania, and Uganda) that the Government of Egypt is
                           currently preparing a power project in Helwan South and requested that their comments, if any, be
                           provided to the Bank by November 14, 2011. No comments were received during the notification.
                           Pursuant to the requirements of OP 7.50 and on the basis of the Bank team’s assessment that the
                           project activities will not cause appreciable harm to the other riparian states, the MNA regional
                           Vice President gave approval on February 3, 2012 to proceed with preparation of the project for
                           Bank financing.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements


                                                                    Page 11 of 13
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      17-Aug-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   17-Aug-2011
Public Disclosure Copy




                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      29-Aug-2011
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Egypt, Arab Republic of                                          20-Jul-2011
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      17-Aug-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   17-Aug-2011
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Egypt, Arab Republic of                                          20-Jul-2011
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                          Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?




                                                                    Page 12 of 13
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Waleed Saleh I. Alsuraih
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (RSA)                    Date: 15-Aug-2012
                            Coordinator:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Charles Joseph Cormier (SM)                  Date: 24-Apr-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 13 of 13
