                                                                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                            CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC661
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Apr-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                       Uganda                                   Project ID:                      P123204
                              Project Name:                  Water Management and Development Project (P123204)
                              Task Team Leader:              Rosemary Mukami Kariuki
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 20-Mar-2012                                   Estimated Board Date:            24-May-2012
                              Managing Unit:                 AFTWR                                    Lending Instrument:              Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                        General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (60%), Public administration- Water, sanitation and flood
                                                             protection (20%), Ge neral agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (10%), General energy sector (10%)
                              Theme:                         Water resource management (60%), Urban services and housing for the poor (40%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                       Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                         0.00
                                   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                             135.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                   135.00
                              Environmental Category:        B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              B. Project Objectives

                              The Project Development Objectives is to strengthen institutional capacity for sustainable Integrated Water Resource Management (IWRM)
                              planning, management and development, and to improve access and reliability of water services in priority urban centers. The project will
                              contribute to higher level goals of sustaining natural resources, improving service delivery and increasing economic productivity.

                              C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                              The project proposes to have the following components:

                              Component 1 – Strengthening Water Sector Institutions for effective IWRM and Development. This component aims to provide support for
                              implementing priority sector policy reforms and institutional modernization for both water resources management (WRM) and water supply and
                              sanitation (WSS). It will strengthen, harmonize or establish key institutions responsible for water resources management and service delivery;
                              provide targeted institutional strengthening at appropriate levels (e.g. WMZs, central); provide training and capacity development support; build an
                              enabling platform of institutional and governance arrangements, structures systems and business processes, and strengthen institutional
                              cooperation and integration between entities responsible for management of water resources with those responsible for management of land,
                              wetland and forest resources. As DANIDA is actively supporting MWE in policy-reforms, the project design will be closely coordinated with their
                              ongoing and future support. SMP).

                              Component 2 - Integrated Water Resources Management and Development in WMZs. This component aims to support (i) improvement of water
                              resources monitoring and information systems across the country, including functionality and coverage of the hydro-meteorological network, and
                              effective systems for information management, analysis, dissemination and use; (ii) identification of priority investments such as catchment
                              management, wetlands andforest restoration and management as related to water resources management, sustainable land management
                              measures, multipurpose storage reservoirs for flood management, micro hydropower generation, and other functions, and rainwater harvesting
                              based on participatory WMZ and catchment planning; (iii) preparation and implementation of select investments in key sectors. One WMZ will
                              likely be selected to implement priority investments, with the intention of scaling up in the future.

                              Component 3 - Investments in UWSS services and source protection. This component aims to support investments in priority urban water
                              supplies and protect future sources such as: (i) 6-10 priority water supply and sewerage systems in NWSC municipalities including Arua, Gulu,
                              Bushenyi/Ishaka, Mbale, Fort Portal and Kasese; (ii) 10-15 Local Government/ DWD investments in small town water supply and sanitation
                              systems (including limited sewerage and sludge management in central business districts) through public private partnerships (PPPs) and Output
                              Based Approaches (OBAs); and (iii) watershed and source restoration and protection through land, forest and wetland management measures for
                              selected existing and future water supply sources. This component will also implement site specific environmental and social mitigation measures
                              as will be identified both in the ESMF/EMPs and RPF/RAPs.

                              Component 4 - Project implementation, monitoring and reporting. This component will support implementing agencies (mainly MWE, DWRM,
                              DWD, NWSC, National Forestry Agency and Department of Forest Services) to effectively implement and manage the project. It will provide for
                              incremental operating costs, consultancies, office equipment and training/capacity building. Specific activities will include project coordination and
                           reporting, technical and administrative capacity development, monitoring and evaluation, management information systems, financial
                           management, procurement, and audits. Existing institutional structures (e.g., program teams and the Water Policy Committee) will be used to
                           enhance and mainstream project activities. In addition, the component will provide for independent third party monitoring of project performance, e.
                           g. through engagement of community and non-governmental organizations.

                            D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                           The project is expected to be implemented at national and sub-national levels all over Uganda. The country has diverse climate, environmental,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and social settings in its four Water Management Zones (WMZs). Most of the project physical investments in water resources management and
                           development would include the preparation and implementation of targeted investments in water-related sectors (including construction or
                           rehabilitation of dams, reforestation, re-vegetation of river banks, soil erosion control, other sustainable land management measures as well as
                           small civil works for office construction and rehabilitation). Water Supply and Sanitation investments would focus on priority water supply and
                           sewerage investments in NWSC towns including Arua, Gulu, Bushenyi/Ishaka and Mbale and investments in approximately 10 DWD town water
                           supply and sanitation systems (including limited sewerage and sludge management). The implementation of selected activities under the Kalagala
                           Offset Sustainable Management Plan would take place in Kalagala and primarily consist of reforestation, wetlands management, etc.

                            E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

                           The borrower has limited capacity for safeguards management, especially relating to Bank safeguard policies. The environmental and social
                           instruments developed during preparation will assess this capacity and propose appropriate measures to be included in the project. The project
                           will strengthen the knowledge base on environmental and social issues in all the four Water Management Zones in the country, and develop
                           analytical and structured stakeholder participation tools to improve the mainstreaming of environmental and social issues into water resources
                           planning as well as investment preparation. The project is supporting the Government's effort to introduce a new paradigm of catchment planning
                           that improves participatory water planning at all levels to better reflect the views of local communities.

                            F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

                           Martin Fodor (AFTEN)
                           Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (AFTCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

                            Safeguard Policies                              Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01             Yes                OP 4.01 is triggered as the project may have potential impacts on the
                                                                                             environment. The project will finance rehabilitation and/or expansion of urban
                                                                                             water supply and sanitation systems (component 2), as well updating of the
                                                                                             hydro-meteorological network and implementation of selected activities under
                                                                                             the Kalagala Offset Sustainable Management Plan (component 1). The project
                                                                                             may also finance physical investments in water resources management and
                                                                                             development that are identified through a catchment planning process
                                                                                             (component 2) and civil works, e.g. construction and/or rehabilitation of office
                                                                                             buildings (component 3). Compliance will be handled through an environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             and social management framework (ESMF).
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                     Yes               OP 4.04 is triggered due to the project location that may include sensitive
                                                                                             ecological areas of Uganda like the wetlands, Kalagala Offset,etc, even though
                                                                                             activities in these locations are to improve the sustainable management of the
                                                                                             offset. Compliance will be handled through the ESMF and site specific ESIAs.
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                              Yes               OP 4.36 is triggered due to potential project impacts on- and in management
                                                                                             of- forests. Some of the project's interventions will include implementation of
                                                                                             selected activities under the Kalagala Offset Sustainable Management Plan that
                                                                                             consists of afforestation and re-vegetation in the Kalagala area. Compliance will
                                                                                             be ensured through the ESMF and ESIAs.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09                         Yes               OP 4.09 is triggered as afforestation in the watershed will likely entail use of
                                                                                             pesticides for weed control. Compliance will be handled through a Pest
                                                                                             Management Plan that will be part of the EA.
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11          Yes               OP 4.11 is triggered due to potential impacts on PCR associated with the
                                                                                             project's civil works, such as water supply, sanitation and water storage
                                                                                             systems. Compliance will be handled through the ESMF and site specific ESIAs,
                                                                                             and by drawing on the rapid archaeological assessment done under the roads
                                                                                             sector.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                   No                OP 4.10 is not triggered as there are no known indigenous peoples in the
                                                                                             project area of influence.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12             Yes                OP 4.12 is triggered due to potential for land acquisition associated with
                                                                                             infrastructure development and limited access to natural resources based
                                                                                             livelihoods in protected areas. Compliance will be ensured through the RPF and
                                                                                             site specific RAPs.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                       Yes               OP 4.37 is triggered.
                                Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                          TBD                   OP 7.50 may or may not be triggered. This will be determined during
                                7.50                                                                                    preparation based on the type of water storage and significance of water
                                                                                                                        abstraction or waste water discharges associated with international water
                                                                                                                        bodies. The project encompasses international waters including the River Nile
                                                                                                                        and Lake Kyoga.
                                Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                              No                    OP 7.60 is not triggered as there are no known disputes over the project area
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        of Uganda.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS:
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
                                  should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                    The required safeguard instruments for the project are: (i) environmental and social management framework (ESMF) informed by a
                                    stocktaking environmental and social assessment synthesizing existing analytical and sector work including the Country Environmental
                                    Analysis; and (ii) resettlement policy framework (RPF); both laying out procedures for due diligence in site specific interventions of which to be
                                    determined during implementation, as well as (iii) site specific environmental and social impact assessments and resettlement action plans
                                    prepared based on application of ESMF and RPF once specific project sites are known. The ESMF and RPF are expected to be initiated
                                    around July 2011 and with draft final reports expected by December, 2011 and final reports completed and disclosed both in country and at
                                    the World Bank Infoshop by appraisal around Feb, 2012.

                         IV. APPROVALS
                                Task Team Leader:                                Name: Rosemary Mukami Kariuki
                                Approved By:
                                Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                 Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                     Date: 11-Apr-2012
                                Sector Manager:                                  Name: Jonathan S. Kamkwalala (SM)                                                                     Date: 11-Apr-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
