                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC240

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Jun-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Brazil                           Project ID:      P128968
                            Project Name:      Marine Protected Areas Project (P128968)
                            Task Team          Adriana Moreira
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          03-Dec-2012                      Estimated        28-Mar-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     LCSEN                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Focal Area:        Biodiversity

                            Sector:            General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%)
                            Theme:             Biodiversity (60%), Other environment and natural resources management
                                               (40%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                            18.20
                              Financing Gap                                                                98.40
                              Total                                                                        18.20
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                             B. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                           11. The project#s global environmental objective (GEO) is to contribute to the conservation of trans-
                           boundary ocean life, including migrating species, through the protection of important areas where
                           these species feed, rest and/or breed along the Brazillian Coast.

                           12. The project#s development objective (PDO) is to support the creation and implementation of a
                           representative and effective marine and coastal protected areas (MCPAs) system in Brazil to reduce
                           the loss of coastal and marine biodiversity. Protected ecosystems will maintain their capacity to
                           produce food, maintain good water quality, and increase their capacity to recover from disturbances,
                         bringing far-reaching social and economic benefits.

                         13. The specific objectives of the proposed project are to:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         #       Increase the area under protection to at least 5% of the total Brazilian marine area;
                         #       Implement and consolidate the already existing marine and coastal protected areas; and
                         #       Design and test financial mechanisms to ensure the long-term sustainability of the MCPA
                         system.
                         C. Project Description
                         The marine and coastal area in Brazil covers 3.5 million km2, an area equivalent to 41 percent of the
                         Brazilian terrestrial territory (8.5 million km2) and comparable in size to the Brazilian Amazon (4.1
                         million km2). Despite its vastness, only 1.57% of this area is currently officially protected.

                         Brazil has one of the most extensive coastlines in the world, measuring over 9,000 km including bays
                         and promontories. Along this coastline there is an immense variety of environments and wildlife. The
                         Brazilian marine and coastal zones shelter the greatest continuous stretch of mangrove ecosystems,
                         which are important as nursery sites and biological filters and include the only coral reefs in the
                         South Atlantic, ecosystems with high biodiversity and ecological relevance. They also shelter many
                         endemic species and distinct ecosystems, such as dune fields, lagoon complexes, islands, restingas
                         (sandy-coastal plain vegetation), flood plains, estuaries, etc. Also, five out of seven marine turtle
                         species found around the world nest along the Brazilian coast and many migratory birds and
                         mammals come to this region for rest stops, feeding and reproduction. Furthermore, 15 seabird
                         species use Brazilian oceanic islands as nesting sites. Unfortunately, these environments have been
                         subjected to intense human pressure.

                         In Brazil, 43 million inhabitants live on the coastal zone, which concentrates 18% of the national
                         population and 16 of the 28 larger metropolitan regions (MMA, 2008). Economic activities in coastal
                         areas account for roughly 70% of the Brazilian GDP (MMA, 2007). Coastal zones can be considered
Public Disclosure Copy




                         one of the most environmentally threatened regions in the country and are the main geographic area
                         for economic growth for many industries, including the oil and gas industry which engages in
                         significant off-shore drilling. Additionally, the waters off the Brazilian coast have traditionally been
                         rich with fisheries, but significant fish populations have been overexploited and in some cases have
                         become extinct. The creation of protected areas is considered an important measure to protect and
                         maintain the productivity of fish stocks.

                         Marine and coastal protected areas (MCPAs) include protected areas which are adjacent to the ocean,
                         but which may or may not include intertidal or subtidal areas. According to the CBD these are areas
                         inserted in or adjacent to the marine environment, including its water, flora, fauna and historical and
                         cultural features that have been preserved by law or other effective means, so that the biodiversity
                         and marine life therein is under a greater level of protection than the adjacent areas. Both the CBD
                         and IUCN (International Union for the Conservation of Nature) definitions consider that these areas
                         should be established with the a priori objective of conservation, although they may have additional
                         or consequential objectives such as improved quality of life, education, etc. Therefore, the definition
                         of MCPAs for this project includes: protected areas, governed by the SNUC act; permanent
                         preservation areas, set forth in the Forestry Code; no-take zones, established under the National
                         Strategic Plan for Protected Areas (PNAP, according to Decree 5758/2006), where fishing is
                         completely prohibited; and other fishing management instruments such as limited access rights and
                         establishment of refugia to protect breeding or nursery areas which provide for the sustainable use of
                         coastal and marine areas in a permanent or seasonal manner.

                         Consistent with the Ecosystem-Based Management principles, sites will be selected where
Public Disclosure Copy




                         compatibility and integration with other coastal activities and their management is feasible or where
                         supporting measures such as fish access limits can be effectively implemented. Potential to offset
                         climate change and generate revenues through the carbon market (Blue Carbon), establishment of
                         community or individual access privileges (such as fish quotas) within MCPA and surrounding areas,
                         or payment for ecosystem services mechanisms could also be considered. This project will help
                         mainstream biodiversity concerns in coastal zone planning, in particular for the fishing, tourism and
                         petro-chemical industries. T he partnership with Petrobras is especially encouraging in this regard.

                         The specific areas to be created under this project will be more precisely defined during project
                         preparation. Initial exercises have been carried out by the National Wetlands Committee (CNZU) to
                         define additional criteria and refine the priority classification of coastal and marine areas listed
                         among the Priority Areas for the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Brazilian Biodiversity. Further
                         studies and analysis will be carried out, and the additional specialized and categorized information
                         gathered will contribute to the planning and designing of the network.

                         The ecological criteria for the MCPA network creation proposed for this project will include the
                         entire range of biodiversity present within the bio-geographical region and also consider the
                         principles of representativeness, inter-connectivity, replicability, feasibility, and precaution. In
                         addition, specific studies on the existence of conflicts, level of available information about
                         biodiversity, and opportunities for each area may be necessary, as well as the identification of
                         relevant actors, and the status of the existing legal instruments affecting the area (such as closed
                         fishing seasons for species, determination of minimum sizes for capture, etc.).

                         This project will be funded by a $US 18.2 million GEF grant and $US 98.4 million in co-financing.
                         The partnership among the GEF, the Government of Brazil, Petrobras and potentially other private
                         sector players is an innovative and exciting approach to coastal zone management and mainstreaming
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of biodiversity in Brazil. The proposed project design includes four components:

                         Component 1 - Creation and Implementation of Marine and Coastal Protected Areas: Protected areas
                         creation activities under this component will focus mainly on marine areas, as the marine zone has
                         the greatest deficit of protection among all Brazilian biomes. This component will also support the
                         implementation of different categories of new and existing MCPAs in the Brazilian marine and
                         coastal zones, establishing and strengthening an effective MCPA system. These areas will be divided
                         between strict protection and sustainable use MCPAs . The selection of new protected areas to be
                         created will be based on the #Priority Areas for the Conservation, Sustainable Use and Benefit
                         Sharing of Brazilian Biodiversity# (SBF/MMA, official list revised in 2007), which list priority areas
                         in all Brazilian biomes, including the coastal and marine zones. An enormous amount of analytical
                         work at the regional and biome-level is available in Brazil, undertaken over the past 15 years by
                         research and government agencies, universities and NGOs. This project will use this regional and
                         macro-level information - not only biodiversity data but socio-economic information as well - and
                         refine it at the local level to define PA creation and implementation actions to be supported by the
                         project, which could include among others the following: decree for protected area creation,
                         demarcation and installation of physical signs indicating the area to be protected, the provision of
                         basic equipment for enforcement, and staffing in protected areas.

                         The procedures for establishing protected areas are determined by the National System of Protected
                         Areas (SNUC- federal law No. 9.985, of June 18, 2000, and Decree No. 4.340, of August 22, 2002).
                         The SNUC Law provides a sound legal basis for the establishment and consolidation of protected
                         areas. This project will contribute to improve institutional capacity for implementing this legislation
Public Disclosure Copy




                         for coastal and marine area s. Public consultations will be carried out for each new protected area to
                         be created, with studies on the environment, land rights (in the case of coastal PAs), and
                         socioeconomic indicators informing the final decisions about the location of new protected areas.
                         Additionally, the implementing agencies will undertake public consultations and circulation of the
                         draft decrees for protected area creation. The partnership with Petrobras is especially important here
                         in that the recommendations made regarding which coastal areas are particularly vulnerable or have
                         high biodiversity value will help inform Petrobras# investment decisions.
                         25. Component 2 - Design of financial mechanisms to support th e MCPAs system: The main
                         activities under this component will be an assessment of the financing needs of coastal and marine
                         protected areas and the identification of potential funding sources. The successful experience of the
                         GEF-supported Amazon Region Protected Areas project will be considered, but alternatives other
                         than an endowment fund will also be explored to complement existing governmental mechanisms
                         aiming at ensuring the necessary financial sustainability of the protected areas system. As part of
                         this work, studies on potential returns of income generating activities will be carried out and financial
                         sustainability plans will be generated, taking into account different costs for different types of
                         protected areas. GEF resources will specifically finance studies for potential revenue generating
                         mechanisms for protected areas focusing especially on climate change related mechanisms (Blue
                         Carbon) for payment for environmental services, the initial testing of the most promising options
                         identified, and support to the Brazilian Government in the development of fundraising strategies.

                         Component 3 - Monitoring and Evaluation - Project monitoring and evaluation will be carried out in
                         three broad areas: (i) financial monitoring, (ii) monitoring of implementation and management of the
                         protected areas, and (iii) environmental/biodiversity monitoring. Financial monitoring will be carried
                         out by FUNBIO, who is responsible for approving and tracking the distribution of funds. The
                         monitoring of project progress in the protected areas will also be carried out by FUNBIO in close
                         coordination with the Project Coordination Unit (UCP) and the Ministry of Environment. The UCP
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will be responsible for overall project management, and at the strategic level, for evaluating and
                         updating, as needed, project objectives and targets in the project results matrix; and at the
                         management level, to further develop and implement the GEF Management Effectiveness Tracking
                         Tool for project management, and to monitor performance against project goals, supervising
                         FUNBIO. MMA and ICMBio will be responsible for the institutional and legal actions for PA
                         creation, and for the implementation of biodiversity and environmental monitoring. Partnerships with
                         research institutions will be critical for this latter activity, given the lack of capacity within these
                         institutions.

                         Component 4 - Project Coordination and Management: Coordination among and between the two
                         investment components and among the various actors involved in all aspects of project
                         implementation will require an efficient and well-trained coordination unit. Funds under this
                         component will be used for the improved operation of the Project Coordination Unit (UCP) within
                         the Ministry of Environment (MMA) and the Project Implementation Unit at FUNBIO. Also
                         included in this component is the strengthening and coordination of the project#s Technical
                         Commission, which will be responsible for defining action strategies and providing technical
                         guidance, identifying and prioritizing relevant actors, and approving operative plans. It will be
                         composed of representatives from governmental, academic and non-governmental sectors.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the              safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The area for the proposed project will encompass the entire Brazilian Coastal and Marine Area,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           which comprise the most deficient biome in terms of protected areas. Within the target area, the
                           Marine zone is even less protected that the coastal zone. Therefore, project actions related to the
                           creation of new protected areas will be mainly directed towards the marine zone, while both new and
                           existing marine and coastal protected areas will be targeted by PA implementation actions and for the
                           establishment and management of the Marine and Coastal Protected Area System.

                           The project intends to positively affect the following types of ecosystem, through enhanced
                           protection: marine environments, small coastal and oceanic islands, coral reefs, beaches, estuaries,
                           restingas, mangrove systems, coastal lagoons, and possibly coastal Atlantic Forest.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Grant Recipient (federal government), through the Ministry o f Environment (MMA), has
                           extensive experience in implementing Bank financed projects and Bank safeguard policies. Recently,
                           MMA and ICMBio have been building capacity to manage MPAs but this has been done at a much
                           lower pace when compared to the land PAs. MMA and ICMBio would carry out project activities at
                           the strategic level, evaluating and updating, as needed, project objectives and targets in the project
                           results matrix; and at the management level, to further develop and implement the GEF Management
                           Effectiveness Tracking Tool to project management, and monitor performance against project goals.
                           Both will also be responsible for the implementation of biodiversity and environmental monitoring.
                           Given the lack of capacity within these institutions related to MPAs monitoring, partnerships with
                           research institutions will be critical. In addition, the project will work, through close supervision and
                           timely actions, to improve the implementation capacity that already exists in both institutions and to
                           assess what kind of additional support might be needed to assure good implementation of Bank
                           safeguards policies.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa (LCSSO)
                           Agnes Velloso (LCSEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              Given the essentially environmental
                           BP 4.01                                               conservation characteristic of the project, a
                                                                                 category B is proposed. The project is expected
                                                                                 to have a significantly positive environmental
                                                                                 outcome as it will improve the conservation and
                                                                                 management of ecologically important areas
                                                                                 through the creation and implementation of
                                                                                 marine and coastal protected areas, and the
                                                                                 establishment of the Marine and Coastal
                                                                                 Protected Areas (MCPA) System, to be
                                                                                 comprised of new and existing PAs. The project
                                                                                 may support small-scale investments in the
                                                                                 protected areas to be created or existing PAs
                                                             that will integrate the MCPA system, such as
                                                             demarcation, possibly interpretative centers,
                                                             trails, preparation of management plans, etc.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             Possible negative impacts from these small-
                                                             scale investments are expected to be small,
                                                             localized and reversible. As such, project
                                                             preparation will include the preparation of an
                                                             Environmental and Social Management
                                                             Framework by the Grant Recipient (to be
                                                             reviewed by the Bank) to assess potential
                                                             impacts and propose a framework for
                                                             preventing or mitigating them. The framework
                                                             will also be integrated into the operating rules of
                                                             the financing mechanisms envisaged as part of
                                                             component 2. Furthermore, principles of
                                                             OP4.01 regarding proper consultation will be
                                                             applied as part of project financed studies for
                                                             the creation of new protected areas envisaged as
                                                             part of component 1.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   This policy is triggered as the project is
                                                             expected to have positive impacts on the quality
                                                             of critical natural habitats. The Environmental
                                                             and Social Management Framework will ensure
                                                             the policy is addressed appropriately by
                                                             identifying the criteria for prioritizing the most
                                                             biologically valuable and/or threatened areas to
                                                             be protected and through the application of a
                                                             precautionary approach to natural resource
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             management in sustainable use protected areas,
                                                             among other measures and guidance.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes   This safeguard policy is triggered as project
                                                             actions for strengthening protected areas may
                                                             include existing coastal protected areas that can
                                                             contain mangroves or portions of Atlantic
                                                             Forest. All impacts on forest systems are
                                                             expected to be positive. The Environmental and
                                                             Social Management Framework will ensure the
                                                             policy is addressed appropriately through the
                                                             application of a precautionary approach to the
                                                             management of non-timber resources in
                                                             mangrove and Atlantic Forest in sustainable use
                                                             protected areas, and by complying with strict
                                                             protection guidance when recommended by the
                                                             existing studies on Priority Areas for
                                                             Conservation. The project will not involve the
                                                             conversion or degradation of forested areas.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    As the project will not involve agricultural
                                                                 activities, seedlings production, reforestation, or
                                                                 any other activity that may involve the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 management of pests that affect plant or public
                                                                 health, OP 4.09 is not triggered.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   The areas to be supported under the project are
                         BP 4.11                                 as yet unknown. However, the potential project
                                                                 protected areas may include historical sites and/
                                                                 or archeological findings. As such, impacts and
                                                                 procedures for "chance findings" from specific
                                                                 investments under Component 1 (if applicable)
                                                                 will be assessed within the Environmental
                                                                 Assessment, and the resulting Environmental
                                                                 and Social Management Framework will
                                                                 include relevant provisions to mitigate any
                                                                 potentially adverse impacts. Such provisions
                                                                 will include compliance with the guidelines
                                                                 defined by the National Institute for Historical
                                                                 and Cultural Heritage (IPHAN) regarding
                                                                 historical sites and/or archaeological findings.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   During Project preparation it was determined
                                                                 that Indigenous peoples with the four
                                                                 characteristics called for in OP 4.10 are present
                                                                 within one of the Protected Areas to be
                                                                 supported by the Project. A Social Assessment
                                                                 and Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) will be
                                                                 prepared, consulted and disclosed, per the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 requirements of OP 4.10 prior to appraisal.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   The creation and consolidation of protected
                         4.12                                    areas could potentially lead to restrictions in
                                                                 access leading to impacts on peoples livelihoods
                                                                 A Process Framework will be prepared,
                                                                 consulted and disclosed prior to appraisal to
                                                                 ensure that affected people and communities
                                                                 have an opportunity to participate in the
                                                                 definition and design of alternative livelihood
                                                                 activities or other compensation/mitigation
                                                                 measures.

                                                                 The project will not require the involuntary
                                                                 taking of land, and given this, a Resettlement
                                                                 Policy Framework or Resettlement Action Plans
                                                                 are not needed.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No    No dams exist in the project area and none of
                                                                 the project activities will involve dam works or
                                                                 operation. Therefore, OP 4.37 is not triggered.
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            No project activities will occur in international
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            waters, or in areas which border Uruguay or the
                                                                                                                                 French Guiana. Therefore, OP 7.50 is not
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 triggered.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             There are no disputed areas within the project
                                 7.60                                                                                            target area (Brazilian coastal zone and marine
                                                                                                                                 zone under Brazilian jurisdiction). Therefore,
                                                                                                                                 OP 7.60 is not triggered.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Jun-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Environmental assessment and social framework studies are expected to be disclosed by June 2012
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Adriana Moreira

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                                                                                                Date: 04-Jun-2012
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Karin Erika Kemper (SM)                                                                                              Date: 08-Feb-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
