                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC4521

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Jul-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 25-Jul-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Malawi                           Project ID:      P125473
                            Project Name:       Shire Valley Irrigation Project (P125473)
                            Task Team           Pieter Waalewijn
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           01-Oct-2015                      Estimated        15-Dec-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      AFTA3                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Irrigation and drainage (70%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (15%),
                                                Agricultural extension and research (15%)
                            Theme(s):           Water resource management (40%), Infrastructure services for private sector
                                                development (20%), Rural services and infrastructure (20 %), Land
                                                administration and management (15%), Natural disaster management (5%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:    340.00                      Total Bank Financing:        100.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                                 Financing Gap:               240.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                              0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                   100.00
                              Total                                                                         100.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           To sustainably increase agricultural productivity and incomes for targeted households in the districts
                           of Chikwawa and Nsanje in the Shire Valley by establishing market-linked smallholder farming
                           ventures and professionally operated irrigation services.
                           C. Project Description
                         The Shire Valley Irrigation Project (SVIP) would be located in the south of Malawi on the right bank
                         of the Shire River. The population of the Shire Valley, according to the 2010/11 census, is
                         approximately 711,000. Depending on the final footprint, approximately 55,000 households live in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the project area. The area contains the highest incidence (75 percent) of extreme poverty in Malawi.
                         Droughts and floods pose a persistent threat of famine. Eighty-eight percent of the project area is
                         held under customary tenure and administered by traditional authorities. Approximately 10 percent is
                         under private lease or freehold and the remainder is public land. The most important developments in
                         the area are the estates of Illovo and its outgrower schemes. Illovo produces cane on a total of 13,805
                         ha and also operates the only sugar factory in the area.

                         The Government requested support from both the WB and the AfDB to provide assistance for the
                         implementation of the SVIP. The WB and AfDB responded to this request with a joint AfDB/World
                         Bank/IFC project identification mission in January 2011. The mission established several key
                         principles to guide the design and implementation, including that: the project would focus on
                         commercial production, including smallholders in high value chains; professional management and
                         PPPs would be pursued; land and water management need careful and transparent attention;
                         communities should be fully engaged in a participatory process; and the Government would
                         competitively recruit a full time team for the preparation of the project. The GoM responded
                         favorably to these principles in January 2012. The WB and AfDB further supported the project
                         preparation with: a) a Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility (PPIAF) funded/WB executed
                         study on the prefeasibility options for Public Private Partnerships; b) African Water Facility (AWF)
                         financed prefeasibility studies, which produced a Prefeasibility Report on the proposed project and
                         support to GoM in the development of detailed ToRs for undertaking a comprehensive set of
                         feasibility level studies; and c) a study on water availability assessment for the scheme was also
                         completed recently considering the impacts of the bulk irrigation water upstream of the last
                         hydropower plant (Kapichira) in the cascade. The study shows that there is a minor trade-off with
                         energy production in average and dry years once the scheme is fully established and the proposed
                         expansion of the hydropower station is on-line.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Following a holistic growth-pole approach that combines infrastructure development with, from the
                         very beginning, delivery of technical, institutional and marketing support services, the project will
                         include three intertwined components:

                         Component 1 - Irrigation Development and Management

                         This component will finance the phased development of up to 42,500 ha of irrigation and drainage
                         with associated irrigation services in the Lower Shire Valley as a necessary precondition for
                         agricultural development. The pre-feasibility study has recommended two phases:

                         Phase I - covering about 21,000 ha currently irrigated with water directly pumped from the Shire
                         river consisting of about a) 10,750 ha already developed and directly cultivated with Sugar cane
                         under commercial production by Illovo plus b) about 750 ha developed by out-growers operationally
                         and commercially linked with Illovo; and c) another 9,300 ha of rainfed agricultural lands proposed
                         to be developed for irrigated agriculture;

                         Phase II – covering about another 21,000 ha of which: a) about 2,850 ha have already been
                         developed by Illovo for irrigated sugar cane with pumped water from Shire river; and b) the
                         remaining area of about 18, 150 ha of currently rainfed agricultural lands to developed for irrigated
                         agriculture.

                         The project would finance the feasibility level studies and engineering designs for both the Phase I
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and Phase II and the construction of the physical bulk water conveyance and distribution system and
                         the tertiary irrigation system and associated drainage infrastructure and facilities of the first phase of
                         the Project. The currently irrigated areas would be converted to a gravity water supply, thus saving
                         significant pumping costs (the Nchalo estate is currently the largest electricity consumer in the
                         country because of its pumped irrigation system). The new bulk water supply system would be
                         governed by a membership-based apex organization of water users’ associations with strong
                         representation from the Government in an unprecedented institutional set-up in the country, of which
                         the form, nature and legal and operational modalities will have to be further defined during project
                         preparation. The project will also include provisions for ensuring capacity is maintained beyond the
                         project and that clear contracting and operating arrangements are in plac e that reflect the farmers’ as
                         well as the public interests. The scheme would be operated and maintained by a private partner in a
                         PPP arrangement, either as a concession, a lease or as a management contract, depending on the
                         partner’s interest in project financing, as well as further assessment of the ‘willingness to pay’ and
                         ‘ability to pay’ the water tariffs.

                         Component 2 – Smallholder-based Agricultural Modernization and Commercialization

                         Agricultural development would be based on promoting development of productive and competitive
                         ventures between agribusiness and producer's organizations and through the provision of demand-
                         driven agricultural services as extension, applied research, mechanization, training, input/output
                         marketing, value adding and storage, etc. These services could be provided through a range of
                         approaches including promoting service delivery within farmer organizations, contracting out to
                         services providers, organizing joint services between private agribusiness investors and farmer
                         groups, and PPPs in agriculture service delivery. Smallholder farmers would be assisted to organize
                         themselves, through a participatory planning and development process, into consolidated blocks of
                         irrigable land. Commodity-based producer organizations will be organized in partnerships with
Public Disclosure Copy




                         profitable value chains that also provide commodity specific support services – on similar lines to the
                         current sugar outgrower schemes that have developed partnerships with Illovo. Initial scoping
                         showed private sector interest in irrigated agriculture in the lower Shire, as it is relatively close to
                         transport links and markets, and has very favorable agro-ecological circumstances.

                         Long term presence of Illovo with their knowledge, experience and interactions with the local
                         farming community is seen as an opportunity for the project: as both a producer and processor, the
                         company has ventured into sustainable ventures with smallholder growers and would be strongly
                         committed to the success of the infrastructure development as well as to smallholder outgrowers on
                         whom they would rely for throughput for their factory. In addition, other value chains will be
                         actively explored and investors attracted to develop profitable and viable agriculture production
                         systems and to promote a modernized smallholder-based farming system.

                         Component 3 – Investment climate support and coordination

                         This component would finance activities related to the coordination and actual implementation of the
                         activities in the Shire Valley as well as activities supporting the investment climate in which the
                         scheme will operate. This includes both costs for project management and the transition from project
                         based support to a sustainable institutional set-up with a contracting authority for the scheme; as well
                         as sector and cross-sector coordination with the agriculture, water, industry, trade, environment
                         sector plans and frameworks, and facilitate interministerial collaboration on tackling implementation
                         challenges.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis (if known)
                         The project area encompasses portions of the lower Shire River Valley in the Chikwawa and Nsanje
                         Districts of southern Malawi. The project’s civil works would extend from north to south, beginning
                         with the irrigation water intake just upstream of the existing Kapichira Dam on the Shire River and
                         continuing south to the cultivation areas on the right bank of the Shire River. The project’s area of
                         influence includes two important protected areas, Majete Wildlife Reserve and Lengwe National
                         Park; portions of both would likely be crossed by the main irrigation canal. The project’s net
                         irrigable area (both Phases I and II) would encompass up to 42,500 hectares (ha), of which some
                         12,000 ha are already under irrigation (mostly sugar cane) and the balance (roughly 30,000 ha) is
                         currently under a combination of rain-fed crops, fallow, and natural or modified woodland and
                         savanna vegetation (none within existing or proposed protected areas).

                         As per the last Integrated Household Survey (2010) the population of Chikwawa is 461,705 and that
                         of Nsanje 250,159 people. Nsanje District has the highest incidence (76 percent) of extreme poverty
                         of all 28 districts in Malawi, followed closely by Chikwawa (65.8 percent). The predominantly
                         subsistence smallholder farming system relies heavily on rainfall and is vulnerable to unreliable
                         weather. Like elsewhere in the country, the vast majority of the rural population (90 percent)
                         consists of smallholder farmers on, cultivating small and fragmented pieces of land held under
                         customary land tenure. Despite the size of the rural population, settlement in the Valley is scattered.
                         Small villages are generally concentrated on higher grounds along the river bank or beside the roads.
                         Housing conditions are poor. Maize is the staple food in the area, but sorghum and milet are also
                         important. Yields and cropped areas are often insufficient to meet household requirements. Droughts
                         and floods pose a persisten threat of famine. The total area of the two districts is approximately 6,700
                         km2, the large majority of which is under customary tenure. The Shire Valley is the most important
                         cotton production area in the country, and it is home to sugar estates and outgrowers, which are
Public Disclosure Copy




                         characterized by high input-high outcome agriculture, and Illovo is the largest employer in the
                         Valley.

                         While this proposed project would only support the construction of Phase I, the SVIP’s
                         environmental and social safeguards analysis will encompass both phases; this is because the
                         completion of Phase I would make the development of Phase II very likely and will be designed to
                         accommodate this second phase (owing to economies of scale).
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The two main ministries that would be responsible for project implementation are (i) Ministry of
                         Agriculture and Food Security (MoAFS) and (ii) Ministry of Water Development and Irrigation
                         (MoWDI). Other Government agencies that would have specific roles in project implementation
                         include the Ministry of Lands and Housing (responsible for surveys, land registration and titling and
                         resettlement/compensation within the irrigation areas); Environmental Affairs Department (EAD,
                         responsible for environmental reviews and approvals); Department of Antiquities (DoA, responsible
                         for cultural heritage) and National Parks and Wildlife (responsible for the Majete and Lengwe
                         protected areas). All of these entities have recent experience with the Bank’s Safeguard Policies,
                         based on other projects currently under implementation, including the Irrigation, Rural Livelihoods
                         and Agricultural Development Project (IRLADP), Agriculture Sector Wide Approach – Support
                         Project (ASWAp-SP), Shire River Basin Management Project (SRBMP), National Water
                           Development Program (NWDP), and the GEF-funded Nyika and Nkhotakota protected areas
                           projects. In particular, staff in MoAFS and MoWDI have been exposed to several training sessions
                           on Bank Safeguard Policies. EAD has also undertaken harmonized safeguards training at the national
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and district levels, emphasizing Government requirements as well as the Bank policies.

                           Nonetheless, the SVIP will be a complex and challenging project for Government to address in terms
                           of environmental and social safeguards. With respect to surface area irrigated, SVIP (at full
                           development) would be about 50 times the size of the largest existing public irrigation project in
                           Malawi (Bwanje Valley Irrigation Scheme). Accordingly, the project’s Environmental and Social
                           Management Plan (ESMP) would specify additional training and other activities to strengthen
                           Government’s capacity to address environmental and social safeguards issues in large-scale irrigation
                           projects. The ESMP would also outline a robust system for environmental supervision of civil works
                           construction, to help overcome any existing gaps in Government’s environmental regulatory
                           capacity.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           George Campos Ledec (AFTN3)
                           Yasmin Tayyab (AFTCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             The project involves a number of interventions
                           BP 4.01                                             and investments that are range from large scale
                                                                               infrastructure support to agricultural
                                                                               intensification and associated services. The
                                                                               potential footprint of the project is generally
                                                                               well known, and a number of impacts can be
                                                                               predicted already. The complexity of this multi-
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               sector operation will require a number of
                                                                               safeguard tools to properly minimize and
                                                                               mitigate potentially adverse environmental and
                                                                               social impacts generated by specific project
                                                                               investments. This Category A project will
                                                                               involve the preparation of an independent
                                                                               Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
                                                                               (ESIA), including an Environmental and Social
                                                                               Management Plan (ESMP). ESIA preparation
                                                                               will include extensive stakeholder consultations,
                                                                               including on the ESIA terms of reference and
                                                                               the draft ESIA report itself. The ESMP will
                                                                               include Environmental Rules for Contractors
                                                                               (ERCs) that cover (i) site-specific Technical
                                                                               Specifications; (ii) Rules of Conduct for all
                                                                               construction personnel; (iii) special precautions
                                                                               for any construction work within the Majete and
                                                                               Lengwe protected areas; and (iv) transparent
                                                                               penalties for non-compliance. The ESIA will
                                                             indicate how the project would comply with all
                                                             applicable rules and guidelines, including (i) all
                                                             triggered World Bank Safeguard Policies; (ii)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             relevant World Bank Group Environmental,
                                                             Health and Safety Guidelines; (iii) World Bank
                                                             Africa Region’s Interim Guidelines for
                                                             Safeguards Application in Agricultural Water
                                                             Management Projects; (iv) IFC’s Performance
                                                             Standards (relevant for public-private
                                                             partnership [PPP] implementation
                                                             arrangements); (v) African Development Bank’s
                                                             environmental and social standards; and (vi) the
                                                             Malawi EAD’s Guidelines for Environmental
                                                             Impact Assessment and Guidelines for
                                                             Environmental Management System and
                                                             Environmental Auditing for Irrigation and
                                                             Drainage Operations.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   To help ensure compliance with OP 4.04 (Para.
                                                             4), the ESIA will need to demonstrate how the
                                                             SVIP could be built without causing significant
                                                             degradation of Majete Wildlife Reserve or
                                                             Lengwe National Park. The project’s planned
                                                             footprint within Majete has already been greatly
                                                             reduced by locating the irrigation canal intake at
                                                             Kapichira Dam (rather than Hamilton Rapids,
                                                             which would have cut off a large part of the
                                                             park from the Shire River). In Lengwe, the
                                                             proposed canal alignment would cut through the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             Park for about 10 km. The ESIA will examine
                                                             options--including modified canal design,
                                                             developing additional wildlife watering areas,
                                                             and support for improved Park protection and
                                                             management--for minimizing adverse impacts
                                                             and ideally producing a net gain from a
                                                             conservation standpoint . Since Lengwe suffers
                                                             from chronic water shortages (being cut off
                                                             from the Shire River by existing sugar estates),
                                                             improving water availability for the local
                                                             wildlife through SVIP might prove to be
                                                             environmentally beneficial. Any SVIP support
                                                             to Lengwe National Park would be additional
                                                             and complementary to the support expected
                                                             under the ongoing SRBMP. Within the
                                                             irrigation command area, the project would
                                                             support “strategic habitat retention” (as per OP
                                                             4.04, Para. 5) of some remaining areas of
                                                             natural vegetation in multi-purpose Reserve
                                                                 Areas. The ESIA would also carefully assess the
                                                                 expected impacts of abstracting 30-50 m3/s of
                                                                 irrigation water on the Elephant Marsh, a large
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 wetland along the lower Shire River which
                                                                 harbors impressive biodiversity, as well as
                                                                 providing fishing and other livelihoods for
                                                                 thousands of local residents. The ESMP would
                                                                 recommend feasible mitigation measures to help
                                                                 maintain and enhance the Marsh, in
                                                                 coordination with the measures planned under
                                                                 the SRBMP.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes   Construction of the main irrigation canal would
                                                                 involve clearing a right-of-way through native
                                                                 woodlands within the Lengwe National Park
                                                                 and a small portion of the Majete Wildlife
                                                                 Reserve. However, since SVIP is not a forestry
                                                                 project, OP 4.36 imposes no additional
                                                                 requirements beyond those of OP 4.04.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes   The project will include a Pest Management
                                                                 Plan (PMP) that will cover (i) promotion of
                                                                 Integrated Pest Management (for irrigated
                                                                 crops) and Integrated Vector Management (for
                                                                 malaria, schistosomiasis, etc.); (ii) safe
                                                                 handling, storage, transport, and disposal of
                                                                 pesticides, including technical assistance (TA)
                                                                 to out-grower farmers; and (iii) criteria and
                                                                 procedures for safer pesticide selection. The
                                                                 PMP will be based on the harmonized PMP set
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 up in Malawi for projects in the agricultural
                                                                 sector, and set up as a “living document”, with
                                                                 procedures for periodic revision, as the crop mix
                                                                 changes over time and new pest issues might
                                                                 emerge.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   The proposed scheme is located in an area of
                         BP 4.11                                 known historic habitation and trade, and has
                                                                 landscape elements of cultural value. During
                                                                 ESIA preparation and (as needed) in the early
                                                                 stages of SVIP implementation, a systematic
                                                                 survey will be carried out by qualified
                                                                 professionals of the main canal right-of-way and
                                                                 other planned civil works sites, to check for
                                                                 archaeological relics, fossils, human graves,
                                                                 shrines, sacred trees or groves, and other
                                                                 physical cultural resources (PCR). Items of
                                                                 cultural interest will be systematically recorded
                                                                 and salvaged as appropriate. The specific
                                                                 locations of some civil works might need to be
                                                                adjusted to minimize conflicts with PCR. The
                                                                ERCs will specify Chance Finds Procedures, in
                                                                case further PCR are discovered during project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                construction.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    No    There are no Indigenous Peoples (as defined in
                                                                OP/BP 4.10) in the project area.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes   Within the future SVIP irrigation area, some
                         4.12                                   people will lose their houses or (more
                                                                commonly) rain-fed croplands and grazing lands
                                                                to make room for project civil works, including
                                                                canals, roads and other structures. The
                                                                Resettlement instrument will determine number
                                                                of impacted people, and assets and develop
                                                                appropriate compensation for loss of assets
                                                                (preferably land-for-land).
                                                                In addition, there will be need for land
                                                                redistribution and consolidation to enable the
                                                                shift to irrigated agriculture (re-alignment with
                                                                canals, accommodating PAPs affected by
                                                                infrastructure development, receiving irrigated
                                                                land-for-land compensation, entrance of new
                                                                agribusiness ventures within the area, etc.).
                                                                These impacts are more indirect than direct
                                                                resettlement and are linked to increased risk of
                                                                indebtedness, new rules of use, as well as a
                                                                physical shift of plot boundaries. Even though
                                                                much of this may be voluntary (with the
                                                                ultimate benefit of increased production, land
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                value and stability of livelihoods in mind), it
                                                                will be very critical that decisions are taken
                                                                based on a detailed understanding of current
                                                                land tenure arrangements, including their gender
                                                                aspects, and that potential project beneficiaries
                                                                opt in or out based on informed consent. The
                                                                available options for people living in the
                                                                proposed irrigation area could include (i)
                                                                participating in the irrigation scheme as an
                                                                irrigation farmer, (out grower or otherwise) or
                                                                employee; (ii) relocating onto alternative (non-
                                                                irrigated) land identified by the project; or (iii)
                                                                cash compensation (especially for PAPs without
                                                                land-based livelihoods and/or the tenants). A
                                                                detailed Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
                                                                will be prepared prior to project appraisal.
                                                                Although the general project area is known,
                                                                precisely which households will be affected
                                                                (and by how much) will only be known upon
                                                                                                                                 completion of the Final Design, expected during
                                                                                                                                 Year 1 of project implementation; at that point,
                                                                                                                                 a specific Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 be prepared to ensure that the livelihood of all
                                                                                                                                 impacted households is restored. The Project
                                                                                                                                 will establish a grievance redress mechanism to
                                                                                                                                 ensure people are well informed and there are
                                                                                                                                 feedback mechanisms where required.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         Yes                           Although the SVIP will not build any dams, it
                                                                                                                                 depends upon the existing Kapichira Dam on
                                                                                                                                 the Shire River for its effective functioning.
                                                                                                                                 SVIP will also depend upon the Kamuzu
                                                                                                                                 Barrage and the Nkula and Tedzani run-of-the
                                                                                                                                 river hydropower plants (further up-river) for its
                                                                                                                                 effective functioning. The Kamuzu Barrage is
                                                                                                                                 due to be upgraded under the recently-approved
                                                                                                                                 SRBMP; a Dam Safety Panel of Experts is
                                                                                                                                 closely involved with this undertaking.
                                                                                                                                 Accordingly, SVIP preparation will include a
                                                                                                                                 Dam Safety Assessment for the Kapichira,
                                                                                                                                 Nkula and Tedzani dams by independent
                                                                                                                                 specialists, consistent with OP 4.37.
                                 Projects on International                                         Yes                           As per OP 7.50, the Shire River is international
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            waterway (a tributary of the Zambezi River).
                                                                                                                                 Accordingly, a standard legal notification needs
                                                                                                                                 to be provided to the other Zambezi Basin
                                                                                                                                 riparian states early during preparation; a
                                                                                                                                 similar notification process has recently been
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 carried out during preparation of the SRBMP.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             N/A
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Jun-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (including Environmental and Social
                                      Management Plan and Pest Management Plan) and Resettlement Policy Framework will be
                                      completed (as good quality drafts) prior to Appraisal. The notification under OP/BP 7.50 as well
                                      as the Safety of Dams Assessment will be undertaken prior to Appraisal, and reflected in the PAD
                                      Stage ISDS, which will be prepared prior to the decision meeting for Appraisal.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Pieter Waalewijn

                                 Approved By:


                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Regional Safeguards Name:                        Date:
                         Coordinator:
                         Sector Manager:     Name: Tijan M. Sallah (SM)   Date: 25-Jul-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy
