                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA3842
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-May-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Feb-2013, 25-Feb-2013, 13-May-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Kenya                              Project ID:    P117635
                            Project Name:      Kenya Water Security and Climate Resilience Project (P117635)
                            Task Team          Gustavo Saltiel
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          04-Feb-2013                        Estimated   18-Jun-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTN2                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (30%), Irrigation and
                                              drainage (20%), General agriculture, fishing and forestr y sector (20%), Public
                                              administration- Water, sanitation and flood protection (20%), General energy
                                              sector (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Water resource management (40%), Other environment and natural resources
                                              management (30%), Land administration and management (30%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     182.67           Total Bank Financing:                 155.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                       Financing Gap:                          0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          7.66
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                               155.00
                              GERMANY KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU
                                                                                                                          20.01
                              (KFW)
                              Total                                                                                     182.67
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)

                                                                       Page 1 of 14
                         The project development objectives of KWSCRP-1 are to: (i) increase availability and productivity
                         of irrigation water for project beneficiaries; and (ii) enhance the institutional framework and
                         strengthen capacity for water security and climate resilience for the country.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Project Description
                         The project will have three inter-related components supporting the project development objective:
                         (i) water resources development; (ii) effective water sector institutions; and (iii) support for project
                         implementation.

                         Component 1: Water Resources Development (US$ 104.5 million – US$ 76.8 million from IDA, US
                         $ 20.0 million from KfW, and US$ 7.7 million from GoK and beneficiaries)

                         This component will support climate resilience and water security for economic growth by financing
                         water investments and by progressively building a longer-term investment pipeline. Component 1
                         includes two sub-components: (i) Water Sector Investments and (ii) Water Investment Pipeline.
                         Each sub-component is described below.

                         Sub-Component 1.1: Water Sector Investments (US$ 54.5 million – US$ 26.8 million from IDA, US
                         $ 20.0 million from KfW, and US$ 7.7 million from GoK and beneficiaries)

                         Lower Nzoia Irrigation Scheme Phase 1. The Lower Nzoia Irrigation Scheme Phase 1 will be
                         financed under the first investment operation in the series, KWSCRP-1. It is a flagship project of the
                         Kenya Agricultural Sector Development Strategy (ASDS) and of Kenya Vision 2030 and is expected
                         to contribute to food security, economic growth and enhanced climate resilience for farmers.

                         Located in Western Kenya, not far from the town of Kisumu, the Lower Nzoia Irrigation Scheme is
                         the first new generation large scale public scheme to be developed by the National Irrigation Board
                         (NIB). The scheme would derive its water from the Nzoia River, which flows into Lake Victoria a
                         very short distance downstream, and irrigate 4,043 hectares, of which about 50% would be devoted
Public Disclosure Copy




                         to high value crops (fruit, vegetables) and the other 50% to rice in rotation with soybeans, cereals and
                         other legumes. The success of the sub-project relies on the effective transition from current rain-fed
                         subsistence agriculture to commercial farming based on horticulture, and on the uptake of efficient
                         irrigation management, operation and maintenance processes that will ensure scheme functionality
                         and sustainability.

                         The sub-project is, therefore, designed with three complementary pillars/activities as follows: (a)
                         construction of irrigation and drainage infrastructure, including rehabilitation of some 705 hectares
                         (existing Bunyala Irrigation Scheme); (b) support to agricultural production and establishment of
                         market linkages through a value chain approach; and (c) support to the efficient operation of the
                         infrastructure and to the progressive transfer of responsibilities and decision-making to Irrigation
                         Water Users Associations in line with Kenya’s irrigation strategy. The sub-project will facilitate
                         linkages and partnerships between the private sector and farmers that would serve the long term
                         interests of the latter, both on marketing and value chain and irrigation service delivery.

                         The sub-project has also been designed to allow sufficient time (seven years) to successfully
                         implement the activities, including under scheme operation. The construction phase will last 3.5 to 4
                         years and be carried out in stages in order to start irrigation as early as possible. It will be followed
                         by a two-year period during which irrigated agriculture will take place and be monitored on the entire
                         scheme as on-the-job capacity building continues.

                                                                       Page 2 of 14
                         The estimated cost of the sub-project – inclusive of the above activities – is US$ 54.5 million to be
                         financed as follows: a contribution from KfW of EUR 15 million (equivalent of USD 20 million as
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of March 31, 2013); a contribution from the World Bank, estimated at US$ 26.8 million; and a
                         contribution from beneficiaries and GoK, estimated at US$ 7.7 million and to cover primarily
                         operational costs, such as the establishment of a revolving fund for access to agricultural inputs, and
                         costs of resettlement.

                         Sub-Component 1.2: Water Investment Pipeline (US$ 50 million)

                         This sub-component will contribute to closing the large infrastructure gap in Kenya’s water sector,
                         estimated at around US$ 5-7 billion in various existing and ongoing exercises. An immediate
                         pipeline of potential investments worth about US$ 293 million has been identified and is currently
                         under review for financing in the next investment operation under KWSCRP. This pipeline includes
                         Mwache Dam and Ruiru well fields, which are in advanced stages of preparation, with detailed
                         designs (and relevant safeguards documents) expected to be completed in 2013.

                         In addition to the investments discussed under the immediate pipeline, a number of investments are
                         under preparation as part of various exercises that are currently underway. These include: those being
                         prepared as part of the Water Supply Master Plans for Nairobi/Satellite Towns and Mombasa/Coast
                         Region (supported under WaSSIP); those under the NIB’s project portfolio, with currently five
                         irrigation development schemes at feasibility or design stage representing almost 300,000 ha; and
                         those under the National Water Resources Master Plan 2030 (supported by JICA). A number of
                         water storage investments were also identified in the 2012 World Bank report, ‘Towards a Strategic
                         Analysis of Water Resources Investment in Kenya.’

                         Notwithstanding various planning exercises and the acknowledged enormous investment needs, the
                         detailed preparation of many identified investments is inadequate. The vast majority of project
                         documents fall far below international standards on technical, economic, financial, environmental,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         social and institutional grounds. It is acknowledged that the poor preparedness of potential
                         investments is partly responsible for the large water sector investment gap and has affected progress
                         in the sector.

                         This sub-component will support the development of the investment pipeline by financing
                         preparation activities for a range of potential investments – from water supply and irrigation schemes
                         to large-scale water investments – requiring preparation budgets of up to US$ 10 million. It is
                         envisioned that several of these investments could receive project financing in subsequent investment
                         operations. Specifically, this sub-component will finance pre-feasibility studies, feasibility studies
                         and detailed designs. Other support will include: (i) development of safeguards instruments (ii)
                         surveys and tests; (iii) preparation of terms of reference (TORs) for consulting services to support
                         investment implementation; and (iv) preparation of operations manuals. The sub-component is
                         expected to result in 70 sub-project ideas, 35 pre-feasibility studies and 21 feasibility studies, with
                         the expectation that detailed design or implementation of ten of these identified projects would be
                         underway by the time the project closes.

                         This sub-component will also support the development of an Investment Framework (IF) with agreed
                         quality assurance standards and guidelines for planning, preparing, implementing and operating
                         water investments. The IF is envisioned to become an overarching sector-wide instrument for
                         enhancing the quality and speed of investment preparation, and consequently a critical element for

                                                                      Page 3 of 14
                         strengthening the pipeline of investment-ready projects.

                         An initial IF – that guides investment preparation at the feasibility level – was developed under
Public Disclosure Copy




                         project preparation. The Ministry of Environment, Water and Natural Resources (MEWNR) tested it
                         on investment proposals at advanced stages of preparation and rigorously applied it to the Lower
                         Nzoia Irrigation Scheme Phase 1. It was found to be an extremely useful tool and to serve as a sound
                         basis for progressive refinement and enhancement, including based on lessons learned and
                         experience gained from is early application. This sub-component will finance the further
                         development of the initial IF, including preparing detailed guidelines that are specific to water-sector
                         investment types (e.g., irrigation versus multi-purpose dams) and extending the IF to include quality
                         requirements at the pre-feasibility level. This sub-component will also support capacity building to
                         ensure effective application of the IF, including the development of skills and tools for undertaking
                         the technical, economic, financial, social, environmental and institutional analyses required for
                         meeting it. The development of the IF will link closely with activities under sub-component 2.2 on
                         basin planning given their complementarities. As investments move through the IF process, they will
                         inform and be informed by the analytical and decision support tools developed under sub-component
                         2.2.

                         Component 2: Effective Water Sector Institutions (US$ 56.3 million)

                         Component 2 will support the current sector institutions, as well as the preparation, implementation
                         and full functioning of the new and proposed legal and institutional framework resulting from
                         alignments with the Constitution of Kenya 2010. It will also support integrated and participatory
                         basin planning, including developing the requisite knowledge base and building capacity and
                         institutional partnerships for effective water management and planning. The overall objective of this
                         component will be to strengthen the enabling institutional and legal framework to sustainably
                         advance Kenya’s vas t water sector investment program in order to achieve water security and
                         climate resilience. To this end, Component 2 includes two sub-components: (i) support for water
                         sector transition and reforms and (ii) strengthening water management and planning. Each sub-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         component is described below.

                         Sub-Component 2.1: Support for Water Sector Reforms (US$ 26.1 million)

                         This sub-component will support the current water sector institutions, as well as the preparation,
                         implementation and full functioning of the new and proposed legal and institutional framework
                         resulting from alignments with the Constitution of Kenya 2010. The objective of this support is to
                         enhance the capacity of water sector institutions to effectively perform their mandates and functions,
                         thereby contributing both to meeting project objectives and to improving the broader reform process.
                         Support will be provided during the three stages of reforms in order to ensure an effective response
                         to evolving challenges: (i) the pre reform stage, during which legal enactments will be designed and
                         supporting legal and institutional instruments will be finalized, including administrative tools to
                         guide the water sector transition; (ii) the reform stage, during which legislative changes will take
                         place and transition plans will be implemented; and (iii) the post reform stage, during which the
                         institutional and legal changes introduced by the reforms will be consolidated and strengthened and
                         further institutional capacity built.

                         This sub-component consists of the following main activities: (i) supporting institutional and legal
                         reforms throughout design and early stages of implementation; (ii) supporting the legal and
                         institutional transition process, including the implementation of the Water Sector Transition Plan;

                                                                      Page 4 of 14
                         and (iii) building the capacity of key water sector institutions. The first two activities are designed to
                         provide support during the pre-reform and reform stages, respectively. The third activity will persist
                         throughout all three stages of reforms. It is envisioned that audits or evaluations will be undertaken
Public Disclosure Copy




                         periodically to identify issues and put in place corrective measures for strengthening activity
                         effectiveness.

                         Sub-Component 2.2: Strengthening Water Management and Investment Planning (US$ 30.2 million)

                         The objective of this sub-component is to improve the capacity and knowledge base for basin-level
                         water resources management in Kenya, including integrated basin planning. The sub-component
                         builds on the strengthened institutional and legal frameworks supported under sub-component 2.1 by
                         focusing on the information, technical capacity, and participatory aspects of water resource planning
                         that will contribute to the sustainability and climate resilience of Kenya’s water resources and
                         associated investments. The sub-compon ent consists of three activities: (i) Water Resources
                         Knowledge Base; (ii) Water Resources Planning and Allocation; and (iii) Institutional Capacity
                         Strengthening and Partnerships.

                         Component 3: Support to Project Implementation (US$ 15.2 million)

                         In the uncertain and dynamic environment arising from the alignment of the water sector to the
                         Constitution of Kenya 2010, it is essential that project implementation is based on an overall design
                         and approach that ensures continuity, avoids unnecessary delays and cost increases in advancing
                         project activities, and mitigates against the potentially harmful effects of gaps and issues that will
                         inevitably emerge during the transition period and as the new institutional, legal and policy
                         framework of the sector is put in place. For these reasons, a Project Management Unit (PMU) will be
                         established to support MEWNR. This component will support the establishment of the PMU to
                         provide for effective project implementation through the completion of the KWSCRP-1 and
                         throughout the reform period (that is, prior to the launch of the reforms, during the transition, and
                         during the post reform period). Specifically, this component will finance the required office space,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         goods (e.g., vehicles), equipment (e.g., computers), staff, consultant services, travel, training and
                         operating costs that will allow the PMU to carry out its responsibilities for project implementation.
                         These responsibilities include project management and coordination, procurement and financial
                         management, project monitoring and evaluation (including impact evaluation), social and
                         environmental safeguards management and oversight, and strategic project communications and
                         outreach. A critical role of the PMU will be to support capacity building of sector agencies to enable
                         them to take over these responsibilities (refer sub-component 2.1).

                         Project Preparation Advance (US$ 3.0 million)

                         A Project Preparation Advance (PPA) in the amount of US$ 2,965,000 was approved and signed in
                         January 2012 to support preparatory activities for the project, including the preparation of core
                         technical documents.

                         Unallocated (US$ 3.67 million)

                         An unallocated amount of US$ 3.67 million has been retained.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)


                                                                       Page 5 of 14
                         The Lower Nzoia Irrigation Scheme Phase 1 is located in two counties in Western Kenya, namely
                         Siaya and Busia, not far from the town of Kisumu. This public irrigation scheme would derive some
                         water from the Nzoia River – which flows into Lake Victoria a bit further downstream. In total, 16
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sub-locations within 6 Locations in 3 Districts would benefit from the project. The project would
                         have a gross command area of 5774.4 ha excluding swamp area and about 4000 ha in net command /
                         cultivated area. The existing Bunyala Pump Irrigation Scheme that was developed in the late sixties
                         and that has a net irrigable area of 213.7 ha (534.25 acre) is included within the project area.

                         Overall, Nzoia is expected to have positive social benefits by improving the livelihoods of farmers
                         through enhanced agricultural production. Based on the ESIA and preliminary findings of the RAP,
                         the sub-project will also adversely affect a total of 60 structures, including 17 residential houses and
                         28 commercial units. About 1801 households residing on 924 farms will be affected by the
                         acquisition of the 95.3 hectares of land needed for the sub-project. A RAP has been prepared
                         consistent with the provisions of the RPF to mitigate these impacts.

                         Social analysis carried out and detailed in the ESIA indicates that there are no indigenous groups/
                         vulnerable and marginalized groups living in the Lower Nzoia Irrigation Scheme area.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Zarafshan H. Khawaja (AFTCS)
                         Helen Z. Shahriari (AFTCS)
                         Hocine Chalal (AFTN1)
                         Jane A. N. Kibbassa (AFTN3)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes               An EIA and EMP have been developed for the
                         BP 4.01                                               Lower Nzoia Irrigation Scheme Phase 1 detailing
                                                                               the mitigation measures required under this sub-
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               investment.

                                                                               Additionally, as part of the preparation of an
                                                                               Investment Framework for the Water Sector
                                                                               being prepared by the project, MEWNR prepared
                                                                               an Environmental and Social Management
                                                                               Framework (ESMF) that will establish the
                                                                               environmental criteria for selecting investments,
                                                                               the detailed procedures for preparing the
                                                                               environmental assessments necessary for those
                                                                               investments, as well as the details of potential
                                                                               impacts and suggested mitigation measures for
                                                                               the kinds of activities envisaged by the project.
                                                                               As part of those procedures, MEWNR will be
                                                                               conducting prefeasibility and feasibility studies to
                                                                               prepare for water resources investment schemes
                                                                               for water supply, irrigation, flood control and
                                                                               small hydropower generation, etc. These
                                                                               prefeasibility and feasibility studies will



                                                                       Page 6 of 14
                                                                     determine the extent of impacts that the identified
                                                                     projects may have on the environment. Relevant
                                                                     subsequent and more specific environmental and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     social impact assessments, including the
                                                                     corresponding management plans, will be
                                                                     undertaken for each specific investment, with
                                                                     TORs and deliverables reviewed by the Bank.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes             Some of the wetlands in the project area may be
                                                                     affected by project activities and related
                                                                     infrastructure. For this reason, the Natural
                                                                     Habitats policy is triggered. The project will
                                                                     strive to retain the ecological functions of the
                                                                     wetlands, which include water purification, flood
                                                                     protection, habitat for aquatic animal and plant
                                                                     species. The ESMF includes guidance on
                                                                     mitigation measures.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No              While the policy does not apply to the Nzoia
                                                                     Irrigation Scheme, as the investments being
                                                                     prepared under Component 1.2 could be located
                                                                     in forested areas, the forestry policy will be
                                                                     looked at during the preparation of the relevant
                                                                     safeguard documents for those investments. The
                                                                     forestry policy has also been considered in the
                                                                     preparation of the ESMF.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       Yes             Although the project will not be financing
                                                                     pesticide, the Lower Nzoia Irrigation Scheme will
                                                                     involve use of different types of agrochemicals to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     control diseases and pests. The project will
                                                                     promote the use of integrated pest management
                                                                     approaches and seek to reduce reliance on
                                                                     synthetic chemical pesticides. An Integrated Pest
                                                                     Management Plan (IPMP) has been prepared to
                                                                     provide guidance on the pest and pesticide
                                                                     management under the Lower Nzoia Scheme. The
                                                                     IPMP provides guidance on assessment of
                                                                     environmental and health risks associated with
                                                                     the current or envisaged pesticide use and
                                                                     integration of specific measures to these risks in
                                                                     the project design.

                                                                     Additionally, an Integrated Pest Management
                                                                     Framework (IPMF) is being prepared that will
                                                                     establish the detailed procedures for preparing the
                                                                     pest management plans, if necessary, for those
                                                                     investments selected under the Investment
                                                                     Framework.



                                                             Page 7 of 14
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes            Location of cultural heritage resources are not
                         BP 4.11                                         yet fully known. The ESIA will address impacts
                                                                         on physical cultural resources and provide a
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         cultural resources management plan, including
                                                                         “Chance Finds?. As the investments being
                                                                         prepared under Component 1.2 could be in areas
                                                                         with cultural heritage resources, this policy will
                                                                         be looked at during the preparation of the relevant
                                                                         safeguard documents for those investments. The
                                                                         policy has also been considered in the preparation
                                                                         of the ESMF.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes            There are no Vulnerable or Marginalized
                                                                         Groups (VMG) in the Lower Nzoia Irrigation
                                                                         Scheme.

                                                                         However, since the project is also preparing an
                                                                         Investment Framework for the Water Sector, a
                                                                         Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups Framework
                                                                         (VMGF) was prepared in accordance to the
                                                                         World Bank’s Policy on Indigenous Peoples (OP
                                                                         4.10).
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes            A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for the
                         4.12                                            Lower Nzoia Irrigation Scheme has been
                                                                         prepared. With respect to loss of assets,
                                                                         according to the RAP, in total 81 structures will
                                                                         be affected including 17 residential units and 28
                                                                         commercial units. There are Approximately 1871
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         households (995 farms) will be affected and a
                                                                         total of about 135.3 hectares of land will be
                                                                         acquired. In addition, 564 vulnerable people are
                                                                         affected. The RAP, which was prepared in close
                                                                         consultation with the affected people from
                                                                         October 2010 - January 2012, and October -
                                                                         November 2012, provides a detailed plan on to
                                                                         how to mitigate these impacts and to ensure
                                                                         scheme sustainability and livelihoods benefits.

                                                                         As the project is also preparing an Investment
                                                                         Framework for the water sector, a Resettlement
                                                                         Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared based on
                                                                         the Kenyan laws and the OP 4.12. The RPF
                                                                         establishes the criteria for selecting investments,
                                                                         the detailed procedures and processes for
                                                                         preparing the investment specific Resentment
                                                                         Action Plans (RAPs) necessary for those
                                                                         investments, as well as the details of potential
                                                                         impacts and suggested mitigation measures. Once


                                                                 Page 8 of 14
                                                                                 investments are identified, feasibility studies will
                                                                                 determine the extent of impacts on people and
                                                                                 land.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No                The Safety of Dams policy is not triggered by
                                                                                 the Lower Nzoia Irrigation Scheme.

                                                                                 Component 1.2 of the KWSCRP-1 is financing
                                                                                 the appraisal level preparation of water sector
                                                                                 investments in the MEWNR investment pipeline;
                                                                                 therefore, the KWSCR Program could, in future,
                                                                                 finance single and multipurpose dams and the
                                                                                 Policy will be revisited for each successive
                                                                                 project accordingly.
                            Projects on International            Yes               The Lower Nzoia Irrigation Scheme is in the
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 Lake Victoria Basin, which is part of the Nile
                                                                                 River Basin; therefore, notification has been
                                                                                 made to all Nile Riparians under the Projects on
                                                                                 International Waterways Policy.

                                                                                 Additionally, the Investment Framework for the
                                                                                 Water Sector to be prepared under the project will
                                                                                 outlines when notification in accordance with OP
                                                                                 7.50 is required.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The KWSCRP is expected to have positive benefits through investments that increase water
                              storage for productive use and increase resilience to floods and droughts. However, water
                              resources development investments including infrastructure for bulk water supply (dam and
                              groundwater development), flood management, upstream catchment management, and
                              downstream productive water uses (irrigation and water supply development) may result in
                              adverse environmental and social impacts. Potential adverse impacts may include loss of land or
                              structures, loss of critical habitats, interruption to migratory patterns, displacement of people, loss
                              of access to areas for livelihood support and public safety issues. The selection process builds on
                              Kenya’s legal framework for environmental management that is already in place and will underpin
                              Project implementation.

                              KWSCRP-1, which is financing the Lower Nzoia Irrigation Scheme (Phase 1), has been assigned
                              an Environmental Assessment Category A. It triggers the following Safeguard Policies:
                              Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01, Involuntary Settlement OP/BP 4.12, Pest Management
                              OP/BP 4.09, Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.04, Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04, and Projects
                              on International Waterways OP 7.50.


                                                                         Page 9 of 14
                          Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) is not triggered for KWSCRP-1. It can be triggered later if there is a
                          dam safety issue later on in the project (i.e. that dam construction is confirmed under
Public Disclosure Copy




                          KWSCRP-1). OP 4.37 may be relevant for pipeline investments prepared under Sub-Component
                          1.2 – if these pipeline investments are taken forward for implementation in subsequent operations
                          under the KWSCRP program, OP/BP 4.37 will be triggered for those subsequent operations.

                          A full Environment and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), and
                          Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) have been completed and disclosed prior to completion
                          of project appraisal.

                          Overall, the project is expected to have positive social benefits by improving the livelihoods of
                          farmers through enhanced agricultural production. However, based on the RAP, the sub-project
                          will also adversely affect a total of 80 – 82 structures, which include: 28 Commercial/business
                          structures, 27 Residential structures, 17 Pit latrines, 2 Churches, 2 Fences/gates, and 4 Community
                          and public structures. With respect to the amount of land, trees, crops, graves and community
                          assets, the impacts are:
                          - Land – 1,871 households will lose land and 995 farms will be affected. In total, 135.3 hectares
                          will be acquired.
                          - Trees – 108,988 trees will be removed.
                          - Crops –Ksh. 2,154,163.8 worth of crops will be lost
                          - Graves – Over 20 graves will be relocated
                          - Community Asset - Diboro Community Well water project

                           Social analysis carried out and detailed in the ESIA indicates that there are no indigenous groups/
                           vulnerable and marginalized groups living in the Lower Nzoia Irrigation Scheme area.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
Public Disclosure Copy




                            KWSCRP-1 is also preparing an Investment Framework (IF) for Kenya’s Water Sector that will
                           focus on long-term development of water resources, including large scale water storage for single
                           and multi-purpose uses. As such, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
                           has been prepared and will be further elaborated during implementation. The ESMF will be
                           applied to guide the ESIA for each potential investment prepared under the IF. In view of the
                           nature of the infrastructure to be considered under the IF, due consideration shall be put on the
                           potential short and long term cumulative impacts of the proposed investments, such as dams that
                           could be located in the same watershed. An Integrated Pest Management Framework (IPMF) has
                           been prepared consistent with World Bank’s policy Pest Management (OP 4.09). The IPMF will
                           guide the preparation of the individual IPMPs for those investments that may involve pest
                           management.

                          With respect to social safeguards for projects under the IF, a Resettlement Policy Framework
                          (RPF), has been developed to guide the preparation of the individual RAPs for those investments.
                          The main objective of the RPF is to ensure that investments are socially sustainable and comply
                          with international best practice and GoK policies and legislation. Finally, a Vulnerable and
                          Marginalized Groups Framework (VMGF) has been prepared consistent with World Bank’s policy
                          on Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10). The VMGF will guide the preparation of the individual
                          Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups Plans (VMGP) for those investments that are located in areas
                          where VMGs are present.


                                                                    Page 10 of 14
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             Lower Nzoia Irrigation Scheme (Phase 1): an ESIA and ESMP, as well as a RAP, have been
                           prepared for the Lower Nzoia Irrigation Scheme. These documents explain the project’s
                           environmental and social impacts and provide detailed mitigation measure to ensure sustainability
                           and compliance with GoK’s regulations and legislations, as well as with World Bank social and
                           environmental policies. According to the ESIA/ESMP and the RAP, over 20,000 people will
                           benefit directly from the Nzoia project and another 50,000 will benefit indirectly. Some of the
                           main problems facing the farmers in this area include frequent flooding, crop loss, high poverty
                           rates, and poor infrastructure. Lack of irrigation for improving agricultural production and food
                           security is noted as one of the main constraints facing farmers in the project area. Negative
                           impacts include land acquisition and impact on livelihoods, mainly for those who rely on the river
                           for their livelihoods such as fishermen and sand harvesters. In addition, possible negative impact
                           on vulnerable people and landless, and those using the river for households needs, mainly women.
                           With respect to loss of assets, according to the preliminary RAP, in total 80-82 structures will be
                           affected including 27 residential units and 28 commercial units. There are Approximately 1,871
                           households (995 farms) will be affected and a total of about 135.3 hectares of land will be
                           acquired. In addition, 564 vulnerable people are affected. The ESMP and RAP, which was
                           prepared in close consultation with the affected people, provides a detailed plan on to how to
                           mitigate these impacts and to ensure scheme sustainability and livelihoods benefits. Mitigation
                           measures to address the negative impacts i.e., sufficient environmental flows for the downstream
                           users, detailed measures for acquisition of land and assets to ensure that the affected people will
                           not be worse off as a result of the project and ideally improve their livelihoods and standards of
                           living or at least to restore them, in real terms, to pre-project levels; livelihood restoration
                           measures; assistance to the vulnerable people; provision of water points for household use and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           livestock, among others.

                          It should be noted the power of land acquisition under the new Land Act 2012 is given to the
                          National Land Commission (NLC). At the time of the preparation of KWSCRP-1, the NLC has
                          not been constituted due to an ongoing judicial process. This means that the procedures of land
                          acquisitions for Nzoia, the first investment under KWSCRP-1 cannot be implemented without
                          special exceptions. Since the power of land acquisition is vested in the Government of Kenya (and
                          delegated by legislation to the NLC), the government can lawfully make variations to the law. In
                          this case, the NIB will request special Cabinet approval for special legislation to be brought to
                          Parliament for enactment in order to temporarily vest land acquisition powers to another state
                          agency. However, since land reform is very important to Kenya, it is unlikely that the impasse
                          surrounding constitution of the NLC will last till the project is effective. This issue has been
                          clearly stated in both RPF and the Nzoia RAP.

                          According to the ESIA and RAP there are no indigenous groups living in the area of this project
                          and, as a result, no VMGP was prepared.

                          Training programs will target capacity issues related to the implementation of the social and
                          environmental management plan and the resettlement plan. The World Bank team has been
                          working closely with the safeguards team preparing the above documents to ensure they comply


                                                                    Page 11 of 14
                           with the relevant World Bank polices and will carry out close, field-based implementation support
                           and supervision.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The PMU constituted under Component 3 will have core roles in fiduciary (procurement and
                           financial management) aspects, environmental and social safeguards supervision, management and
                           coordination, reporting, monitoring and evaluation. The PMU, that would include social and
                           environmental safeguards specialists, and will be responsible for ensuring the application of social
                           and environmental frameworks (ESMF, VMGF and RPF) and supervising the implementation of
                           safeguards instruments.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Potential stakeholders are found at national, regional and catchment levels, including WRUAs,
                           farmers, municipalities, county governments, national ministries, civil society, and others. The
                           ESMF details the stakeholder consultation process for the selection and implementation of future
                           investments under the IF.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        31-Jan-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     01-Feb-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive        19-Mar-2013
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Kenya                                                              13-Feb-2013
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        12-Feb-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     13-Feb-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Kenya                                                              13-Feb-2013
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        12-Feb-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     13-Feb-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Kenya                                                              13-Feb-2013
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        12-Feb-2013


                                                                    Page 12 of 14
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   13-Feb-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Kenya                                                            13-Feb-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?




                                                                     Page 13 of 14
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                             Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the            Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                             Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                             Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Gustavo Saltiel
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                       Date: 08-May-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Magdolna Lovei (SM)                               Date: 13-May-2013




                                                                       Page 14 of 14
