                                                                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                             CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC599
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Mar-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        China                                    Project ID:                       P127867
                              Project Name:                   China: Qinghai Xining Urban Transport Project (P127867)
                              Task Team Leader:               Ke Fang
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 25-Mar-2013                                    Estimated Board Date:             22-Oct-2013
                              Managing Unit:                  EASCS                                    Lending Instrument:               Sector Investment and Maintenance Loan
                              Sector:                         Urban Transport (100%)
                              Theme:                          City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (80%), Climate change (20%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                        Amount
                                   Borrower                                                                                                                  131.66
                                   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                                     120.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                     251.66
                              Environmental Category:         B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              B. Project Objectives

                              The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to enable Xining residents to travel between the city center and the western part of the city
                              in a fast, comfortable and safe manner, through improving a major transport and city development corridor. A key focus will be demonstration of
                              integrated improvements in roads, public transport infrastructure and services, traffic safety conditions (particularly for pedestrians), and traffic
                              management on the Wusixi Road corridor, an important transport corridor of the city.

                              C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                              The project proposal includes the following four components:

                              Component 1: Urban Roads. This component includes investment in construction of three short road sections (the total distance is less than 10km)
                              which are necessary for improving the public transport services on Wusixi Road corridor. All road works will include underground utilities (as
                              required by the city’s Master Plan), e.g., drainage and sewerage pipes, and environmental protection measures.

                              Component 2: Public Transport. This component is focused on integrated public transport corridor improvements on Wusixi Road corridor. Based
                              on further assessment of quality and performance of bus services on the corridor, this component may include investment in constructing bus
                              lanes, installing bus priority signals, improving bus stops and terminals, improving pedestrian crossings and other non-motorized transport
                              facilities, constructing a public transport interchange at the west edge of the city, optimizing bus routes and bus dispatching, and/or procuring new
                              buses for routes on the Wusixi Road.

                              Component 3: Intelligent Traffic Management. This component is focused on development of an intelligent traffic management system for Wusixi
                              Road and select road junctions in vicinity. It will include investment in installing and operating Area Traffic Control (ATC), CCTV monitoring, traffic
                              enforcement, Variable Message Sign, incident detection and data collection, and upgrading the existing traffic control center located inside the
                              traffic police headquarter.

                              Component 4: Institutional and Capacity Building. This component aims at improving the city’s human resources and institutional capacity for
                              urban transport planning and management and the capacity of relevant municipal agencies for preparing and implementing the above three
                              investment components. Scope of this component will be defined based on capacity assessments to be conducted during the project preparation.

                              D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                              The proposed project is located in Xining, the capital of Qinghai Province in the western part of China.
                              Xining is located in the eastern part of Qinghai province and in the Huang River Valley of the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau with an average altitude of
                              over 2200 meters. The urban population is about 1.2 million concentrating on the built up areas in a total size of 104 km2.

                              All the physical activities are in the urban and peri-urban area in the west part of the Xining Municipality.

                              E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Xining has an ongoing Bank financed project. For this proposed project, a Project Leading Group(PLG), chaired by the Mayor of Xining, and
                           comprises senior officials from relevant municipal agencies, has been established to oversee the preparation and implementation of the Project. A
                           Project Coordination Office (PCO) has been established in Xining Development and Reform Commission. A Project Construction Management
                           Office (PMO) has been established in Xining Construction Bureau. The PMO will be responsible for project management, detailed designs, social
                           and environment safeguard preparation, monitoring and evaluation etc. in accordance with Bank guidelines. The PMO currently has 12 full-time
                           staff. The PMO will include adequate dedicated staff responsible for different aspects of the project, including overall social and environment
                           management. The PMO and its consultants received safeguard trainings in the early stage of project preparation, and will continue to receive more
Public Disclosure Copy




                           training and technical guidance during project preparation. The close interaction between the Bank’s task team and the PMO will ensure the
                           adequacy of the PMO’s capacity. During project preparation, a robust GRM will be established to address complaints due to both construction-
                           related nuisances and resettlement impacts. Public consultations will also be undertaken and documented during the preparation of the required
                           safeguard instruments. The attendants of the consultations, issues raised and how they have been or will be addressed will be summarized in the
                           final documents.

                            F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

                           Zhefu Liu (EASCS)
                           Peishen Wang (EASIN)
                           Feng Ji (EASCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

                            Safeguard Policies                             Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01            Yes                It is expected that environmental impacts during construction are mainly related
                                                                                            to small-scale construction under Component 1 and 2, e.g. disturbance to traffic
                                                                                            and local communities along the roads, disposal of spoil, nuisance of dust and
                                                                                            noise. Environmental impacts during operation mainly include noise,
                                                                                            improvement of vehicle emission and road safety; the disposal of waste and
                                                                                            wastewater generated at the public transport interchange.

                                                                                            It is expected that the project will overall improve the road safety, and
                                                                                            consequently reduce traffic congestion and vehicle emissions in Xining. The
                                                                                            adverse impacts are localized, limited and can be easily mitigated. The project is
                                                                                            proposed as a category B project considering the type, location, sensitivity, and
                                                                                            small scale of the project and the nature and magnitude of its potential
                                                                                            environmental impacts. Most mitigation measures will be included in engineering
                                                                                            designs and construction specifications.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                    No                The project is mainly in the urban and peri-urban area of Xining and the areas
                                                                                            already disturbed by intensive human activities. The project will not convert,
                                                                                            degrade or restore any natural habitats or critical natural habitats, and hence this
                                                                                            policy is not triggered.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                             No                The project will not finance activities that would involve significant conversion or
                                                                                            degradation of critical forest areas or related critical natural habitats as defined
                                                                                            under the policy. Hence this policy is not triggered.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09                        No                The Project will not lead to purchase nor use of any pesticides. This policy is
                                                                                            not triggered.
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11         TBD                Based on the available information and preliminary screening carried out by the
                                                                                            Bank team , there are no physical cultural resources identified to be affected by
                                                                                            the project. It will be confirmed by a detail survey to be carried out during project
                                                                                            preparation, The policy is marked as “TBD? at this stage. Chance-find
                                                                                            procedures will be included in the EMP.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                  No                Qinghai province has 5.63 million of populations in Year 2011, Han people
                                                                                            accounts for 53% of the total populations and the remaining 47% are Tibetan,
                                                                                            Hui, Tu, Sala and other ethnic minorities. The Tibetan ethnic minorities
                                                                                            contributed 24% of the provincial population, Hui ethnic minorities 15%, Tu 3.6%
                                                                                            and Sala 1.9%. Most of the ethnic minorities concentrate in Yushu, Guole,
                                                                                            Huanghai, Hainan and Haibei prefectures.

                                                                                            Xining is the capital city of Qinghai province with 38 ethnic minorities in the city
                                                                                            area. The ethnic minorities account for about 25% of the city population, but
                                                                                            there are no concentrated minority communities in the city. The city has been
                                                                                            growing up very rapidly. The population changed from 50,000 in the 1950s to
                                                                                            currently 1,200,000. Most of the citizens immigrated from Gansu, Ningxia,
                                                                                            Sichuan and Shaanxi Provinces.

                                                                                            The main project area is located about 10-15 km away from the downtown area.
                                                                                            The project will affect three villages by land acquisition and housing demolition.
                                                                                            The task team conducted the screening in those affected villages and concluded
                                                                                            that no minority communities which are considered as Indigenous Peoples
                                                                                                                        according to OP4.10 are inside or near these villages. Hence, OP 4.10 was not
                                                                                                                        triggered.
                                Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                                Yes                    The proposed Project will require collective land and private structures in three
                                                                                                                        villages by the proposed three urban roads and one bus & ride terminal in
                                                                                                                        Xichuan District in Xining municipal area. Since the resettlement census survey
                                                                                                                        has not been undertaken at this stage, the mission only received the estimated
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        resettlement data information on land acquisition and housing demolition. The
                                                                                                                        three roads and the bus terminal will require about 722 mu of collective
                                                                                                                        cultivated land and 32,000 square meters of rural private housing area. As the
                                                                                                                        result, World Bank Involuntary Resettlement Policy OP 4.12 will apply to this
                                                                                                                        project. A resettlement action plan (RAP) is required to be prepared and
                                                                                                                        submitted to the Bank for review before Appraisal.

                                                                                                                        The task team will conduct due diligence review of the roads that may be linked
                                                                                                                        to the proposed roads under this project during project preparation and
                                                                                                                        determine actions to be taken by the city and by the Bank on those roads.
                                Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                          No                    The project will not finance construction or rehabilitation of any dams as
                                                                                                                        defined under this policy.
                                                                                                                        Not applicable
                                Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                          No                     Not applicable
                                7.50
                                Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                              No                     Not applicable



                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Oct-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
                                  should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                    One EIA (including EMP) for the new road construction including the proposed bus depot will be prepared. Environmental Codes of Practices
                                    (ECOPs) will be prepared as part of the EIA to mitigate any potential impacts from the corridor improvement activities like, bus stops, creation
                                    of dedicated bus lanes, pedestrian crossing, junction improvement etc. Additionally, Due diligence report will be prepared for all project
                                    components (regardless of source of financing) that have already been under construction to ensure that they comply with the requirements of
                                    both Bank safeguard policies and Chinese laws/regulations. As the project may finance some CNG buses, due diligence report will also be
                                    prepared to ensure that the current Compressed Natural Gas (CNG) filling stations are operating in compliance with the government's safety
                                    and environmental protection requirements.

                                    One single RAP will be prepared for all land acquisition and resettlement activities to be undertaken by the project as well as the linked
                                    projects as defined in OP4.12. In cases where land that has already been involuntarily acquired (i.e. under the legally mandated procedures of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                    eminent domain), in anticipation for the proposed project (with an intention of preparing for this project or clearing land of occupiers for this
                                    project), the TT will undertake a due diligence exercise following guidance provided by EAP Regional Safeguard Secretariat dated March 7,
                                    2012.

                                    Preparation of required safeguard documents have been started in March 2012. During the preparation mission (proposed for July 2012) the
                                    draft EIA report (including EMP) and draft RAP will be reviewed by the Bank team.

                         IV. APPROVALS
                                Task Team Leader:                                Name: Ke Fang
                                Approved By:
                                Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                 Name: Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan (RSA)                                                           Date: 09-Apr-2012
                                Sector Manager:                                  Name: Paul Kriss (SM)                                                                                 Date: 23-Mar-2012




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
