                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC3712

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-May-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-Apr-2013, 30-Apr-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Dominica                        Project ID:      P129992
                            Project Name:      Third Phase Disaster Vuln.Reduction APL for Dominica (P129992)
                            Task Team          Zoe Elena Trohanis
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          24-Jun-2013                     Estimated        26-Sep-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     LCSDU                           Lending          Adaptable Program Loan
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Flood protection (50%), Public administration- Water, sanitation and flood
                                               protection (20%), Central government administration (15%) , Other social
                                               services (15%)
                            Theme(s):          Natural disaster management (50%), Climate change (50%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     39.00                    Total Bank Financing:         18.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                               Financing Gap:                 0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                 18.00
                              Climate Investment Funds                                                    21.00
                              Total                                                                       39.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives


                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed Project would consist of the following four components: (1) Prevention and
                         Adaptation Investments; (2) Regional Platforms for Spatial Data Management, Hazard and Risk
                         Evaluation, and Applications for Improved Decision-Making; (3) Natural Disaster Response
                         Investments; and (4) Project Management and Implementation Support. The Project would address
Public Disclosure Copy




                         risks associated with, among others, flood, landslides, and, to some extent, seismic risks.

                         Component 1: Prevention and Adaptation Investments (TBD). This component would be designed to
                         reduce physical vulnerability and pilot adaptive measures to build resilience to current and future
                         hydro-meteorological shocks. Activities under this component would include a suite of civil works to
                         improve infrastructure resilience to disaster events and climate change adaptation measures.
                         Activities to be financed are expected to include, but would not be limited to, the following:
                         (a) Construction of community multi-purpose emergency shelters;
                         (b) Retrofitting and rehabilitation of water infrastructure;
                         (c) Slope stabilization interventions (geotechnical as well as re-vegetation);
                         (d) Climate resilient rehabilitation of primary and secondary roads and bridges;
                         (e) Improved climate resilient drainage systems, including maintenance of storm water drainage;
                         (f) Construction of coastal and river defenses.

                         In addition to the urgent repair and retrofitting investments identified above, a prioritization of
                         further vulnerability reduction and adaptation investments based on a multi-criteria evaluation would
                         be carried out. Baseline information on critical facilities (primarily in the education sector), and
                         emergency shelters would be gathered as well as information regarding characteristics and current
                         condition. Information on hazards, risks and potential climate change impacts along with geospatial
                         information would also be collected. The relative importance of specific infrastructure (i.e. schools,
                         emergency shelters) as well as the projected number of individuals expected to benefit from project
                         activities would further inform the prioritization of investments.

                         Component 2: Regional Platforms for Spatial Data Management, Hazard and Risk Evaluation, and
                         Applications for Improved Decision-Making (TBD). This component would finance a series of
                         capacity-building and technical assistance in Dominica to support disaster risk management and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         climate change adaptation. Activities for strengthening spatial data management and the information
                         sharing platform in Dominica, as well as linking it to a regional platform, could include: (i) adoption
                         of standards on spatial data, metadata and data quality; (ii) collection of spatial data relevant to
                         disaster risk management activities; and (iii) capacity building and knowledge exchange on spatial
                         data management. Additionally, for the agriculture sector, crop diversification studies and technical
                         assistance would be included to support the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry with its
                         diversification and food security program.

                         Activities to be performed at the regional level, in collaboration with other OECS countries and
                         regional institutions would include, inter alia: (i) creation of a regional backbone technology
                         infrastructure and collaboration mechanisms that would allow countries and regional technical
                         entities to share geospatial data for DRM and other purposes, including the establishment of data
                         sharing protocols for the region; (ii) knowledge sharing and learning process to develop and enforce
                         harmonized infrastructure codes, standards and methods for critical public infrastructure; and (iii)
                         improving physical/territorial planning practices.

                         Component 3: Natural Disaster Response Investments (TBD). Due to the high risk of a catastrophic
                         event in Dominica, a provisional component would be added under this project designed as a
                         mechanism that would allow for rapid response in the event of an emergency. Following an adverse
                         natural event and the Government’s declaration of emergency in accordance with its national law,
                         and subject to the Bank’s satisfaction that a situation of national emergency exists, the contingent
                         component would be activated and implemented following the rapid response procedures governed
                         by OP/BP 8.00. The component facilitates rapid re-categorization of financing and additional
Public Disclosure Copy




                         financing request under streamlined procedures during an emergency, should the Government so
                         request. Preparatory work would be undertaken for the design of the component, including i)
                         preparation of an agreed preliminary emergency recovery Action Plan of activities; ii) compilation of
                         a positive list of eligible critical imports/needs; iii) ToRs and contracts for technical services to
                         support the scoping and design of the emergency recovery and reconstruction subprojects; and iv) a
                         list of firms (national & regional) that have a demonstrable track record in emergency response
                         activities related to the anticipated nature and scope of those required.

                         Component 4: Project Management and Implementation Support (TBD). Activities under this
                         component relate to the institutional support and capacity development for project management and
                         execution. Specifically, this component will finance: (i) the establishment of a new Project
                         Coordination Unit (PCU), including staffing (fiduciary, safeguards, financial sector specialist, etc.),
                         training, and operating costs; (ii) project audits and project studies, including performance reviews
                         and impact evaluations; and (iii) the hiring of a Climate Change Coordinator for the Environmental
                         Coordinating Unit within the Ministry of Environment, Natural Resources, Physical Planning and
                         Fisheries which will be the Project’s technical advisory department on climate change issues.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Project works would be undertaken throughout the island of Dominica, including on the Carib
                         Territory where Dominica’s indigenous population resides. Works being considered relate, but are
                         not limited to, the repair and rehabilitation of existing infrastructure, possible new emergency facility
                         construction, limited application of erosion control and sea defense structures to protect critical
                         infrastructure, rehabilitation of road and drainage systems as well as water infrastructure, and
                         possible support for slope stabilization interventions, including through re-vegetation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The types of projects being considered have been scoped and are being further defined during the
                         project preparation process in coordination with the relevant Ministries. A sample of proposals
                         under development with physical works having environmental safeguard implications include:

                         •        Installation and construction of water storage tanks and system for nationwide water
                         inventory and monitoring. Water tanks on the west coast and east coast will link supply systems for
                         numerous communities currently relying on vulnerable individual systems and hydrometric stations
                         will provide continuous data as to water quality/quantity as well as rainfall and groundwater levels.
                         These projects will have small environmental footprints and will not involve exploitation of new
                         water resources.
                         •        Enhancement and integration of hydrometeorological and seismic monitoring networks.
                         Retrofitting or replacement of existing stations will involve potential waste management issues,
                         while installation of new monitoring stations will be screened for potential natural habitat impacts
                         (particularly in highland areas where forest areas occur) and land acquisition issues.
                         •        Highway improvements. One of two main roads connecting the capitol to the international
                         airport (Bois Diables - Hatton Garden) is vulnerable to landslides and washouts due to geotechnical
                         and climatological factors. These works may involve land acquisition for benching and terracing,
                         waste management issues, clearing of sensitive areas, or other impacts.
                         •        Carib Territory Subprojects. Small scale civil works have been proposed in the Carib
                         Territory, which present minimal environmental impacts. Artisanal agricultural enhancement
                           (planting of larouma reed, gomiere trees, and Bois Bande trees) and reforestation efforts
                           (stabilization of deforested slopes and degraded lands) do not appear to include harvesting of forest
                           resources or destruction of natural habitat, but will require diligent screening of subprojects to ensure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           they do not.
                           •        Sustainable Fisheries Development. This subproject is focused on improving the efficiency
                           of artisanal fishermen, and may include cold chain facilities and processing areas on boats and on
                           shore, provision of radios and early warning systems, renovation of a fish hatchery facility, and
                           supplies and equipment for the monitoring and management of Marine Protected Areas. An
                           associated subproject is the restoration of the Soufriere / Scotts Head Marine Reserve, which will be
                           screened for potential impacts to sensitive habitat and other possible safeguards implications during
                           project preparation
                           •        Agro-Forestry Development. Subprojects under consideration generally involve limited
                           scale of activities, such as replanting of crop orchards or root crops (coffee, cocoa, cashew) in areas
                           deforested by banana plantations, establishment of tamarind tree stands to serve as coastal buffer
                           zones, and development of agouti rearing facilities. Further screening and definition of potential
                           subprojects will occur during project preparation.
                           •        Disaster Response. Activities related to emergency response and disaster mitigation could
                           include debris clearing, refuse removal, spill cleanup, or other works. Screening to exclude Category
                           A activities as well as to ensure the proper application of environmental and social safeguards will be
                           accomplished by laying out clear safeguards guidelines for emergency investments and works
                           including types of activities, responsibilities for screening and environmental/social management,
                           and for preparation of any safeguards studies prior to works.
                           The scale of the subprojects, their locations and physical settings, and the anticipated activities
                           indicate they are Category B, for which minimal environmental impacts occur and which are
                           mitigable through standard management techniques and safeguards instruments, as described further
                           in Section II. Additional screening, research and subproject definition will take place during project
                           preparation to provide greater detail of specific works and their safeguards implications.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The Project would establish a Project Coordination Unit (PCU) to lead project management and
                           monitoring activities for investments financed under the operation. Coordination of all safeguard
                           requirements will be managed through the PCU. A review of past safeguards management will be
                           conducted during project preparation, upon establishment of a PCU, and addressed in the appraisal-
                           stage ISDS.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           M. Yaa Pokua Afriyie Oppong (LCSSO)
                           Michael J. Darr (LCSEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The Environmental Assessment Policy is
                           BP 4.01                                               triggered because civil works from subprojects
                                                                                 may create negative environmental effects.
                                                                                 These are expected to be small works with
                                                                                 relatively minor environmental impacts that can
                                                                                 be readily mitigated with standard construction
                                                             environmental mitigation and monitoring
                                                             procedures. Environmental Management Plans
                                                             (EMPs) will be prepared prior to appraisal for
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             any project works fully identified by the
                                                             appraisal date. For those works not identified by
                                                             the project appraisal date, the ESMF will
                                                             provide the framework within which specific
                                                             EMPs will eventually be developed. The
                                                             positive environmental impacts of the program
                                                             derive from improved planning capabilities and
                                                             increased resilience to natural disasters.

                                                             A project-level ESA (Environmental and Social
                                                             Assessment) will be prepared to encompass and
                                                             evaluate the potential environmental and social
                                                             impacts of the program as a whole. An ESMF
                                                             (Environmental and Social Management
                                                             Framework) will also be prepared to set out the
                                                             principles, rules, guidelines and procedures to
                                                             assess the environmental and social impacts of
                                                             future individual subprojects once they have
                                                             been defined with sufficient detail to be
                                                             specifically evaluated, and provide for
                                                             conducting ESAs of individual subprojects if
                                                             required. The ESMF will also include a section
                                                             with clear safeguards guidelines for emergency
                                                             investments and works including types of
                                                             activities, responsibilities for screening and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             environmental/social management, and for
                                                             preparation of any safeguards studies prior to
                                                             works as pertinent under OP 8.00 and consistent
                                                             with the project category.

                                                             The ESMF will reflect the types of projects/
                                                             subprojects under specifically components 1 and
                                                             2.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   The Natural Habitats policy has been triggered
                                                             as a precaution. Potential project activities may
                                                             occur in highland forest areas, on coastlines, or
                                                             in other areas where the policy could be
                                                             triggered owing to the richness of Dominican
                                                             natural habitat. The ESMF and ESA would
                                                             consider natural habitats in screening known
                                                             works and in screening procedures for any
                                                             demand-driven or undefined activities
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            TBD   Harvesting of forest resources is not anticipated
                                                             in any of the project interventions. Agro-
                                                                 forestry and food security / soil stability
                                                                 interventions are likely to focus on planting of
                                                                 select tree varieties, and reforestation efforts in
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 the Carib Territory may involve stabilization of
                                                                 deforested, eroded and degraded slopes and
                                                                 riverbanks. However, additional research and
                                                                 verification will be required during project
                                                                 preparation to insure the Forests Policy is not
                                                                 triggered, so in the interim it is considered TBD
                                                                 (to be determined).
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes   The Pest Management policy is triggered since
                                                                 some subproject activities may require the use
                                                                 of pesticides for termite control, road
                                                                 maintenance activities, crop recovery or other
                                                                 emergency activities.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   The project activities may potentially include
                         BP 4.11                                 retrofitting of historical buildings, restoration of
                                                                 culturally important sites, and chance finds of
                                                                 historically or culturally important resources
                                                                 during construction of works; accordingly, the
                                                                 Physical Cultural Resources Policy is triggered
                                                                 as a precaution. The ESA and ESMF will
                                                                 include screening for historical structures, as
                                                                 well as a "chance-find" procedure.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   The Indigenous Peoples Policy is triggered as
                                                                 the project will be implemented in the Carib
                                                                 Territories. Consultations have been held with
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 the Ministry of Carib Affairs, Members of the
                                                                 Carib Council, including the Carib Chief, and
                                                                 members of the Carib community. Appreciation
                                                                 was expressed for the project, and the
                                                                 application of OP/BP 4.10. An Indigenous
                                                                 People’s Plan will be prepared; prior and
                                                                 informed consultations with indigenous peoples
                                                                 will be undertaken during project preparation to
                                                                 inform the plan.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   The Involuntary Resettlement Policy is being
                         4.12                                    triggered as a precaution as it is possible that
                                                                 works planned under the project, including
                                                                 rehabilitation of primary and secondary roads
                                                                 and bridges, and construction of structures and
                                                                 monitoring stations, might encroach upon
                                                                 private lands therefore necessitating
                                                                 compensation. All works requiring private land
                                                                 acquisition will be subject to prior review. Any
                                                                 voluntary concession of land by the indigenous
                                                                                                                                 community will be monitored and legal
                                                                                                                                 documentation obtained prior to any
                                                                                                                                 transactions. In addition, populations would
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 only be resettled in the event of an emergency,
                                                                                                                                 as per component 3. The project will
                                                                                                                                 prepare a Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                                                                                                 (RPF), which will be consulted and disclosed in
                                                                                                                                 country and at the Bank’s InfoShop prior to
                                                                                                                                 appraisal. Specific projects identified during
                                                                                                                                 project preparation will be screened for potential
                                                                                                                                 resettlement impacts, with abbreviated or full-
                                                                                                                                 scale resettlement action plans prepared as
                                                                                                                                 appropriate.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            There are no project activities which support the
                                                                                                                                 construction or rehabilitation of dams, nor
                                                                                                                                 which rely on the services of existing dams.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             There are no project activities which will affect
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            international waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             There are no project activities which will take
                                 7.60                                                                                            place in disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Jul-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      An Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA) will be prepared for known investments and an
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared for those works to
                                      be identified during implementation. The ESMF will include a section with clear safeguards
                                      guidelines for emergency investments. In addition, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and
                                      an Indigenous Peoples Plan will be prepared for the project. The studies and accompanying
                                      documents are expected to be completed no later than June 2013. Finding details will be provided
                                      in the PAD-stage ISDS.

                                      Given that this project is in its third phase, a review of past safeguards instruments used in Bank
                                      projects in APL1 and 2 will be undertaken to glean best practices and lessons learned from
                                      safeguards management within these projects; this process will be conducted during project
                                      preparation and addressed in the appraisal stage ISDS. The ESMF would be developed taking into
                                      consideration lessons learned from environmental and social safeguard instruments in previous
                                      Bank projects in the APL1 and APL2 projects in Grenada/St Vincent and the Grenadines and St
                                      Lucia, respectively, by attempting to integrate them in the preparation of the social and
                                      environmental safeguards instruments and so improve their efficiency and consistency.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Zoe Elena Trohanis

                                 Approved By:


                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Regional Safeguards Name:                         Date:
                         Coordinator:
                         Sector Manager:     Name: Anna Wellenstein (SM)   Date: 30-Apr-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy
