                                              INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC3984

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Jun-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Jun-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            China                           Project ID:      P132748
                            Project Name:       Establish M&V system for Energy Efficiency in China (P132748)
                            Task Team           Xiaodong Wang
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           04-Nov-2013                     Estimated        03-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      EASCS                           Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            GEF Focal Area:     Climate change

                            Sector(s):        Energy efficiency in Heat and Power (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Climate change (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       118.00                Total Bank Financing:            0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                              Financing Gap:                   0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           100.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                             18.00
                              Total                                                                        118.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The objective of the proposed project is to establish a measurement & verification system for energy
                           savings to prepare for market-based mechanisms, thereby, contributing to the GoC’s ambitious
                           energy conservation programs.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed project is a stand-alone GEF project. The project cost is US$17.8 million from GEF
                         grant. The counterpart funds of US$104 million from the governments, enterprises, and financial
                         institutions will be complementary to the project. The GEF project design was approved by the Bank
                         management, Chinese government, and the GEF Council in June 2012.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed project would be comprised of the following three components: (a) establishing a
                         measurement & verification system for energy savings; (b) designing and piloting market-based
                         Energy Saving Certificates trading scheme; and (c) supporting project management and coordination.
                         Component 1 will provide a solid foundation for Component 2.

                         Component 1 is an immediate and urgent task. Such an energy saving M&V system is needed to
                         bring credibility and accountability to the government’s EE reward funds and achieving the energy
                         intensity reduction target for the 12th FYP. It is required regardless whether the proposed Energy
                         Saving Certificates Trading moves forward or not.

                         Component 2 is contingent on government’s decision over the Energy Saving Certificates Trading.
                         The National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC) Environmental Protection and
                         Resource Conservation Department plans to pilot Energy Saving Certificates Trading as a market-
                         based mechanism to achieve the 12th FYP energy intensity reduction target cost effectively. In the
                         meantime, the NDRC Climate Change Department is piloting carbon cap and trade scheme in five
                         cities and two provinces (Beijing, Tianjin, Shanghai, Chongqing, Shenzhen, Guangdong, and Hubei)
                         to cost effectively achieve the 12th FYP carbon intensity reduction target. The priority and
                         coordination of the proposed Energy Saving Certificates trading and carbon cap and trade are under
                         discussion at the highest level of the government.

                         Component 1. Establishing measurement & verification system for energy savings (indicative cost
                         estimate: US$10 million GEF grant): This component will support the design and establishment of an
                         energy saving M&V system in China through the following four sub-components: (a) developing
                         more detailed methodologies, operational guidelines, templates, and case studies for energy saving
                         M&V, both at the project-level and enterprise-level; (b) establishing a transparent and credible
Public Disclosure Copy




                         accreditation system for third-party verifiers; (c) building capacity of third-party verifiers, ESCOs,
                         enterprises, provincial energy monitoring centers, and other key stakeholders; and (d) supporting
                         implementation of energy saving M&V in selected priority enterprises, including installation of the
                         online monitoring systems and M&V equipment.

                         Component 2. Designing and piloting market-based Energy Saving Certificates trading schemes
                         (indicative cost estimate: US$7 million GEF grant): Subject to the GoC’s confirmation that Energy
                         Saving Certificates trading is a priority focus for Component 2, this component will capitalize on
                         international experience to support the design of Energy Saving Certificates trading, including
                         obliged parties, penalty for non-compliance, trading platform, pricing mechanisms, trading rules,
                         regulatory and registry entities, and coordination with the existing financial reward program and the
                         ongoing pilot carbon cap and trade. A robust design is essential to the successful pilot of the Energy
                         Saving Certificates trading scheme. Specifically, this component will focus on the following sub-
                         components: (a) designing the pilot Energy Saving Certificates Trading scheme, possibly among the
                         priority enterprises; (b) building capacity of key stakeholders; and (c) supporting implementation of
                         the trading system.

                         Component 3. Supporting project management and coordination (indicative cost estimate: US$0.8
                         million GEF grant): This component will support project management and coordination activities of
                         the Project Management Office (PMO). The PMO has been established under the Economic
                           Construction Department of the Ministry of Finance (MOF). Currently, MOF is responsible for fiscal
                           incentives such as the EE reward fund, and energy saving M&V is required to be eligible to receive
                           the EE rewards. NDRC is responsible for achieving the 12th FYP energy intensity targets and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           managing the 17,000 priority enterprises program. A close collaboration between MOF and NDRC is
                           essential to ensure that the proposed project will be effective and successful. It was agreed that MOF
                           and NDRC will both be represented in the Project Steering Committee and the PMO, and assign
                           dedicated staff working on this project. The following implementation arrangement was proposed
                           and is waiting for confirmation from the GoC--MOF will lead the implementation of Component 1,
                           NDRC will lead the implementation of Component 2, and the PMO under the MOF will provide
                           overall coordination of project implementation.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Establishing a measurement and verification system for energy savings and designing/piloting energy
                           saving certificates trading system are policy and capacity building activities at national level.
                           Research studies are applicable throughout China. Location of enterprise energy saving measurement
                           and verification pilot demonstrations will be determined during project implementation.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The proposed project will be implemented by the Economic and Construction Department of MOF,
                           in collaboration with the NDRC Environmental Protection and Resource Conservation Department.
                           Both MOF and NDRC will be represented in the Project Steering Committee and the Project
                           Management Office (PMO), and assign dedicated staff working on this project. The PMO,
                           established under the MOF, is implementing the Bank/GEF Thermal Power Project, so is familiar
                           with Bank’s operational policies.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Youxuan Zhu (EASCS)
                           Peishen Wang (EASCS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The proposed project will primarily consist of
                           BP 4.01                                              establishing an energy saving measurement &
                                                                                verification system, and designing and piloting
                                                                                market-based Energy Saving Certificates
                                                                                trading schemes in China. These are policy and
                                                                                capacity building activities that will lead to
                                                                                positive environmental impacts through
                                                                                promoting energy savings throughout China. It
                                                                                is foreseen that such design of energy saving
                                                                                M&V system and certificates trading scheme
                                                                                will not have adverse environmental impacts.
                                                                                The piloting demonstration activity focuses on
                                                                                installation of on-line monitoring equipment at
                                                                                existing enterprises, which is also unlikely to
                                                                                have any adverse environmental impacts.
                                                                                Therefore, the project is suggested to be
                                                                                                                                 classified as Category C as per OP4.01.

                                                                                                                                 The project will define screening criteria for
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 selection of pilot enterprises for energy saving
                                                                                                                                 M&V with due consideration of their
                                                                                                                                 environmental performance and compliance
                                                                                                                                 status to avoid potential reputational risks.
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No                            The proposed project will not have any physical
                                                                                                                                 activities in any potential natural habitat areas,
                                                                                                                                 thereby the Natural Habitats Policy will not be
                                                                                                                                 triggered.
                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No                            The proposed project will not have any physical
                                                                                                                                 activities in any potential forest areas, thereby
                                                                                                                                 the Forest Policy will not be triggered.
                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No                            The proposed project will not lead to
                                                                                                                                 procurement of pesticide or change of pest
                                                                                                                                 management practice, therefore the policy is not
                                                                                                                                 triggered.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No                            The proposed project will not have any adverse
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         impacts on physical cultural resources,
                                                                                                                                 therefore, this policy is not triggered.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            The proposed project will have no potential
                                                                                                                                 impacts envisaged on indigenous people.
                                                                                                                                 Therefore, this policy is not triggered.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            The proposed project will consist of policy and
                                 4.12                                                                                            capacity building activities, and limited piloting
                                                                                                                                 of online monitoring equipment installation is
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 confined in existing enterprises. There will be
                                                                                                                                 no land acquisition and resettlement envisaged,
                                                                                                                                 therefore, this policy is not triggered.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The proposed project will not involve any new
                                                                                                                                 or existing dams, therefore, this policy is not
                                                                                                                                 triggered.
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            The proposed project will not involve any
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            international waterways, therefore, this policy is
                                                                                                                                 not triggered.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The proposed project will not involve any
                                 7.60                                                                                            disputed areas, therefore, this policy is not
                                                                                                                                 triggered.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Aug-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             A.    Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage
                             ISDS would be prepared: August 2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                             B.      For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-
                             stage ISDS:

                             C.Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                             The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:      Name: Xiaodong Wang

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name:                                                    Date:
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Mark R. Lundell (SM)                               Date: 19-Jun-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
