                                                                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                               CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC437
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Mar-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                               Country:                         Bangladesh                             Project ID:                     P127015
                               Project Name:                    Climate Resilient Participatory Afforestation and Reforestation Project (P127015)
                               Task Team Leader:                Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi
                               Estimated Appraisal Date: 23-May-2012                                   Estimated Board Date:           25-Jun-2012
                               Managing Unit:                   SASDI                                  Lending Instrument:             Specific Investment Loan
                               Sector:                          Forestry (100%)
                               Theme:                           Climate change (65%), Biodiversity (20%), Environmental policies and institutions (15%)
                               Financing (In USD Million)
                                    Financing Source                                                                                                      Amount
                                    Borrower                                                                                                                  1.20
                                    Bangladesh MDTF for Climate Change                                                                                       25.00
                                    Total                                                                                                                    26.20
                               Environmental Category:          B - Partial Assessment
                               Is this a Repeater project? No

                              B. Project Objectives

                              The proposed Project Development Objectives (PDO) are to: (a) strengthen the institutional capacity of the Bangladesh Forestry Department and
                              selected local communities in the coastal and hilly areas of Bangladesh for participatory afforestation and reforestation; and (b) increase the size of
                              reforested areas in selected communities through participatory afforestation and reforestation. Both objectives would help to improve climate
                              change resilience in the selected local communities.

                              C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                              The project will include three components:

                              a.            Component 1: Participatory Afforestation and Reforestation in Coastal and Hilly Areas (approximately US$15.0 million):

                              The component aims at scaling up the afforestation and reforestation through participatory forestry and providing livelihood support to poor people
                              living in project areas. The component has two subcomponents: i) afforestation and reforestation and ii) alternative income generation.

                              i)            Afforestation and Reforestation (approximately US$12.0 million)

                              The objective of this subcomponent is to increase the afforested/reforested areas through participatory forestry and co-management approach in
                              the degraded forestland, marginal, fallow and newly accreted land in coastal and hilly areas. This plantation will contribute in (i) better protecting
                              of lives and property in coastal areas against the cyclones and surges and (ii) improving soil stability and water retention in hilly areas. The
                              afforestation and reforestation will be undertaken on available lands that are not yet covered by other planned, on-going and completed projects of
                              the BFD or other development partners. The project will engender engagement with local communities in afforestation and reforestation
                              throughout the project cycle from the planning phase. Also, a community participation model will be developed using the social forestry program
                              as a foundation along with co-management. Poor people living in the target geographic areas will work in nursery raising and plantation
                              establishment. The afforestation and reforestation program will generate an estimated 0.70 million man-days of work. In addition, about 15,000
                              poor and vulnerable people will be selected through a transparent and inclusive process as the core beneficiaries of forestation program. This
                              selected group will also be responsible for maintaining the plantations and will receive benefits from the earnings of the afforestation/reforestation
                              program. The key results section provides specific targets on afforestation/reforestation.

                              ii)           Alternative Livelihood (approximately US$3.0 million)

                              The objective of the subcomponent is to finance alternative livelihood options of local people in the targeted hilly areas to reduce their dependence
                              on forest resources and strengthen the participatory forest management. This subcomponent will be implemented by Arannayk Foundation (AF).
                              The community based organizations (CBO) or groups meeting the basic/minimum participation requirements (to be designed and agreed on with
                              key project stakeholders) will receive cash grants from an overall endowment fund to be launched under the project. The fund will operate on a
                              revolving basis as a supporting mechanism to help group members develop and sustain alternative income generating activities (AIGAs). Group
                              members will also generate additional funds through participatory savings (monthly, fortnightly or weekly) first to supplement the seed grant and
                              second, to demonstrate a level of commitment to the group#s investment plans. The groups will operate the revolving fund based on agreed upon
                         guidelines. Loans (interest free) from the revolving fund will be given to the group members based on the prospect and viability of AIGAs proposed
                         by the applicants. Loans can also be utilized for community interventions. AF (along with its partner organizations) will mobilize the community,
                         facilitate the CBO formation (where necessary), develop their capacity, and provide market information and linkage building support to the AIGA
                         applications and CBOs. In addition to creating new community groups, this component will support existing CBOs with the necessary skills and
                         assistance to enable them to participate in the livelihoods component and also on forest conservation. AF will carry out the periodic auditing of the
                         funds utilization by CBOs during project period. The subcomponent will primarily focus on income activities outside the forest sector but will also
                         consider non-extractive forest based income generating activities. This will cumulatively result in forest conservation and sustained forest resource
Public Disclosure Copy




                         productivity.

                         b.        Component 2: Technical Assistance (approximately US$8.0 million):

                         This component aims to improve forest management through three subcomponents: i) technical studies; ii) introduction to and demonstration of
                         smart green infrastructure; and iii) capacity development.

                         i)        Technical Studies (approximately US$4.5 million)

                         The objective of the subcomponent is to improve the technical knowledge base on forest resource assessment/monitoring and long-term planning
                         for sustainable development of forest sector. This subcomponent will establish the forest resource assessment and monitoring system through
                         Remote Sensing (RS) and Geographic Information System (GIS) for BFD. The assessment will provide comprehensive information on
                         afforestation/reforestation resources in coastal and hilly areas of Bangladesh, and thereby contribute to better planning process. This will provide
                         scientific information on existing resources, areas to be covered under the afforestation/reforestation projects and future needs. The assessment
                         will be carried out both in the first and last year of the project. Comparing the two assessments for project area will reflect the changes in the
                         plantations expected to take place during the project timeframe.

                         The subcomponent will also support the review of the existing Forestry Sector Master Plan (1995-2015) and it#s updating to include contemporary
                         issues of climate change impacts, adaptation measures and carbon sequestration. The analytical studies such as economic cost-benefit of
                         afforestation/reforestation investment, impact of climate change, improved water management in hilly areas, land tenure issue in accredited
                         afforested areas, institutional structure of BFD for participatory approach and better forest management will be carried out under the assignment to
                         strengthen the present knowledge base and contribute to master plan. This will also explore potential financing support through bio-carbon
                         financing for sustainable forest sector planning and management. The study will include area specific management plan and short, medium and
                         long term investment requirement to implement the plans.


                         ii)       Smart Green Facility (US$2.5 million)

                         The objective of the subcomponent is to introduce and pilot smart green facility (small infrastructure) that could potentially support forest
                         biodiversity conservation by i) minimizing and mitigating adverse impacts of infrastructure; and ii) remediating and compensating for any residual
                         damage to have a net positive impact. This will be achieved through construction of new and rehabilitation of existing Forest Department field level
                         Offices by adopting design and construction practice that have no or little residual impacts on the surrounding biological, physical and natural
                         environment. The design options will consider the solar system, rainwater harvesting and local materials. The project will develop design and
                         construction guidelines for smart green facility to promote it for biodiversity conservation. It is anticipated that the civil works will generate local
                         employment of about 0.18 million man days.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         iii)      Capacity Development (US$1.0 million)

                         The objective of the subcomponent is to develop further the capacity of the BFD to better manage forest assets in a country confronted with
                         climate change risks. This subcomponent will support capacity assessment and will provide a strategy for capacity development. Some BFD
                         officials and staff will receive long-term training (i.e. one year masters/diploma program for around five officials and two-three months training for
                         around twenty officials), while others will benefit from short-term training (i.e. on climate change impact on bio-diversity and forests, community
                         mobilization and participatory process, methods to design and implement policy, program and projects in coastal and hilly areas). Special attention
                         will be given to quality assurance, financial management, RS, GIS, management information systems, performance management/monitoring and
                         evaluation.


                         c.        Component 3: Project Management (US$2.0 million):

                         This component will support the establishment of a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) at the BFD. This PIU will also provide necessary support like
                         financial management, social and environmental safeguard, communication and procurement to the AF. The budget allocation will cover
                         consultancy fees, routine monitoring, travel, purchase of office equipment and vehicles (including small water vessels), emergency maintenance
                         works, meeting costs, audits and other operating costs necessary for project implementation and reporting. This component will also finance an
                         independent/third party monitoring for project activities.

                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         3.        The activities will be mainly focus on the degraded forestland, marginal, fallow and newly accreted land in coastal and hilly areas. In
                         coastal region, target geographic area will cover 7 coastal districts out of the 19 coastal districts of Bangladesh. These coastal districts are Cox’s
                         Bazar, Chittagong, Noakhali, Lakshmipur, Pakuakhali, Bhola, Feni. In the hilly area, the project will target the core and buffer zones of the
                         Reserved Forest Land of Chittagong District and Cox’s Bazar District.

                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

                         4.        The implementing agencies BFD and AF have experience on conserving the natural resources and pay due diligence to environmental
                         issues. BFD also implemented three IDA supported projects during 1980-2001 and presently implementing the Regional Wildlife Project.However,
                               both BFD and AF needs to be further oriented on bank environmental and social safeguard policies. The capacity weakness will covered by hiring
                               both social and environmental specialist during preparation phase. Part-time specialists will also be included during the implementation phase.

                               F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

                               Sabah Moyeen (SASDS)
                               Nadia Sharmin (SASDI)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

                                Safeguard Policies                                                 Triggered?           Explanation (Optional)
                                Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                                Yes                    It is anticipated that some activities would involve minor civil works (smart
                                                                                                                        green facility). Hence, certain short term negative environmental impacts may
                                                                                                                        occur during the implementation phase. These negative impacts are expected
                                                                                                                        to be largely on-site and easily mitigated with proper planning and sound
                                                                                                                        environmental practices. The project will not support the construction of any
                                                                                                                        major new infrastructure.
                                Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                        Yes                   The project is expected to make a positive long-term contribution to the
                                                                                                                        environment such as protecting against soil and water erosion, working as a
                                                                                                                        barrier during cyclone and storm surge, reducing atmospheric pollution,
                                                                                                                        providing habitat for flora and fauna etc.
                                Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                 Yes                    The project will promote afforestation and reforestation throughout the project
                                                                                                                        cycle from the planning phase and a community participation model will be
                                                                                                                        developed using as basis the social forestry program and co-management
                                                                                                                        approach. The plant species should be carefully selected in consultations with
                                                                                                                        the local communities and professionals.
                                Pest Management OP 4.09                                            No

                                Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                             No

                                Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                      Yes                   Since the project is expected to be operational in areas where indigenous
                                                                                                                        people live (hilly areas), OP 4.10 may be triggered by the project. Appropriate
                                                                                                                        screening mechanisms will be developed and used to determine whether IPs are
                                                                                                                        affected by project activities. A Social Management Framework (SMF) will be
                                                                                                                        developed to contain an Indigenous Peolple’s Planning Framework (IPPF) in
                                                                                                                        order to guide the preparation of an Indigenous People’s Plans (IPP) where and
                                                                                                                        when required.
                                Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                                Yes                    The project will screen the locations where activities are slated to be carried out
                                                                                                                        in order to avoid as much as possible any sites where the displacement or
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        involuntary resettlement of people may be expected. However, given the land
                                                                                                                        scarcity and population density prevailing in the country it may be required to
                                                                                                                        acquire some private lands or public lands where local communities live. The
                                                                                                                        SMF will contain a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to guide the
                                                                                                                        preparation of site specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) where and when
                                                                                                                        required. Additionally, Social Impact Assessments (SIA) and surveys will be
                                                                                                                        carried out. The design and implementation of the alternative livelihood
                                                                                                                        component will be carried out by the Arannayk Foundation separately.

                                                                                                                        The SMF will also include a Gender Action Plan to help gender sensitization
                                                                                                                        programs, which will target all levels of officials, especially field-based officials
                                                                                                                        who will be directly involved in implementation and supervision the work.
                                Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                          No

                                Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                          No
                                7.50
                                Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                              No



                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Mar-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
                                  should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                    Launching in January 2012 and draft completion in end March, 2012.

                                    BFD will prepare Environmental and Social Management Frameworks and conduct screening/assessment and mitigation measures during
                                    implementation. Both frameworks will be disclosed before appraisal: (i) at the InfoShop, and (ii) in-country at publicly accessible locations.


                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:                  Name: Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Name: Sanjay Srivastava (RSA)   Date: 21-Mar-2012
                            Sector Manager:                    Name: Herbert Acquay (SM)       Date: 14-May-2012
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy
