                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA1393
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Dec-2012
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-Apr-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Armenia                          Project ID:    P128442
                            Project Name:     Disease Prevention and Control Project (P128442)
                            Task Team         Susanna Hayrapetyan
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         14-Jan-2013                      Estimated   26-Mar-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    ECSH1                            Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Health (86%), Central government administration (14%)
                            Theme(s):         Health system performance (70%), Injuries and non-communicable diseases
                                              (21%), Rural services and infrastructure (9%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      45.00           Total Bank Financing:              35.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                       Financing Gap:                      0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                    Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                     8.20
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                           35.00
                              Health Results-based Financing                                                         1.80
                              Total                                                                                 45.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           The Project development objective is to improve (i) Maternal and Child Health(MCH) services and
                           the prevention, early detection, and management of selected Non-Communicable Diseases (NCD) at



                                                                     Page 1 of 8
                         the Primary Health Care (PHC) level; and (ii) the efficiency and quality of selected hospitals in
                         Armenia.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed Project will comprise four components as follows:

                         Component 1: Pay-for-Performance (P4P) to improve MCH and Non Communicable Disease (NCD)
                         services in primary care facilities

                         This component will support the strengthening of the on-going P4P program in Armenia as well as
                         expanding its scope. This will be done through:
                         a)       adding performance indicators (especially quality of Anti-natal Care (ANC) visits, screening
                         for cervical cancers, screening for hypertension and high cholesterol)
                         b)       increasing the frequency of verification of results and payment
                         c)       enhancing SHA verification of results by turning them into supportive supervision visits with
                         technical feedbacks for individual health facilities
                         d)       introducing counter-verification of results by an independent third-party (which involves
                         checking a random subset of patients if they actually received the services)
                         e)       standardizing all the procedures for self-reporting, verifications and counter-verifications of
                         results with the development and use of instruments, protocols and manuals
                         f)       strengthening HMIS to accommodate the reporting of the new indicators
                         g)       introducing mechanisms for peer learning and peer competition
                         h)       putting in place mechanisms to ensure the poor’s access to treatment after screening (such
                         funding will be provided by the Government).

                         Subcomponent 1.1: P4P incentives for MCH and NCD

                         This sub-component will co-finance performance-based payments for all indicators monitored under
                         the existing scheme. There will be two parts to the P4P incentive program: (i) screening part in which
Public Disclosure Copy




                         full cost reimbursement for selected screening tests (on a “per test? basis); and (ii) performance-
                         based incentives for an agreed list performance indicators if targets are met.

                         Subcomponent 1.2: P4P implementation and capacity building

                         This sub-component will finance: (i) eligible operating costs of P4P implementation and capacity
                         building in P4P for key stakeholders (IDA credit and HRITF grant); and (ii) selected essential
                         equipment for PHC facilities for the screening program (IDA credit only).

                         Subcomponent 1.3: Health Promotion

                         This sub-component would focus on supporting health promotion activities that would aim at
                         increasing population awareness on major risks associated with NCDs through supporting
                         population-based actions. It would also finance national public information campaigns focused on
                         promotion of healthy lifestyles and prevention of main NCD risk factors (diet, physical activity, and
                         tobacco use). Efforts would also be made to reach targeted adult populations with information on the
                         screening programs for cardiovascular disease, diabetes and cervical cancer through mass media as
                         well as outreach by primary health care providers within communities. The activities would be
                         implemented by the HPIU in close collaboration with the Ministry of Health’s Public Relations Unit,
                         the Health Program and Quality Management Unit, and the Public Health Department. The Project


                                                                       Page 2 of 8
                         will finance technical assistance, training, and materials (brochures, leaflets, etc.).

                         Component 2: Improving efficiency and quality of selected hospitals. This component comprises
Public Disclosure Copy




                         four sub-components as follows:

                         Subcomponent 2.1: Modernization of Marzes Hospitals

                         2.       In order for the Government to successfully complete the marz hospital optimization plan
                         and further improve the efficiency and quality of hospital services in all marzes, this sub-component
                         would finance the upgrading and refurbishing of the remaining marz hospital networks, pa rticularly
                         in Vanadzor city. The project would finance civil works, provision of medical and waste
                         management equipment, TA and training activities aimed at improving the management system of
                         Vanadzor Medical Center as well as increasing professional skills and competencies of medical staff.
                         In addition the subcomponent would finance angiographs for Gyumri new hospital supported under
                         the APL2 project and “Nork-Marash? specialized cardiology and cardiac surgery centre for adults
                         and children in Yerevan.

                         Subcomponent 2.2: Modernization of “Center of Hematology named after Professor Yeolyan?CJSC

                         The objective of this subcomponent is to improve the quality of specialized in-patient and out-patient
                         hematological services in Armenia. This subcomponent would finance substantial design work for
                         the reconstruction of the Center of Hematology and creation of a Bone Marrow Transplantation,
                         renovation/reconstruction and provision of equipment, medical furniture and supplies as well as
                         clinical and management training to the clinical staff and hospital administration. The subcomponent
                         would also support the development and enforcement of treatment standards in accordance to
                         international standards for treatment of blood diseases.

                         Subcomponent 2.3: Modernization of Cancer Treatment Services in Armenia
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The objective of this sub-component is to support the establishment of a new Cancer Treatment
                         Center, which would allow for the provision of an integrated oncology service for the Armenia
                         population This sub-component would support the Government’s proposal to construct a single
                         building that would house all related services and that would replace or combine current services and
                         their related budgets/expenditure. The new Cancer Treatment Center will include diagnostic,
                         treatment planning and treatment departments, including radiation treatment facility. The
                         subcomponent would finance the design and civil works, provision of diagnostic and treatment
                         equipment, development of clinical protocols and treatment standards and training of clinical staff.

                         The creation of the new Cancer Treatment Center would be carried out as a public-private
                         partnership (PPP) project in conjunction with the International Finance Corporation (IFC).

                         Sub-component 2.4: Hospital Quality Improvement

                         This sub-component would focus on three activities:
                         (i)      Cancer Registry Development. The project would support the development of a
                         comprehensive cancer registry system for Armenia. This would facilitate policy-makers decisions
                         related to the national burden of cancer. This would involve the assessment of the current reporting
                         system for oncological cases; updating of reporting forms and software to better capture various
                         demographic, diagnostic and treatment aspects of cancer care; training; and provision of some IT

                                                                        Page 3 of 8
                         equipment to the statistical departments of the new oncology center.

                         (ii)    Development of hospital clinical guidelines: The National Institute of Health plans to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         develop clinical guidelines and standards for hospitals. The project will provide technical assistance
                         to the NIH to carry out this task

                         (iii)   Scaling up Hospital Quality Improvement program: A hospital quality improvement program
                         currently is being piloted in three hospitals with the support of USAID. The project will finance the
                         scale up of this Quality Improvement Program in all marzes’ hospitals (at the minimum). This would
                         involve: training of hospital staff in clinical guidelines and standards: training hospital managers and
                         hospital Quality Control Committees in quality management mechanisms and tools; training hospital
                         managers in budget management; and technical support to assist hospital implement Quality of Care
                         tools and mechanisms

                         Component 3: Project Management

                         This component would support day-to-day project management, including fiduciary tasks and
                         monitoring and evaluation. It would finance project operating costs, including inter-alia translation,
                         interpretation, equipment, supervision costs (transportation and per diem), salaries of the staff in the
                         HPIU, and incremental operating costs at the Ministry of Health.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will finance reconstruction of the Center of Hematology and construction of new
                         premises for the Cancer Treatment Center in the capital city of Yerevan, as well as construction of
                         the new premises for the Medical Center in the town of Vanadzor. The sites of all these medical
                         centers are located in highly transformed urban areas, away from wildlife habitats and other sensitive
                         natural receptors.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Darejan Kapanadze (ECSEN)
                         Sarah G. Michael (ECSSO)

                          6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The project carries investment components in
                          BP 4.01                                              support to provision of premises for medical
                                                                               facilities and therefore triggers OP/BP 4.01
                                                                               Environmental Assessment. None of the project
                                                                               supported activities are expected to have
                                                                               significant, long term, or irreversible impacts on
                                                                               the natural environment, therefore the project is
                                                                               classified as environmental Category B.

                                                                               An Environmental Management Framework
                                                                               (EMF) is prepared to guide conduct of site-
                                                                               specific Environmental Impact Assessments
                                                                               (EIAs) of construction works at Vanadzor
                                                                               Medical Center and Cancer Treatment Center,



                                                                       Page 4 of 8
                                                                        because detailed designs for these centers will not
                                                                        be available in the project preparation phase. A
                                                                        site-specific Environmental Management Plan
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        (EMP) is developed for the reconstruction of the
                                                                        Center of Hematology, sufficient for adequate
                                                                        mitigation of minor environmental risks
                                                                        associated with this intervention, which are
                                                                        typical for rehabilitation of a medium-sized
                                                                        existing building in an urban setting.

                                                                        The EMF and the EMP for the Center of
                                                                        Hematology were drafted to the satisfaction of the
                                                                        Bank, disclosed in-country and through the
                                                                        InfoSHop, and discussed with the project
                                                                        stakeholders. The finalized versions of these
                                                                        documents will be re-disclosed with the minutes
                                                                        of public consultations attached. EIA reports for
                                                                        the Vanadzor Medical Center and the Center for
                                                                        cancer Treatment will be prepared, approved by
                                                                        the Bank, disclosed, and discussed with local
                                                                        stakeholders prior to tendering works for each of
                                                                        these centers.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No            None of the proposed project sites are located
                                                                        within or in immediate proximity to the
                                                                        designated natural protected areas, wildlife
                                                                        habitats, or other sensitive natural receptors.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No            The existing building of the Center of
                         BP 4.11                                        Hematology, intended for reconstruction with the
                                                                        project support, does not carry a historical or
                                                                        aesthetic value and is not listed among national
                                                                        cultural assets. Land plots selected for the
                                                                        construction of medical centers in Yerevan and
                                                                        Vanadzor are located in densely developed urban
                                                                        settings and encountering any unknown cultural
                                                                        property in the course of their construction is
                                                                        unlikely. Nonetheless, EMF carries instructions
                                                                        for the course of action in case chance finds are
                                                                        encountered during earth works.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No            The Project will not require any land take or
                         4.12                                           cause physical relocation. Center of Hematology



                                                                Page 5 of 8
                                                                                will be reconstructed within the existing
                                                                                perimeter of its current premises. Land plots
                                                                                considered for the construction of new buildings
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                for the Cancer Treatment Center and the Vanazor
                                                                                Medical Center are State-owned as confirmed by
                                                                                the land title and tenure documents obtained by
                                                                                HPIU. No informal land use has been registered
                                                                                on these plots during field visits undertaken as
                                                                                part of the project preparation.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                The project will finance new construction and reconstruction of premises of the medical
                              institutions which according to the OP/BP 4.01 are classified as environmental Category B. No
                              large scale significant adverse environmental and social impacts are expected from the project
                              implementation. Civil works to be supported under the project are typical and carry environmental
                              implications which are common for construction and rehabilitation of medium size buildings
                              within urban settings.
                              For the purposes of modernization of center treatment services in Armenia the Government plans
Public Disclosure Copy




                              to equip the Cancer Treatment Center with a cyclotron for the production of isotopes used in
                              diagnostics. Premises for placement of cyclotron are under construction. Operation of the
                              cyclotron is likely to be included into the Cancer Treatment Center management contract and be
                              co-financed from the project. If this PPP arrangement materializes in the course of the project
                              implementation, then the EMP for the operation phase of the Cancer Treatment Center to be
                              produced as part of the EIA report will include servicing of the cyclotron as well.

                              The Project will not require any land take or resettlement. Center of Hematology will be
                              reconstructed within the existing perimeter of its current premises. Land plots considered for the
                              construction of new buildings for the Cancer Treatment Center and for Vanazor Medical Center
                              are State-owned as confirmed by the land title and tenure documents obtained by HPIU. They
                              were inspected both by the HPIU as all as the Bank team and no informal land use has been
                              identified. Expected temporary negative social impacts of the construction phase can be easily
                              mitigated through minimizing nuisance from the excessive noise and dust, managing movement of
                              construction vehicles and machinery, demarcating and fencing of construction sites, and excluding
                              scattered piling of construction materials and waste outside the boundaries of construction sites.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                               n/a


                                                                        Page 6 of 8
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             n/a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             The Borrower prepared the EMF which carries detailed guidance on the conduct of the site-
                           specific EIAs for the construction of medical centers in Yerevan and Vanadzor by the time the
                           detailed designs become available for these buildings. EMF determines the generic types of risks
                           associated with these investments and gives a menu of conventional measures for mitigating these
                           risks. This information, along with the background data compiled in the EMF, will be used for the
                           preparation of EIA reports. The site-specific EMP was prepared for a lower-risk investment into
                           the reconstruction of the existing premises of the Center of Hematology in Yerevan. The draft
                           final EMF and EMP were disclosed and discussed with stakeholders. Similar procedures of
                           disclosure and public consultation will be applied to the site-specific EIA reports to be prepared
                           for the construction of the Cancer Treatment Center and the Vanadzor Medical Center, following
                           the requirements of the EMF. The EMF is included in the Operations Manual of the project
                           implementing entity and adherence to it is mandatory throughout the project life.

                           The Health Projects Implementation Unit (HPIU) under the Ministry of Health of the Republic of
                           Armenia is the project implementing entity. It has a long history of implementing World Bank-
                           supported projects with a good track record of complying with safeguard policies. HPIU managed
                           rehabilitation and construction works under the ongoing Health Systems Modernization Project
                           (HSMP), which are mostly similar to the works planned under the NDPC Project. Ratings on
                           safeguard compliance under HSMP have been consistently satisfactory. Arrangements for
                           monitoring adherence to safeguard policies under the NDPC Project will remain similar to those
                           applied under the HSMP and will imply integration of environmental supervision into the overall
                           technical oversight of works, using monthly field environmental monitoring checklists for tracking
                           and recording status of compliance on regular basis. HPIU’s bi-annual project progress reporting
Public Disclosure Copy




                           will include analysis of environmental performance, issues identified, and corrective measures
                           applied.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Patients and health service providers of the beneficiary medical centers are the main beneficiaries
                           of the project. The Ministry of health of the RoA and the municipalities of Yerevan and Vanadzor
                           are also the project stakeholders. Managerial and medical staff of these institutions was involved
                           in the decision-making process related to the development of the hospital optimization program
                           and to the technical aspects of providing adequate premises for the project beneficiary medical
                           centers.

                           Advanced drafts of the EMF andthe EMP for the Center of Hematology were disclosed in-country
                           and through the InfoShop on December 19, 2012. The final versions, with the minutes of public
                           consultations attached, will be re-disclosed in-country and through the Bank Infoshop. The site-
                           specific EIA reports for the Cancer Treatment center and the Vanadzor Medical Center will be
                           subject to mandatory in-country disclosure and consultation with the affected communities in the
                           areas of individual project sites. These site-specific documents will be developed, reviewed, and
                           approved prior to tendering of works under these individual investments.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements

                                                                      Page 7 of 8
                            Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                      18-Dec-2012
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                   19-Dec-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                              For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                              Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                            "In country" Disclosure
                              Armenia                                                          19-Dec-2012
                              Comments: EMP and EMF were published on Government's official web site (http://healthpiu.
                                            am/Procurement/reports.html)
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Susanna Hayrapetyan
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Johanne Angers (SM)                          Date: 16-Apr-2013



                                                                       Page 8 of 8
