                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC837

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Jun-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-Jun-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Congo, Republic of              Project ID:      P128628
                            Project Name:      Congo Skills Development for Employability Project (P128628)
                            Task Team          Cristina Isabel Panasco S
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          24-Jun-2013                     Estimated        17-Sep-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTEW                           Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Adult literacy/non-formal education (10%), Vocational training (90%)
                            Theme(s):          Education for the knowledge economy (85%), Micro, Small and Medium
                                               Enterprise support (15%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     30.00                    Total Bank Financing:         10.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                               Financing Gap:                 0.00
                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                         20.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                10.00
                              Total                                                                      30.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The development objective of the proposed operation is to establish mechanisms and build capacity
                           to develop and deliver demand-driven training programs to respond to the labor market needs and to
                           improve employability of beneficiary groups.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed project is being put in place as an important element of the Government’s agenda for
                         diversifying the country’s economy and improving employment and job creations. By
                         complementing other interventions including the World Bank-financed Support to Economic
                         Diversification project, it will focus on reducing skills shortages and/or workforce qualification
Public Disclosure Copy




                         needs in areas that are critical for all segments of economy while helping prepare workforce
                         development plans for priority growth pole sectors.

                         As such the project aims at helping the Government and the main stakeholders to put in place a
                         demand-driven skills development framework which not only gradually respond to skills shortages
                         but introduce new practices and procedures to foster accountability for results. To this end, and based
                         on our discussions and consultations with the main stakeholders, the strategic approach used in the
                         design of the operation is guided by three main principles. First, this should be seen as a multi-
                         sectoral endeavor, for which there is a need for a process where the main actors (Planning/Finance
                         and Private Sector Development ministries, private sector organizations and TVET and Higher
                         Education ministries) discuss and work together toward a shared goal. This has led to the
                         establishment of tripartite arrangements where relationships between various actors will be governed
                         by strong partnership and contracts. Second, the importance of having a demonstration effect so as to
                         pave the way for better institutionalizing the process, scaling up programs, while improving
                         sustainability in the long run. In this context, the choice was made to be selective in defining both the
                         scope and the coverage of the project interventions. It is proposed that the project focuses on two
                         qualifications areas where the shortages are mostly reported by firms and households, e.g. civil
                         works and maintenance. The possibility to add a third area of focus will be examined at mid-term
                         review, paying a particular attention to the gender dimension. In a similar vein, the project
                         intervention will be limited to the development of detailed workforce development plans for priority
                         sectors/filières. Some of these plans will be translated into relevant programs which could be
                         implemented under separate operations, as deemed relevant.

                         The project activities will be structured around the following two main components.

                         Component 1: Developing and delivering effective demand-driven training and apprenticeship
Public Disclosure Copy




                         programs while enhancing the existing training capacity

                         The component is comprised of 2 sub-components that will contribute to the overall objective of
                         improving employability and productivity of the active population focusing on the areas of civil work
                         and maintenance.


                         Sub-component 1.1 Funding demand-driven training programs

                         The project would support training and apprenticeship sub-projects which are submitted to the
                         Training Technical Unit (TTU see the Implementation arrangements section) by SMEs or organ
                         ization such as NGO, professional associations) --referred to as sponsors --, who had organized
                         groups of beneficiaries, for this purpose. It is proposed that priority be given, at the first place, to
                         training in the areas of construction and maintenance, given the fact that there are pressing skill and
                         qualification shortages in those fields that are cross-sectoral and will benefit all segments of the
                         economy. The possibility of adding a third area of qualification will be examined at mid-term review.
                         Training sub-projects are identified and submitted by a “sponsor” on behalf of beneficiary groups.
                         The training sponsor could be a public or a non-public institution (NGOs, associations, enterprises,
                         etc) which is actively involved in economic and social activities, can justify the training needs, and
                         has some legitimacy in organizing the beneficiary groups. Each training sub-project will be assessed
                         on its content and cost-effectiveness.

                         Project support will be structured around two windows which depend on the nature of the training
Public Disclosure Copy




                         request and the quality of the supply side. These training are expected not to last than 18 months and
                         to be tailored to qualifications ranging from post-primary to post secondary education levels (see
                         illustration below). The first window will finance requests for training or re-training or
                         apprenticeship, for which proven modules and/or qualified training providers (public or private)
                         already exist. A competitive selection process will be used to select the training providers for this
                         window. The second window will finance training requests whose execution require investment to
                         improve existing capacity. Partnership arrangements will be developed with selected centers to this
                         end and contribute to improve their capacity to deliver such programs. Some work will be done
                         during project preparation to identify these potential training domains so as to initiate the center
                         selection process.

                         Sub-component 1.2: Developing training outreach activities and strengthening the existing training
                         capacity

                         The new mechanism and goals which are being put forward by the project will need to be supported
                         by vibrant IEC and monitoring programs. In this regard, this sub-component will support a range of
                         activities needed to generate quality training demands from the beneficiary groups/sponsors, to
                         review proposals of training sub-projects and to monitor implementation of selected training sub-
                         projects (paying attention to the training provider capacity improvement).

                         This will include provide support (technical assistance, training, etc) for:

                         •        Carrying out necessary and tailored outreach programs in direction of all stakeholders
                         (sponsors, beneficiaries, etc). A particular attention will be given to the creation and/or the
                         consolidation of the existing network of actors so as to maximize effectiveness and impact;
                         •        Developing partnerships with selected training institutions to execute training sub-projects
Public Disclosure Copy




                         along with actions and investments to strengthen their capacity and the necessary quality assurance
                         work,
                         •        Executing monitoring and evaluation activities. This will include the monitoring of the sub-
                         project training actives as well the execution relevant surveys and impact evaluation studies for
                         assessing DO achievements and for accumulating lessons and knowledge. These activities will be
                         contracted-out as much as possible.

                         Component 2: Strengthening the Institutional Capacity to support the overall training delivery
                         responsiveness agenda

                         This component comprises the following three sub-components

                         Sub-component 2.1: Supporting the preparation of Workforce Development Plans for selected
                         priority Growth Pole sectors

                         The project will provide technical assistance to prepare detailed workforce development plans to
                         accompany the implementation of the PRSP’s Growth pole programs, by focusing on two or/three
                         priority economic sectors. These plans which will aim at ensuring that qualified workforce is
                         available to support private investment in these growth sectors will identify relevant training
                         programs (pre-service and in-service) and propose cost-effective delivery options and program costs.
                           These options will include some cost-sharing arrangement with private investors. While these plans
                           are expected to provide a good basis for preparing specific separate projects, it is expected that
                           eligible in-service training needs would be supported either under component 1 or by the Economic
Public Disclosure Copy




                           diversification project.

                           Sub-Component 2.2: Supporting labor market monitoring activities and providing selective technical
                           support to the TVET and Higher Education ministries.

                           Discussions with main actors underscored the need to strengthen the existing capacity in collecting
                           and analyzing labor market information with the view to provide the TVET and higher education
                           institutions with needed information on labor market needs and dynamics, as well as feedbacks on
                           the adequacy of the skills acquired by their graduates. The design of these activities will be
                           influenced by the final decision on the institutional settings. Presently, ONEMO is handling this
                           responsibility but faces a range of capacity challenges to deliver (including management and human
                           resources issues). The Government is also considering setting up a new and well-tailored
                           “Observatory” to undertake these tasks. Data to be provided are expected to include the following:
                           job availability with different skills and their earning, skills competencies required by different jobs,
                           labor force structure, labor productivity, and technology. To be effective, the Observatory work
                           should be based on a strong out-sourcing and partnership approach with qualified institutions.

                           Sub-component 2.3: Project coordination and management

                           The sub-component will support project management and coordination. This will include the staffing
                           and equipment of the Training Technical Unit (TTU) and its running costs.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           N/A
Public Disclosure Copy




                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Borrower is familiar with Bank safeguards policies.

                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Abdoulaye Gadiere (AFTN3)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/          No
                           BP 4.01
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04           No

                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                    No

                           Pest Management OP 4.09               No

                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/       No
                           BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 05-Jun-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The project has no environmental and social impacts and thus none of the Bank's safeguards
                                      policies are triggered for this project.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Cristina Isabel Panasco S

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name:                                                                                                                      Date:
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Peter Nicolas Materu (SM)                                                                                            Date: 10-Jun-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
