                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC815

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Jun-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Bangladesh                       Project ID:      P131394
                            Project Name:      BD: Reaching Out of School Children II (P131394)
                            Task Team          Dilip Parajuli
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          13-Jul-2012                      Estimated        23-Oct-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASED                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector:            Primary education (70%), Other social services (30%)
                            Theme:             Education for all (50%), Participation and civic engagement (25%), Gender
                                               (25%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                             0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                  100.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Total                                                                        100.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The key project development objective is to contribute to improving equitable access, retention and
                           completion in quality primary education in under-served areas.
                           C. Project Description
                           1. The proposed ROSC II project would be implemented in about 100 additional upazilas of the
                           country and the upazilas would be selected on the basis of poverty, education deprivation and other
                           relevant criteria. Based on the demand, the needy communities in the current 90 upazilas would also
                           be eligible for ROSC-II interventions. The project would support access to learning opportunity for
                           out-of-school children by providing stipend allowances to students and grants to learning centers.
                           With community management as the fulcrum, buttressed by a partnership between the government
                           and non-governmental organizations (NGOs), the approach would focus on the establishment of
                         learning centers set up through a Center Management Committee (CMC) directly accountable to
                         parents and students.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2. The proposed project would consist of the following components:
                         i. Access: increasing equitable access in primary education through: (a) establishment of Learning
                         Centers, (b) provision of grants to LCs, (c) provision of education allowances to students, and (d)
                         piloting of ROSC-type approach in selected urban slums;
                         ii. Quality: improving retention in and completion of primary education cycle through teacher
                         development and support program, provision of instructional materials, provision of specialized
                         support to appear in cycle completion examinations, and skills training for eligible ROSC students;
                         iii. Capacity development: enhancing project implementation capacity through mobilization of
                         communities and partner agencies; and
                         iv. M&E: establishing an effective monitoring and evaluation system.

                         3. In the selected upazilas, once the needy communities are identified, social awareness and
                         community mobilization campaign would be conducted to make the communities aware of the
                         processes, their roles and authorities and the support they will be provided so they are prepared to
                         take full leadership of the Learning Centers. With the help from Upazila Education Committees,
                         communities will identify and contract local NGOs to help them establish the LCs, recruit the
                         teachers (one teacher per LC) and run the school administration during the first year. Some national
                         level NGOs will be contracted by CMCs to provide education quality support including teacher
                         training, classroom instruction and other necessary support throughout the project life. Each CMC
                         will enter into a cooperation agreement with the project unit; the agreement will include compliance
                         with ensuring safe drinking water and sanitation facility in the LCs. Each LC will have a maximum
                         of 35 students. Children aged between 6 and 12, who dropped out of primary school or were never
                         enrolled, will be eligible for initial admission. Allowances will be provided to each enrolled student
                         meeting certain criteria which will go directly to her/his mother’s account. A comprehensive
                         database and monitoring system would be in place to track education achievement and receipt of
                         eligible funds to each student and to help take timely corrective measures as necessary. A number of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         third party independent studies will also be built into the program to measure its results and
                         effectiveness and also help the country identify future directions.

                         4. While the basic approach in the proposed ROSC-II would follow that of the ongoing ROSC
                         project, it will feature a number of new ideas. These will include (i) revamped focus on quality of
                         learning through incentive-based teachers development and support program, (ii) extension of
                         ROSC-type intervention in selected urban slums, (iii) piloting of information technology such as
                         mobile phones for funds disbursement as well as monitoring of service delivery at the beneficiary
                         level.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the             safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed ROSC II project would be implemented in about 100 additional upazilas of the country
                         and the upazilas would be selected on the basis of poverty, education deprivation and other relevant
                         criteria. It will also be extended to selected urban slums on a pilot basis. Since the environmental
                         safeguard measures worked well for the first ROSC, it will be continued in the ROSC–II as well. The
                         main safeguard concern for ROSC-II, as was the case for ROSC, will be the availability of safe
                         drinking water.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                               The Directorate of Primary Education (DPE) under the Ministry of Primary and Mass Education
                               (MOPME) is the implementing agency. Although DPE has successfully implemented IDA supported
                               first ROSC and Primary Education Development Program (PEDP), DPE does not have any dedicated
Public Disclosure Copy




                               environmental professional for the World Bank funded projects. To address any gaps in borrower's
                               capacity to review and update the existing environmental guidelines for sanitation facilities in ROSC
                               Learning Centers, and in continuing with the targeted/inclusive project intervention, technical
                               assistance will be provided from the World Bank side.
                               F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                               Sabah Moyeen (SASDS)
                               Nadia Sharmin (SASDI)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                                 Safeguard Policies                                                Triggered?                    Explanation (Optional)
                                 Environmental Assessment OP/                                      Yes                           The main safeguard issue for ROSC-II, as was
                                 BP 4.01                                                                                         the case with ROSC-I, is the availability of
                                                                                                                                 arsenic free safe drinking water and adequate
                                                                                                                                 sanitation facility. The existing environmental
                                                                                                                                 management framework for ROSC I will be
                                                                                                                                 updated.
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No
                                 BP 4.11
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     Yes

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            ROSC-II, as in ROSC-I, will continue to target
                                 4.12                                                                                            children from poor households in under-served
                                                                                                                                 areas (upazilas selected by human opportunity
                                                                                                                                 index ranking). This includes both gender
                                                                                                                                 aspects as well as children from indigenous
                                                                                                                                 communities if these communities are part of
                                                                                                                                 the targeted areas. The Ministry will update the
                                                                                                                                 existing IP guidelines to make it more
                                                                                                                                 appropriate for the new operation.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 12-Jul-2012


                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                             Safeguards measures in place for the original project (category-B) have worked well. As with the
Public Disclosure Copy




                             original ROSC project, the two safeguards (OP 4.01 and OP 4.10) will continue to be triggered.
                             As such, the agreed guidelines prepared by MOPME for the original project will be revised to
                             reflect necessary refinements and followed in the proposed ROSC-II project. Communities will
                             own and operate the Learning centers (LCs) established in the project. Center management
                             committees (CMC)'s cooperation agreement with the project unit will ensure that LCs will be
                             responsible for providing enrollment access to a wider group of children, including tribal, street
                             children, child labor and poor children, and safe water and sanitation to these children. Both
                             environmental and social safeguards-related assessment reports will be prepared before project
                             appraisal, and lessons learned from the first project will be used to update the relevant guidelines.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:       Name: Dilip Parajuli

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Sanjay Srivastava (RSA)                              Date: 13-Jun-2012
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Amit Dar (SM)                                        Date: 13-Jun-2012
Public Disclosure Copy
