                                                                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                             APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA127
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Mar-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        Bangladesh                              Project ID:                       P123828
                              Project Name:                   Second Rural Transport Improvement Project (P123828)
                              Task Team Leader:               Manzoor Ur Rehman
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 12-Mar-2012                                   Estimated Board Date:             03-May-2012
                              Managing Unit:                  SASDT                                   Lending Instrument:               Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                         Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (97%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (2%), Ports, waterways and
                                                              shipping (1%)
                              Theme:                          Rural services and infrastructure (88%), Rural policies and institutions (10%), Rural markets (2%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                        Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                        115.00
                                   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                               302.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                     417.00
                              Environmental Category:         A - Full Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              The proposed Project Development Objective is:
                              To improve rural accessibility in project areas (covering 26 districts) and strengthen institutional capacity for sustainable rural road maintenance.

                              3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                              1.         The project rationale is to scale up the accomplishments in the rural roads infrastructure under the ongoing RTIP-I and further expand on
                              it by adding improvements in the inland water transportation and introducing performance based (routine and periodic) maintenance contracts of
                              the rural roads. Therefore, the RTIP-II consists of the following components.

                              Component A: Accessibility Improvement:

                              2.       Sub Component A1: Rural Roads Improvement: The project will finance improvement of about 750 km of Upazila roads and about 500
                              km of Union roads in 26 districts through upgrading earthen to paved roads standard. Appropriate road safety measures will be included in the civil
                              works. The sub-component will include land acquisition (only for Upazila roads) and compensation of persons affected by the project,
                              environmental mitigation measures, road safety and activities by women’s groups. All required land acquisition and resettlement costs will be
                              funded by the GoB counterpart funding.

                              3.        Sub Component A2: Rural Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance: The project will finance rehabilitation and periodic maintenance of
                              about 3,550 km of Upazila and Union roads in 26 districts. Rehabilitation works will include appropriate road safety measures. The project will also
                              maintain about 450 km of roads for 5-years following the DANIDA model of performance based maintenance contracts (PBMC). RTIP-1 roads will
                              be given preference for PBMC to enhance sustainability of RTIP-I investments. Bank will regularly monitor increases in GoB’s maintenance
                              funding.

                              4.        Sub Component A3: Rural Waterways and Ghats: The project will pilot on low impact dredging of two rural waterways using local
                              technology and removal of temporarily constructed earthen bunds across waterways, protection works at erosion-prone and vulnerable points
                              along bank lines, enhancing safety by installation of navigational aids, and provision of landing facilities. In addition, the project will finance
                              construction of river infrastructure (ghats, jetties) at about 20 locations. The two rivers at Comilla and Tangail have been selected. Candidates
                              Ghats have been identified following a methodology agreed with the Bank.

                              5.         Sub Component A4: Growth Center Markets (GCMs): The project will support the improvement and development of 50 markets,
                              selected by a jointly-determined selection methodology and in consultation with the beneficiaries. This sub-component will also aim at
                              strengthening management and operation of GCMs by providing support to the markets’ committees. Five shops will be reserved for women
                              traders in women’s marketing sections (WMS) of each market. Due consideration was paid in the selection process for women to operate shops in
                              WMS and enhancing their capacity.

                              6.         Sub component A5: Project Supervision and monitoring consultants : The subcomponent will include services of three consulting firms,
                              two of these will be the Design and Supervision Consultants (DSC), and one Management Support Consultant (MSC). The MSC will provide

                                                                                                                                                                          Page 1 of 6
                         managerial support to PMU, LGED and assist to oversee the function and performance of the two DSCs. The two DSCs will be responsible for
                         field-level supervision and implementation of project works in 13 districts each. The DSCs will also be responsible for the design and preparation of
                         the RPM and PBMC works beyond the first year program. This component also includes cost of office equipment and vehicles.

                         Component B: Institutional Strengthening, Capacity Building and Governance Enhancement: The institutional strengthening aspect builds on and
                         further improves the functioning of the LGED through (i) capacity building to enhance LGED performance, governance and accountability; and (ii)
                         performance monitoring and training.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         7.          Sub Component B1: Institutional Development and Governance: The sub-component will support implementation of the new post-ORA
                         LGED Management Improvement Plan aimed at strategic enhancements in LGED’s capacity, effectiveness, governance and accountability in the
                         following areas: Maintenance Management (Policy, Planning and Operations); Planning, Design and Quality Management (including ISO
                         certification); Environmental and Social (Impact) Management; Performance Management including Monitoring and Evaluation; IT-ICT-MIS
                         Technology, Facilities and Capacity Building; and Training and Human Resource Development capacity. The interventions in these fields are
                         mostly directly aligned with targets in the project’s Governance and Accountability Action Plan (GAAP).

                         8.         Sub Component B2: Project Implementation: LGED’s capacity will be strengthened in project performance monitoring and management
                         to regularly gather information for assessing the project’s effectiveness in meeting the agreed PDO. The support will include services for
                         performance audits and socio-economic and monitoring surveys.

                         Component C: Rural Transport Safety:

                         9.         The component will support technical assistance and advisory services to (a) strengthen road safety capacity of the LGED and the new
                         LGED ‘Central Road Safety Unit’ (CRSU); (b) upgrade LGED design standards, codes, and practices in road safety engineering; (c) collaboratively
                         with the DSC and ARI-BUET (as appropriate) develop a comprehensive Road Safety Training Program for LGED including rural road safety
                         engineering, road safety auditing, monitoring and evaluation, safety during road works and other key aspects; (d) improve rural road accident data
                         collection process, database and analysis capacity through piloting local accident data collection at Upazila and Union levels in 8 districts; (e)
                         provide training (basic and ‘train-the-trainer’ levels) for representatives of participating Local Government (LG) entities and communities, police,
                         school teachers, members of the (rural) rickshaw drivers’ associations, other local road transport operators and local-level works contractors and
                         associated advocacy, monitoring and survey activities in the concerned Project districts. TA under this component will support design and
                         monitoring of implementation of road safety features on project roads under Component A. Costs associated with implementation of engineering
                         solutions such as signs, markings, street lights, pedestrian facilities, etc. will be included as part of civil works.

                         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         11. The project will be implemented in 26 districts out of 64 districts in Bangladesh. 24 districts are on the east of the Jamuna/Padma rivers but
                         the project area excludes the Chittagong Hill Tracts, which are heavily populated by indigenous peoples. The two remaining districts are on the
                         west of the Jamuna River.

                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                         Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi (SASDI)
                         Md. Akhtaruzzaman (SASDS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         6. Safeguard Policies                           Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01             Yes              The project is classified as a Category A project due to the complexity of
                                                                                          environmental issues associated with waterways improvements and also the
                                                                                          uncertainty (lack of details at project preparation) on the impact of most of the
                                                                                          projects to be implemented in a widespread geographical project area.
                                                                                          Since all the details of improvement works are not available at this stage, a
                                                                                          framework approach will be followed for the proposed operation. A typical
                                                                                          environmental management plan and a code of practices will be provided in the
                                                                                          environmental management framework. Specific environmental assessments of
                                                                                          improvement works will be required during the design before clearance for
                                                                                          execution.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                     Yes              The project activities may have temporary and in few cases permanent impacts on
                                                                                          fisheries and aquatic life. Construction of approach roads on flood plains may
                                                                                          restrict free movement of fishes. In addition, dredging works will create noise and
                                                                                          disturbances that may affect breeding and migration of aquatic life. Site
                                                                                          developments may require cutting and/or trimming of tress. The impact on the
                                                                                          natural habitats will be studied as part of the environmental screening/assessment
                                                                                          of each sub-project. Appropriate measures will be recommended to reduce the
                                                                                          disturbance to the natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                              No
                         Pest Management OP 4.09                         No
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11          Yes              It is highly unlikely that any designated physical cultural resources will be affected
                                                                                          by the subprojects. In the unlikely scenario of any such impacts, the impacts will be
                                                                                          examined as part of the environmental screening/assessment of each sub-project.
                                                                                          ‘Chance find’ procedures conforming with local legislation on heritage would also
                                                                                          be evaluated and made a part of the EMP.




                                                                                                                                                                    Page 2 of 6
                               Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                  Yes              Although the project does not include the Chittagong Hill Tracts (CHT), given the
                                                                                               presence of indigenous peoples (IPs) in some of the project districts, RTIP-II will
                                                                                               trigger OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples. The on-going RTIP, which also excluded
                                                                                               CHT, prepared and implemented an Indigenous Peoples Development Plan (IPDP
                                                                                               based on OD 4.20) for the first-phase works. A Social Impact Management
                                                                                               Framework (SIMF) has been prepared under RTIP II that covers project social
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               issues, including issues related to indigenous peoples. . The SIMF includes an
                                                                                               indigenous peoples planning framework and lays out the principles, guidelines and
                                                                                               procedures to prepare and implement Indigenous Peoples Plan (based on OP/BP
                                                                                               4.10) wherever project improvements would be found to affect IPs.
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12            Yes              As experienced under the on-going RTIP, project works under the RTIP II will
                                                                                               require land acquisition and population displacement. This is particularly so with
                                                                                               the Upazila roads component. Acquisition of private lands and displacement of
                                                                                               peoples under other components and sub-components will not be required given
                                                                                               the nature of the civil works involved. The Resettlement Framework adopted for
                                                                                               the on-going RTIP has been updated into the SIMF for RTIP-II. It includes issues
                                                                                               related to Involuntary Resettlement, Indigenous Peoples and gender. Among other
                                                                                               issues, the SIMF includes (a) a legal framework outlining the principles and
                                                                                               guidelines which will be used to acquire lands and mitigate the adverse impacts,
                                                                                               including those on indigenous peoples; (b) facility for screening of social safeguard
                                                                                               issues related to involuntary resettlement and indigenous peoples; (c) mitigation
                                                                                               principles, guidelines, and a policy matrix in terms of different impact categories;
                                                                                               (d) a grievance redress procedure for the project affected persons; (e) stakeholder
                                                                                               consultation framework; and (f) arrangement for monitoring progress in the
                                                                                               implementation of impact mitigation plans. The SIMF will provide the basis to
                                                                                               prepare Resettlement Action Plans and Indigenous Peoples Plans along the
                                                                                               annual civil work programs.
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                      No
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP      Yes              The two pilots will improve the navigability of the two rivers using small boats in the
                               7.50                                                            existing and ongoing rural waterways with limited draft requirements, and as such
                                                                                               they are not expected to adversely change the quality or quantity of water flowing
                                                                                               to the Bay of Bengal or being withdrawn from internationally shared river or
                                                                                               aquifers. The project is not expected to adversely impact India’s or any other
                                                                                               riparians' water use. Therefore, the proposed upgrades do not substantially alter,
                                                                                               change, or exceed current rural waterway systems or open new waterways in the
                                                                                               proposed pilot areas. The proposed rural waterway improvements build on existing
                                                                                               waterway networks, and only offer limited upgrades to improve the efficiencies of
                                                                                               existing transport systems. This includes support removal of temporarily
                                                                                               constructed earthen bunds across waterways, protection works at erosion-prone
                                                                                               and vulnerable points along bank lines, enhancing safety by installation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               navigational aids, and provision of landing facilities. Furthermore, sand removal
                                                                                               activities are already underway by the private sector, thus proposed project
                                                                                               activities will only have incremental effect to facilitate the ongoing rural waterways
                                                                                               to benefit the local population. Therefore the exception to the riparian notification
                                                                                               requirement under paragraph 7 (a) of OP 7.50 applies to the Project. The pilot river
                                                                                               routes are not part of the Protocol Agreement between India and Bangladesh.
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60          No


                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                  12. The proposed project will finance road improvement and maintenance activities on the existing rural road network. No construction of new
                                 roads is envisaged and therefore, significant and long-term environmental impacts are not expected from the rural road improvement and
                                 maintenance subcomponent. However, works on rural roads in general are known to have impacts resulting from erosion, dust and noise
                                 control, waste disposal during construction and increased access to remote areas. Road improvements will ensure proper drainage and
                                 enhance soil stability, as well as provide greater vehicular and pedestrian safety by improving road surfaces and embankments and building
                                 bridges. Other impacts can be managed effectively with known mitigation measures.

                                 13. The construction of fifty (50) growth center markets will take place in the existing market locations and no significant impact is expected
                                 from this subcomponent.

                                 14. The project will support the improvement of the two existing waterways by introducing low-cost dredging, removal of temporarily constructed
                                 earthen bunds across waterways, protection works at erosion-prone and vulnerable points along bank lines, enhancing safety by installation of
                                 navigational aids, and provision of landing facilities. The rural waterways improvement may have significant environmental impacts on aquatic
                                 life, human health, agriculture, land use etc. The subproject specific environmental assessment will identify all possible impacts due to the
                                 waterways improvement.

                                 15. Social safeguards issues are anticipated only in subprojects involving improvement of Upazila roads. However, social screening will be

                                                                                                                                                                          Page 3 of 6
                           conducted for each subproject for ensuring social safeguard compliance and identification of issues to be addressed. Sub-projects other than
                           Upazila roads will not qualify for project finance if they involve land acquisition and population displacement.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                            16. The proposed project will gradually open-up the development opportunity of some of the underdeveloped or low developed rural areas and
                           eventually the numbers of motorized transport will be increased, which may contribute to localized air pollution and road safetyrelated
                           challenges. As practiced in Bangladesh, new shops and market will also be set-up around the improved roads. All these new economic
                           activities may lead to change in present land use pattern. The improved road will also induce increased mobility of the peoples including the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           women and disadvantaged groups.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                             17. Since the rural road maintenance works will be carried out on existing roads, no change in the existing alignment of the roads will be
                           considered. Improvement works may require some incremental changes in the alignment which will be designed to minimize adverse impacts.
                           The improvement work will ensure proper cross drainage, widening and slope stability during planning. The Growth Center Markets will be
                           constructed on existing market space and waterways development will be carried out on existing rivers. The locations of the Jetties will be
                           finalized taking into consideration of land availability, technical feasibility and environmental impact. Alternative locations will be considerate for
                           environmental and social benefits.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                            and implement the measures described.
                             18. Since the exact location of all subprojects has not been finalized at project preparation stage, it was not possible to carry out a full
                           environmental assessment for this project prior to its appraisal. Instead, an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) has been prepared
                           by the Borrower describing the general baseline condition, typical environmental impacts from different types subproject during preconstruction,
                           construction and operation periods. The EMF also provides the guidelines to comply with national legislation and World Bank safeguards
                           policies, and defines the environmental requirements needed for processing the financing of each sub-component. In addition, the EMF has laid
                           out the procedures for screening each subproject for potential environmental impacts, and how to determine the scope of appropriate
                           Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA). The environmental screening/assessment will take into consideration the impact on the natural
                           habitats and will recommend appropriate measures to reduce disturbance to these habitats. Although it is highly unlikely that any designated
                           physical cultural resources will be affected by the subprojects, the EMF has provision of ‘Chance find’ procedures conforming to applicable
                           legislations on heritage. In addition, the relevant Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines of the World Bank Group/International Finance
                           Corporation (IFC) will be applicable to the project.

                           19. The subprojects (waterways improvement, growth center construction and improvement of the road networks) which may have
                           environmental potential impacts will be implemented from second year of project implementation after proper environmental screening and
                           assessment. Only the maintenance of roads having insignificant environmental impacts will be carried out during the first year of the project.
                           These subprojects are expected to require only environmental screening. According to EMF, specific Environmental Management Plans (EMP)
                           need to be prepared for all subprojects having environmental impacts and EMP will be an integral part of the Bill of Quantities (BOQ). The EMF
                           also provides the Environmental Code of Practice (ECP), which will be included in all subproject civil works contracts through a set of special
                           environmental clauses (SECs) included in the Technical Specification of the bidding documents.

                           20. The Project Environmental Unit headed by an Executive Engineer which was set-up under the RTIP will continue to coordinate the
                           environmental management of the project. The project will also hire the services of two Junior Environmental Specialists through Design and
                           Supervision Consultancy and one Senior Environmental Specialist through Management Support Consultancy for environment screening/
Public Disclosure Copy




                           assessment, supervision and monitoring. The EIA of the rural waterways will be conducted by qualified individual environmental consultant. In
                           addition, an environmental audit will be carried out before the mid-term evaluation and before project closing.
                           Similarly, a Social Impact Management Framework (SIMF) has been developed at the preparation stage to guide the planning and
                           implementation of mitigation meas ures to address possible social impacts under the project. The SIMF lays out general policies, guidelines,
                           and procedures for integration of social safeguard compliance into the selection, design and implementation of the subprojects in each phase.
                           The SIMF will be followed to ensure that the project identifies all adverse social impacts associated with land acquisition, develops mitigation
                           measures with participation of the affected persons and their community, and all mitigation measures are prepared and implemented in
                           compliance with the relevant policies of the Government of Bangladesh and the World Bank. The SIMF also includes a procedure for social
                           screening of all sub-projects, a grievance redress system and institutional arrangements for implementation.

                           21. The Project Management Unit (PMU) at LGED, headed by a Project Director (PD), will be responsible for compliance of the SIMF. . The PD
                           and the PMU will be actively assisted by the Management Support Consultant (MS Consultant) in carrying out the project preparation and
                           implementation tasks. The Project will appoint a full-time and dedicated Senior Sociologist at PMU for overseeing social aspects of RTIP-II. In
                           carrying out the social management and resettlement activities, LGED will also utilize its existing staff at district and upazila levels. The key
                           LGED staff supporting social management includes the Executive Engineer (XEN) at district, and the Upazila Engineer (UE), the Surveyor and
                           the Community Organizer (CO) at upazila level. A Grievance Redress Committee (GRC) at each Upazila will be chaired by the UE and
                           participated by community representatives and affected persons to manage local grievances on resettlement implementation issues.

                           22. LGED has its staff members at PMU having previous experience in social safeguard. Executive Engineers at 15 districts out of 26 have the
                           experience in implementation of social safeguard mitigation plans under the ongoing RTIP. The Project will finance additional personnel
                           resources to enable the LGED to fulfill its commitment to implement the social component, in particular the resettlement activities proposed in
                           SIMF. They will include a full-time District Sociologist (DS) in each district where the position is vacant. In this effort, the Project Implementation
                           Offices (PIOs) at the district level will be actively assisted by the Design and Supervision (DS) Consultant, with the technical services of a Land
                           Acquisition and Resettlement Specialist. However, to enhance the capacity on social safeguard, LGED has conducted orientation to the
                           Executive Engineers and Assistant Engineers of all the 26 project districts through the inception workshop on project preparation and the
                           national orientation workshop on 7 February 2012. During the implementation period, the Senior Sociologist jointly with the MS and DS
                           Consultants, will design and conduct training on social safeguard issues and compliance with the SIMF for the LGED field staff, especially
                           those who will implement subprojects including the District Sociologists. Gender actions as per the project SIMF will be given special attention
                           in all training and capacity building activities.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                            on potentially affected people.

                                                                                                                                                                       Page 4 of 6
                             23. The EMF and SIMF were prepared in consultation with the key stakeholders including the LGED field level staffs, contractors and
                           communities. A national consultation workshop was organized by LGED on February 07, 2012 to share the draft EMF and SIMF with all the
                           stakeholders. Consultation with communities has been made mandatory for environmental and social screening/assessment of each
                           subproject. Considering the piloting experience of RTIP, the project will display the environmental management plan with costing on a billboard
                           at the project site. The EMF and SIMF along with Bangla versions have been disclosed by the LGED on their website on December 22, 2011
                           and hardcopies are also available at LGED headquarters and district offices (project area). Advertisement requesting public comments are
                           published in two daily Newspapers (English and Bangla) since general people are not checking website on regular basis. The EMF and SIMF
Public Disclosure Copy




                           have also been disclosed in Infoshop on December 24, 2011. The SIMF, among others, includes Resettlement Policy Framework and
                           Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework.

                           24. The updated EMF including the comments from national workshop has been uploaded in the LGED website on February 29, 2012. The
                           subproject specific environmental screening/assessment will also be disclosed before the contract mobilization. For high risk sub-projects
                           having full scale environmental assessment, the EIA report will be disclosed by LGED before 120 days of contract mobilization after bank
                           review. However, the screening report/initial environmental examination report of low-risk sub-projects (like maintenance) will be disclosed
                           before 30 days of contract mobilization.

                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                                 Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                    22-Dec-2011
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                                22-Dec-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                 24-Dec-2011
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive                 30-Dec-2011
                           Directors
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                                 Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                    22-Dec-2011
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                                22-Dec-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                 24-Dec-2011
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                                 Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                    22-Dec-2011
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                                22-Dec-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                 24-Dec-2011
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                         disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                           Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                     Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [    ]

                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                           If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) natural   Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [    ]
                           habitats, does the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                           Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts on               Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [    ]
                           cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                           If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and approved by           Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [    ]
                           the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                           If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the             Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [    ]
                           plan?
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                           Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                                                Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [    ]

                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                           Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?                     Yes [     ]      No [   ]   NA [    ]

                                                                                                                                                                Page 5 of 6
                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language      Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for   Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?              Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard    Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same        Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Task Team Leader:                    Manzoor Ur Rehman
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:     Name: Sanjay Srivastava (RSA)                                            Date: 17-Mar-2012
                            Sector Manager:                      Name Binyam Reja (SM)                                                    Date: 16-Mar-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                                               Page 6 of 6
