                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC5287

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Jul-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 23-Jul-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           India                            Project ID:      P145502
                            Project Name:      TECHNOLOGY CENTER SYSTEMS PROJECT (TCSP) (P145502)
                            Task Team          Vincent Palmade
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          06-Feb-2014                      Estimated        24-Apr-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASFP                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        SME Finance (50%), Other industry (50%)
                            Theme(s):         Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       400.00              Total Bank Financing:            200.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                            Financing Gap:                     0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          200.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                 200.00
                              Total                                                                       400.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed Project’s Development Objective (PDO) is to enhance the competitiveness of MSMEs
                           and the employability of trainees in selected manufacturing industries and States through the
                           upgrading and development of Technology Centers.
                           C. Project Description
                           This proposed project is about the upgrading and development of Technology Centers which have as
                           their mission to improve the technological capabilities of MSMEs and technical skills of students in
                         selected manufacturing industries and States – with a strong emphasis on Low Income States. A
                         Technology Center is specialized in a given industry/technology. It provides on a fee basis: technical
                         training to workers and students as well as advisory services to MSMEs on both technology and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         business issues. It also helps MSMEs get exposure and access to state of the art technology/
                         equipment. These facilities can help MSMEs develop prototypes and get their equipment tested and
                         calibrated.
                         C. Project Description
                         The proposed national Program is based on a number of design principles and features aimed at
                         building on the strengths and addressing the weaknesses of the existing Micro, Small and Medium
                         Enterprise (MSME) Technology Centre program. It also seeks to develop synergies with the other
                         related public/private institutions and schemes involved in similar activities. The design principles
                         and features of the proposed Program are:
                         a.       Technology Centers to achieve technological and pedagogical excellence for
                         transformational impact – the Technology Centers, with the support of world class Technology
                         Partners (discussed in more details below), will need to reach and keep in touch with the global
                         technological frontier and rely on world class education skill development techniques and curricula.
                         b.       Technology Centers to be demand driven – all clients of the Technology Centers will need to
                         pay for a significant portion of the cost of the services received (some beneficiaries will benefit from
                         support provided by other programs). The price will vary depending on the nature of the services and
                         the beneficiary as well as on whether the service is being provided by private providers in the
                         vicinity (see immediately below).
                         c.       No crowding-out of the private sector – the Technology Centers will produce manufactured
                         products only for training/demonstration purposes. The Technology Centers will support (rather than
                         compete with) private providers of technology and skills. To ensure that, the price of their services
                         (adjusted for quality) will be at least equal to the prices of local private providers (if any).
                         Representatives of the private sector (including representatives of private providers of technology
                         and skills) will sit on the Governing Councils or Boards (in the case of Special Purpose Vehicles) of
                         the autonomous Technology Centers.
                         d.       Good governance – each autonomous Technology Center will be governed by a Governing
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Council representing all main stakeholders (especially private sector) or, in the case of a Special
                         Purpose Vehicle, by a Board (the later to be developed and tested first on a pilot basis).
                         e.       Linked to eco-system – each Technology Center will be supported by an internationally
                         competitively recruited Cluster Network Manager ensuring that it keeps in touch with the needs of
                         the business and student communities and that it contributes to/benefit from the eco-system it
                         operates in (discussed in more details below).
                         f.       National relevance – the Project will be governed by a Project Steering Committee
                         representing all main stakeholders ensuring that the Project keeps on track with fulfilling its main
                         objectives and contributes to/benefits from other related national programs and initiatives.
                         g.       Effective implementation – the design and implementation of the Project will be supported
                         by an internationally competitively recruited firm (discussed in more details below).
                         h.       Design inspired by good practices – the design of the Project is/will be inspired by relevant
                         international and national good practices - e.g. Germany’s Fraunhofer Institute, the US’ National
                         Network for Manufacturing Innovation initiative (NNMI) , China’s clusters of tool rooms and India’s
                         most successful industrial cluster initiatives).
                         The proposed program/project will finance the following activities grouped into three components:
                         Component 1: Technical assistance to the existing and new Technology Centres
                         A.       Technology Partners for each System of Technology Centre specialized on specific
                         industries/technologies. The role of the Technology Partners would include:
                         •        Technology Development: Identification of the existing and expected future technologies
                         which could have a transformational impact on the industry, in particular on MSMEs and
                         development of a detailed strategy for the industry to take most advantage of it.
                         •        Human skill Development: Development, in cooperation with the relevant stakeholders
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (especially leading private sector companies and business associations), of world class training
                         curricula (including for trainers), training models, knowledge transmission medium (for example -
                         on-line tooling simulation software), standards and certification schemes for the development of the
                         technological and skill base of firms (especially MSMEs), workers and students. Training of
                         trainers, for Technology Centres as well as other associated training institutions, including leading
                         private providers of technology and training (on a partial fee basis), examination/validation/
                         certification systems and faculty exchanges.
                         •        Business advisory: Advising on the type of software and equipment the Technology Centres
                         and their partners should rely on to facilitate/demonstrate the acquisition of new technologies and
                         skills. Advising on the technical set-up and governance models of common shared facilities within
                         the industry (within as well as outside the System of Technology Centres). Providing (on a partial fee
                         basis) technical advice to key clients/members of the Technology Centres (for example - industrial
                         clusters or leading manufacturing firms with large network of suppliers). Benchmarking the
                         performance of the main type of players in the industry with relevant international benchmarks
                         leading to specific recommendations to the various types of industry players as to how they should
                         improve their operations.
                         •        Policy advocacy: Conduct regular in-depth industry analysis, pointing out in particular the
                         main policy issues to be addressed by the Government.

                         B.       Cluster/Network Managers for each Technology Centre or local cluster of Technology
                         Centres. The role of Cluster Managers would include:
                         •        TC advisory – e.g. help TCs develop and implement their strategy based on the identification
                         the main opportunities and needs of the industrial clusters it will support (in partnership with the
                         Technology Partners).
                         •        Cluster advisory – e.g. help the main industrial clusters to be supported by the TCs improve
                         to help them identify and pursue common opportunities (new markets, technology upgrading,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         innovation) as well as help them identify and address key impediments standing in the way (policy
                         advocacy, development of shared infrastructure, help clusters access government schemes and
                         sources of financing).
                         •        Development of linkages across the TCs’ ecosystem – e.g. help TCs serve the needs of the
                         industrial clusters, help TCs develop partnerships with the providers of vocational training, help TCs
                         link up with research institutes and leading manufacturers.
                         Component 2: Investments to up-grade and build the facilities for the existing and new Technology
                         Centres
                         The Program will finance the upgrading of the existing 18 Technology Centres and will finance the
                         construction of new facilities for around 15 new Technology Centres.
                         1)       Land: The Program is expected to span across at least 25 States, including the eight Low
                         Income States. Most States have already expressed a strong interest in the Program and have
                         committed to allocate land for the new Technology Centres. The scope for having a transformative
                         impact together with the time it will take for the facilities to become operational will be a key
                         criterion for the site selection. Further, findings from the environment and social screening exercises
                         will influence/determine selection of the sites for construction of new Technology Centres.
                         2)       Buildings: The physical facilities of the Technology Centres will be upgraded and developed
                         with the following objectives in mind:
                         •        World class with respect to facilitating the provision of their services
                         •        Green to minimize their environmental impact
                         •        Economic to reduce costs
                         •        Flexibility with respect to usage and expansion/contraction
                         3)       Software/Equipment: to be purchased following the advice of the Technical Partners as
Public Disclosure Copy




                         discussed above and following the same principles as for the buildings.
                         Component 3: Technical assistance to MSME Ministry for Program implementation
                         1)       Implementation Partner: The Program will be implemented with the support of an
                         internationally competitively recruited firm which will provide support in the following areas:
                         •        Day-to-day Program management and supervision of activities
                         •        Procurement (including preparation of Terms of References and bidding documents)
                         •        Financial management
                         •        Contract management
                         •        Environmental and social management
                         •        Monitoring and Evaluation
                         2)       Small dedicated team hired to act as the interface between the Implementation Partner and
                         the Program Coordinator of the MSME Ministry.
                         Project Cost: The total Program cost on the government side will be USD 400 million over a five
                         year period split equally between State Governments (mostly through the contribution of land) and
                         the Federal Government (primarily through a USD 200 million Sector Investment Loan from the
                         World Bank/IBRD). The private sector is also expected to contribute financing in the pilot SPVs
                         (amount to be determined).
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Program is expected to span across several States of India, including the eight Low Income
                         States. The project would involve supporting the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises,
                         Govt. of India in setting-up of Tool Rooms and Technology Development Centers (together called
                         Technology Centres) in States such as Odhisa, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Rajasthan,
                         Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Karnataka and Maharashtra. However, the final list of
                         States where the project will be implemented is yet to be finalized in consultation with the MSME
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Ministry.
                         India is one of the world’s largest and most dynamic emerging markets with vast economic potential.
                         However, its recent economic performance has been under par; GDP growth decreased from 10.5
                         percent in 2010 to 5 percent in 2013 (year-to-end as of March 2013). While India stands to benefit
                         from an immense demographic dividend, with the largest youth population in the world (around 66
                         percent of the total population is under the age of 35), 11 percent of these are unemployed, and
                         overall labor participation is low at 56 percent.
                         The manufacturing sector is expected to play an important role in returning India to high growth
                         rates. Manufacturing has been recognized as an essential driver of economic development for most
                         developing countries and has an important economic and employment multiplier effect. India’s
                         manufacturing performance has not been very encouraging despite a strong potential. Its share of
                         GDP has stagnated at around 15 percent compared to more than 30 percent (and growing) in East
                         Asia. India’s manufacturing remains dominated by low productivity MSMEs co-existing with a few,
                         sometimes world class, large manufacturers.
                         The Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) play an important role in India’s economic
                         development and in the creation of productive jobs, especially in rural areas. According to the fourth
                         All India Census of MSMEs, the number of enterprises and employment opportunities in this sector
                         has grown by more than 25 percent in the period 2006-07 to 2011-12 compared to the period
                         2001-02 to 2006-07, compounded annually. Of this, rural areas accounted for more than half the
                         share of total MSME growth in India. As evidenced by these figures, strengthening the MSME
                         system is essential for achieving balanced economic development and creating productive jobs called
                         for by India’s demographic dividend. Recognizing its potential, the Government of India has set an
                         objective of creating 100 million additional jobs in the recently announced National Manufacturing
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Policy.
                         However, there are constraints to the growth and competitiveness of India’s manufacturing sector,
                         specifically for the MSMEs. These bottlenecks include difficulties to access markets (including
                         within India), difficulties to access finance (especially for MSMEs), infrastructure deficiencies,
                         regulatory red tape, disincentives for MSMEs to grow and difficulties for MSMEs to access
                         technology (including green/environment friendly) and skills. Against this backdrop, the proposed
                         national Program is aiming to develop the technological and skill base of MSMEs in selected
                         manufacturing industries (the tooling industry in particular), via upgraded and expanded Systems of
                         specialized Technology Centres (currently called Tool Rooms and Technology Development
                         Centres).
                         The Program focus on the ‘tooling industry’ stems from the importance of this sector to key
                         manufacturing industries, such as automotive and electronics. The tooling industry consists in the
                         development and manufacturing of dies, molds and casts as well as testing and prototyping. As such
                         it is the interface between product design and product manufacturing. The right tools help increase
                         throughputs, reduce material waste (can help in improving the environmental footprint) and improve
                         product quality. Like in other countries, the tooling industry in India has grown hand in hand with the
                         manufacturing industry. The turnover of the Indian tooling industry is USD 3 billion with more than
                         a thousand firms employing 120,000 workers. The importance of the tooling industry increases with
                         accelerating technological developments, product sophistication/innovation/customization and
                         decreasing time to market. Because it sits in between design and production and is highly
                         specialized, tooling is a local industry (more than 60 percent of tools in the world are locally
                         produced and consumed, including in India) dominated by Small and Medium Enterprises (more than
                         80 percent of firms in India, Europe, US and Japan). The development of the technological and skill
                         base of MSMEs can be justified, especially in the case of the tooling industry, because of the high
                         expected economic and social returns.
                         Among other industrial sectors that are likely to be supported under the proposed project include: (a)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Electrical Systems Design & Manufacturing (ESDM); (b) Fragrances and flavors; (c) Leather and
                         leather products and; (d) Glass and Ceramics. There are specific technological and environmental
                         (including occupational health and safety) issues associated with each of these sectors (specifically in
                         case of leather and leather products). The issues will be assessed in detail during preparation of the
                         project once there is clarity on the inclusion of specific sectors/clusters in the project/program.
                         The Tool Rooms and Technology Development Centers are to be set-up most likely in existing
                         Industrial Areas of a State or on available sites (government land) well connected by public transport
                         through road, rail and air so that activities of the new Tool Rooms and Technology Centers are easily
                         accessible to all stakeholders including trainees, including women, from poor and vulnerable sections
                         of society and industries. For the new Technology Centres, the land is expected to be available free
                         (exiting government land) of any encumbrances - this will be checked/validated through screening
                         exercises to be conducted during the preparatory stage of the project.
                         If successful the Program will directly led to a marked improvement in the lives of many workers
                         and graduates in industries with significant positive spill-over effects to the rest of the economy,
                         including some environmental (including occupational health and safety) benefits. Many of these
                         workers and graduates would be from Low Income States, and/or coming from low income
                         households, and/or be women.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The key implementing agency for the Program/project will be the Ministry of Micro, Small and
                         Medium Enterprise (MSME), Govt. of India.
                         At present, through the Office of Development Commissioner, the Ministry operates 10 Tool Rooms
                         and 8 Technology Development Centres (together referred as Technology Centres). Several of these
Public Disclosure Copy




                         are set up through collaborations with German and Danish agencies as well as with the United
                         Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO). These Technology Centres are to a large
                         extent self-sustaining centres that have been providing technical and vocational training programs to
                         more than 100,000 trainees annually including All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE)
                         and National Council for Vocational Training (NCVT) approved certification. They also provide
                         design and manufacturing support to entrepreneurs alongside technical consultancies.
                         There is variance in the levels of training itself, which is demonstrative of a wide spectrum of
                         technical sophistication in training inputs. The recent evaluation studies of Technology Centres have
                         found a strong need to replicate the facility at more places. The studies also point to the need for
                         technological up-gradation, improved training output and innovation in the business models of the
                         Technology Centres, strengthening of workforce supply and to increase the capacities to train youth
                         in India.
                         Under the proposed project, establishment of 15 new Technology Centres and strengthening of 18
                         existing ones is envisaged over a five-year period. These facilities will focus on improving access to
                         technology, providing skill up-gradation and offering advocacy support for specific industries with
                         high growth potential. The centres are to provide technical advisory support for entrepreneurs and
                         workers while offering opportunities for technical skill development for the youth. . It is also
                         envisioned that these existing Technology Centres will act as mother units and thought leaders to the
                         sectors and space in which they operate. The long term vision of this Program is to ensure
                         competitiveness of the MSME system by strengthening further their linkage to the mainstream
                         manufacturing sector in the country.
                         The activities under the project are likely to focus on priority industries, including such as Tooling,
                         Electronic System Design & Manufacturing (ESDM), Fragrances & Flavours, Leather and leather
                         products and Glass & Ceramics, among others. The ultimate goal is to ensure easy access to high
                         quality technology and holistic skill development and training across the industry value chain,
                         geographies and functionalities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         To succeed, the proposed Program requires strong private sector involvement in all the key decisions
                         pertaining to the design and implementation. Also, involvement and timely coordination between
                         MSME Ministry and other major stakeholders such as Ministry of Science and Technology, Ministry
                         of Communication and Information Technology, Ministry of Heavy Industry, Ministry of Labor
                         (DGE&T), State Governments (through their Department of Industries), Industry Associations,
                         representatives from the relevant business associations, Industry Leaders is required for
                         strengthening the Indian MSME system through the Program.
                         While there is strong commitment and interest in the Ministry for the program, there are institutional
                         challenges and limitations in capacity to manage an ambitious program/project of this nature and
                         scale. The institutional deficiencies/gaps exist in terms of staffing shortage, lack of up-to-date
                         technical knowledge on various industrial sectors and lack of capacity to coordinate/bring together a
                         large number of diverse stakeholders in a systematic and time-bound manner. There is an over-all
                         lack of quality information and understanding on what the key safeguard (environmental and social)
                         issues, risks and opportunities are in the context of the MSME sector. In the light of the importance
                         of the program, complexities involved in the operation and current limitations in institutional
                         capacity, the preparation and implementation of the project requires strong technical, advisory,
                         safeguards and management support from consultants/agencies with apt international experience and
                         expertise to handle this program.
                         F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Neha Pravash Kumar Mishra (SASDI)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Safeguard Policies             Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes          Specific interventions envisaged under the
                           BP 4.01                                     project such as creation and upgrading of
                                                                       building infrastructure may have some potential
                                                                       adverse environmental impacts in the local
                                                                       context. Even though it is expected that the new
                                                                       buildings/blocks would be located within
                                                                       existing campus or on available government
                                                                       land, planning, construction and operation of
                                                                       buildings would require appropriate integration
                                                                       of environment, health and safety measures to
                                                                       ensure that adverse environmental impacts are
                                                                       minimized and properly managed.
                                                                       Impacts pertaining to: (a) location
                                                                       (environmental and social features of the site
                                                                       and surrounding land-uses); (b) design
                                                                       (sanitation, water supply, drainage, solid waste
                                                                       arrangements, waste water management,
                                                                       ventilation, access, energy efficiency, material
                                                                       usage, fire safety, storage facility and natural
                                                                       disaster dimension); (c) worksite safety
                                                                       management, including occupational health and
                                                                       safety of construction workers and; (d)
                                                                       operation/maintenance aspects would require
                                                                       attention. There is also an opportunity to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       improve the over-all environmental footprint by
                                                                       creating ‘green buildings’ or ‘greener facilities’
                                                                       under the program.
                                                                       On other project interventions pertaining to
                                                                       training/curriculum development and testing/
                                                                       developing prototypes the anticipated
                                                                       environmental impacts are not likely to cause
                                                                       any significant or serious damage to natural and
                                                                       physical environment. In fact, the Program also
                                                                       offers opportunity to promote improved
                                                                       environmental performance of the selected
                                                                       industrial sectors and safer working practices
                                                                       through introduction of new/ appropriate
                                                                       technology (equipment/machines) and training.
                                                                       OP 4.01 has been triggered to ensure that all
                                                                       major (like building infrastructure) and minor
                                                                       (tools/equipment/machinery, training and
                                                                       curriculum related) interventions are planned
                                                                       and designed to be environmentally sound by
                                                                 integrating appropriate principles and
                                                                 approaches into the over-all decision making
                                                                 process.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No    OP 4.04 is not being triggered for this project as
                                                                 no interventions are envisaged in natural
                                                                 habitats, including those defined as ‘critical’
                                                                 under the policy.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    OP 4.36 is not being triggered for this project as
                                                                 no interventions are envisaged in forest areas
                                                                 and therefore no conversion/degradation of this
                                                                 natural resource would occur.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           TBD   OP 4.09 is to be determined at this stage. While
                                                                 no significant use of pesticides is expected,
                                                                 activities in the agribusiness sector may require
                                                                 pest management. During preparation the
                                                                 potential for use of pesticides, associated
                                                                 practices, and capacities will be assessed and the
                                                                 policy triggered as necessary as well as the need
                                                                 for a pest management plan or inclusion of
                                                                 specific measures in the ESMF.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   Since some civil works are involved, ‘chance
                         BP 4.11                                 finds’ at work sites is a likely impact that would
                                                                 have to be managed. Adverse impacts on any
                                                                 locally important cultural property would be
                                                                 examined, if any, for appropriate mitigation
                                                                 during planning and implementation stages.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     TBD   The States to be covered by the project has not
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 yet been finalized at this stage and also the exact
                                                                 locations within a particular State. Once the
                                                                 selection of States and sites within have been
                                                                 made, social screening will be undertaken to
                                                                 determine whether or not this OP/BP would be
                                                                 triggered.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    TBD   The actual locations for the new Training
                         4.12                                    Centres are not known at this stage. However,
                                                                 based on the information made available so far,
                                                                 the facilities are likely to come-up on existing/
                                                                 available government lands that are free from
                                                                 encroachers and/or squatters. The status on
                                                                 encumbrance free land will be confirmed once
                                                                 the results from the screening exercise are
                                                                 available.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No    OP 4.37 is not being triggered for this project as
                                                                 there is no construction of new dams or
                                                                 activities that are concerned with safe
                                                                 functioning of existing dams.
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            OP 7.50 will not be triggered for this project as
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            there are no interventions planned/ proposed
                                                                                                                                 over or around an international waterway that
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 could cause a potential conflict. There are also
                                                                                                                                 no activities that may affect the use or pollute
                                                                                                                                 such a waterway.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             OP 7.60 is not being triggered as the project is
                                 7.60                                                                                            not proposed in any disputed area.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Jan-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      A.       Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage
                                      ISDS would be prepared.
                                      January 31, 2014
                                      B.       For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD
                                      stage ISDS
                                      Not Applicable
                                      C.Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The
                                      specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
                                      In line with Bank’s operational policies, environment and social assessments will be conducted.
                                      Based on the findings from these studies, an Environment Management Framework and a Social
                                      Management Framework for the project will be prepared. Since the actual locations and specific
                                      technical features of the Technology Centres are not known, a framework approach will be
                                      suitable for the project. The borrower’s organizational capacity to achieve environmental and
                                      social objectives against the range of environmental and social impacts and opportunities that may
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      be associated with the program/project will be assessed as part of these studies.
                                      The Program offers opportunity to promote improved environmental performance of the selected
                                      industrial sectors and safer working practices through introduction of new/appropriate technology
                                      and training – these possibilities will also be explored through safeguards and technical studies.
                                      On the social aspects, the SMF would highlight potential entry points on dimensions such as
                                      gender, equity and inclusion for the targeted interventions and up-scaling of good practices for
                                      improving over-all Program delivery.
                                      Expected time frame for completion of this Activity - Prior to appraisal.
                                      The safeguard-related documents will be disclosed by appraisal at the Bank’s Infoshop and in-
                                      country in line with the requirements set forth in the Bank's Operational Policies (including the
                                      Disclosure Policy).
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Vincent Palmade

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name:                                                                                                                      Date:
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Henry K Bagazonzya (SM)                                                                                              Date: 23-Jul-2013


                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
