                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                  Report No.: ISDSC1225

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Oct-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Algeria                           Project ID:      P128082
                            Project Name:       Improving Desert Ecosystems and Climate Resilient Oases Project (P128082)
                            Task Team           Li Song
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           29-Mar-2013                       Estimated        30-Oct-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      MNSEN                             Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Focal Area:         Land degradation

                            Sector:             Irrigation and drainage (70%), General water, sanitation and flood protection
                                                sector (30%)
                            Theme:              Land administration and management (60%), Environmental policies and
                                                institutions (20%), Water resource management (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                              Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                             10.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                               8.00
                              Total                                                                          18.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                             B. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                           The project’s PDO is to pilot, in selected and representative oases, the integrated management of
                           desert ecosystems (IMDE), thereby reinforcing the resilience of those communities to climatic and
                           social changes, with the intent of replicating successful initiatives across major Government
                           investments in agriculture and rural development.
                           C. Project Description
                           There is a clear need to improve the livelihoods of people living in rural (desert) areas to help them
                           utilize scarce natural resources in a more sustainable and profitable manner and to facilitate
                           adaptation to both climate and social changes likely to put even great demands for resource use
                         efficiency into play in the future. This is expected to result from leverage of successful pilot
                         participatory development activities that support environmentally and socially sustainable livelihood
                         improvement in a small number of communities that represent different types of oases in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Algerian desert.

                         A powerful tool for the sustainable and fruitful management of the sensitive ecosystems of desert
                         regions is called “integrated management of desert ecosystems?, or IMDE. For the purposes of this
                         project, IMDE is defined as an integrated approach to management focusing on enabling economic
                         opportunities specific to deserts that integrate the health and diversity of the desert biome with the
                         vast potential for innovative livelihood opportunities that also sustain valuable repository knowledge
                         linked to adaptive practices. It is intended that such an approach ultimately enhance desert livelihood
                         opportunities and increase the resilience and adaptation responses of desert communities and
                         ecosystems to projected pressures, in particular climate change impacts.

                         IMDE provides a methodology in which all relevant government sectors work together, in a
                         transparent and decentralized way, and in close cooperation with desert residents and stakeholders.
                         The objective of this locally based management is to ensure that any development that occurs in this
                         sensitive area does so in an environmentally and socially sustainable fashion. It is an approach
                         which links development to sustainable management of ecologically sensitive and protected/
                         conservation areas, promotes co-management of resources between government and local
                         stakeholders, and integrates management by government through cooperation of sectors. Because of
                         the fragility of desert ecosystems generally, IMDE requires that all development sectors (e.g.
                         agriculture, tourism, public works, local government, etc.) plan and integrate their annual work
                         programs to be complementary and to recognize the very real possibility of unintended consequences
                         across sectors.

                         Presently, the existing 5 year plan of the Ministry of Agriculture, SNAT, and other sector plans
                         follow basically traditional processes requiring little local participation in development. The process
                         appears to have limited impacts of Government investment in the South. As such, “business as
Public Disclosure Copy




                         usual? will not be sufficient to deliver what is needed to address environmental, social and
                         development issues in the South over the long run, and the current system is deeply engrained in the
                         Government and will not be easy to change. What the project can do to leverage a change to this
                         top-down approach to development planning is to present real examples of the potential benefits of
                         combining environmental and social protection into the agriculture and rural development sector
                         planning model. It can also introduce an element of local stakeholder participation in the
                         prioritization of sector development investment in their localities. Existing government and
                         community systems necessary to support a program of integrated desert management are in place,
                         but there is a strong need for capacity building, particularly in support of spatial planning at the local
                         level and on specific management methodologies.

                         Project financing will complement existing government programs in the pilot areas, making them
                         more environmentally and socially sustainable. The project will be supported by an US$8 million
                         grant, comprising US$5 million from GEF and US$ 3 million from the Special Climate Change
                         Fund. It will finance activities that complement existing Government programs that reduce
                         environmental degradation and improve rural livelihoods in the country’s South. The Project
                         concentrations on two broad agendas. These are: (i) capacity building (training, legislative support,
                         equipment) in the integrated management of desert ecosystems (IMDE) for all concerned
                         stakeholders (e.g. central governments, wilayas, managers, development agents, researchers, local
                         beneficiaries, associations); and (ii) pilot investments to the IMDE in selected demonstration areas.
                           Based on the above, the project includes the following components:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Component 1. Strengthening capacity for integrated management of desert ecosystems (IMDE).

                           Component 2. Piloting the IMDE approach in investment.

                           Component 3. Project management.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the               safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The selected project sites represent different types of oases in the South. Four sites were selected as
                           particularly representative of arid zones in the Algerian Sahara:

                           - Taghit (wilaya of Bechar),
                           - Tamentit (wilaya of Adrar),
                           - Tinerkouk (wilaya of Adrar) and
                           - In Guezzam (wilaya of Tamanrasset).

                           The sites are located in wilayas that host important biodiversity (date varieties, plants with high level
                           of endemism, endangered wildlife), traditional values (ksour, artisanat), and an exceptional
                           endowment with renewable energy (solar, wind). They are representative for different irrigation
                           sources (surface water, groundwater) and methods (foggaras, wells) used in the South.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Borrower (MATE) has no previous experience in implementing Bank safeguards. However,
                           MATE has qualified staff who are experienced in applying national environmental protection
                           legislation and can successfully apply all relevant safeguard policies when supplied with the
                           necessary capacity support from the Bank team. This will be a learning experience for MATE staff,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           but given their strong capacity and availability of ministry staff at the regional level who know the
                           issues on the ground in affected communities, it is expected that MATE will move quickly up the
                           learning curve.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Djibril Doucoure (MNSEN)
                           Andrew Michael Losos (MNSEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes              Planned interventions could include modifying
                           BP 4.01                                                agricultural or drinking water systems. Some
                                                                                  activities may include construction of works,
                                                                                  though likely on a small scale limited to small
                                                                                  municipal infrastructure.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04           TBD              Project may include activities in a protected
                                                                                  area. To be confirmed during preparation of the
                                                                                  Environmental and Social Management
                                                                 Framework (ESMF).

                                                                 In addition, preparation will determine if
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 activities in non-protected areas have substantial
                                                                 impact on naturalhabitat, in which case this
                                                                 policy will apply. In all cases, the ESMF will
                                                                 include measures to determine whether there is
                                                                 a risk to natural habitats in any given site and
                                                                 will prescribe the enactment of appropriate
                                                                 mitigating measures.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    No foreseeable significant conversion or
                                                                 degradation of forests resulting from the project.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    No purchase of pesticides or vector controls.
                                                                 No indirect increase in pesticide use expected.
                                                                 However, the ESMF will include measures to
                                                                 determine whether there is a risk from pest
                                                                 management products in any given site and will
                                                                 prescribe the enactment of appropriate
                                                                 mitigating measures.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   Project activities in proximity of ancient
                         BP 4.11                                 settlements (ksours) may require action under
                                                                 this policy. This will be settled during the
                                                                 background investigation required for the
                                                                 development of the Environmental and Social
                                                                 Management Framework (ESMF).
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     TBD   The task team is investigating the possible status
                                                                 of the Touaregs as indigenous people within the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 definition of OP 4.10. This will be resolved and
                                                                  safeguards measures taken as appropriate
                                                                 before appraisal.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   Resettlement Policy Framework will likely be
                         4.12                                    needed in case of land acquisition for
                                                                 agricultural or water management works.
                                                                 Process Framework may be needed if activities
                                                                 take place in protected areas.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No    The project will not finance new dams or
                                                                 modifications of existing dams.
                         Projects on International         Yes   The project will involve the small-scale taking
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                    of groundwater from an aquifer which straddles
                                                                 the Algeria-Niger border at In Guezzam. In
                                                                 addition, activities in other sites may draw
                                                                 irrigation groundwater from the north-western
                                                                 Sahara aquifer system (NWSAS), which is a
                                                                 transboundary resource shared with Tunisia and
                                                                 Libya. Preparation will determine whether
                                                                 these activities will be of sufficient scale to
                                                                                                                                 warrant requiring official notification of these
                                                                                                                                 countries as detailed in OP 7.50.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             No project activities will occur in disputed
                                 7.60                                                                                            areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Jan-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Preparation of Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) begun August 2012,
                                      with completion expected in November 2012. Preparation of Resettlement Policy Framework to
                                      proceed concurrently.

                                      Individual Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMP)to be prepared for each project
                                      site containing Category B activities as soon as possible following project appraisal, in early 2013.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Li Song

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (RSA)                                                                                            Date: 17-Oct-2012
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Hoonae Kim (SM)                                                                                                      Date: 12-Oct-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
