                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC3111

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Jul-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 29-Jul-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Uzbekistan                      Project ID:      P144856
                            Project Name:      Improving Pre-primary and General Secondary Education Project (P144856)
                            Task Team          Janssen Edelweiss Nunes F
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          12-Aug-2013                     Estimated        04-Nov-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSH2                           Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General education sector (59%), Pre-primary education (41%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for all (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        49.90               Total Bank Financing:          0.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                             Financing Gap:                 0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                     0.00
                              Education for All Supervising Entity                                        49.90
                              Total                                                                       49.90
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           22.     The project development objectives are to improve access to quality preschool education,
                           and to enhance conditions for better learning outcomes in general secondary education .
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed Project would be aligned to the Education Sector Plan for the Republic of Uzbekistan
                           2013-17. The Project is to be implemented over a period of three years between 2014 and 2017, and
                           would be financed by a GPE grant of USD 49.9 million in the form of an investment operation. The
                         proposed Project is organized around three components, which relate to the following key
                         dimensions of investments: quality of preschool education and learning conditions for students of
                         general secondary education.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1 - Improving Access to Quality Pre-Primary Education (Estimated total cost: US$22
                         million). The objective of this component is to improve access to early learning opportunities and
                         quality preschool education, especially in rural areas of Uzbekistan. It includes the subcomponents
                         described below.

                         Subcomponent 1.1 – Promoting More Flexible and Efficient ECCE Service Provision. This
                         subcomponent would finance the development of more flexible forms of Early Childhood Care and
                         Education (ECCE) service provision, ensuring that Child Friendly Schools are scaled up for young
                         children, in line with the ESP. By the end of the Project, it is expected an increase of 100 percent in
                         the number of children enrolled in flexible ECCE service provision models.

                         Project funds would finance two flexible models of ECCE service provision. The first is through
                         expansion of a half-day, full-year, school preparation program for children age 5 and 6, prior to
                         primary school entry. Children would be enrolled in the half-day program either at existing
                         preschools or in classrooms attached to primary schools (when a preprimary school is not located
                         close enough to the catchment area). It is expected that approximately 1,000 existing pre-primary
                         schools with available space would open a classroom for half-day ECCE provision.

                         In addition, a targeted program to reach disadvantaged children and those not enrolled in formal
                         ECCE (either full-day or flexible) would include the following activities: (i) an education campaign
                         to encourage parents to engage in responsive speech and activities with their children from birth, and
                         to read to very young children in the home; and (ii) the distribution of storybooks to young children
                         and a campaign to encourage reading in the home - this would include book distribution and weekly
                         story-hours at preschool and community facilities designed to motivate parents and children to read
                         more at home.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Subcomponent 1.2 – Improving ECCE Quality. This subcomponent would support activities to
                         improve the quality of preschool available to young children, by providing teaching and learning
                         materials to centers where the half-day ECCE programs would be held, as well as equipment to
                         ECCE facilities (also targeted to centers where the half-day ECCE programs would be held).
                         Additionally, this subcomponent would finance training activities for teachers who will teach in the
                         half-day ECCE centers, including ongoing coaching and mentoring. By the end of the Project it is
                         expected that 60 master trainers are trained and 1,000 ECCE centers are visited.

                         This subcomponent also includes an impact evaluation of children's school readiness and the impact
                         of the different models of ECCE service provision (full-day, half-day and through the Mahalla
                         structure). It would also cover Technical Assistance (TA) to support the revision of tools to monitor
                         ECCE quality on an ongoing basis.

                         Component 2 - Improving Conditions for Better Learning Outcomes in General Secondary Schools
                         (Estimated total cost: US$25 million). The objective of this component is to improve conditions for
                         better learning outcomes in general secondary schools located in rural areas, by supporting training
                         programs for teachers and school managers, which include foreign language training, and increasing
                         the availability of adequate teaching and learning materials. By the end of the proposed Project, it is
                         expected an increase in the percentage of general secondary education schools located in rural areas
                         that meet minimum school standards, which include requirements for teaching and learning
                         materials, furniture and ICT equipment.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Subcomponent 2.1 – Supporting Training Programs for Teachers and School Managers of General
                         Secondary Schools. This subcomponent would finance the improvement of existing in-service
                         teachers training institutions, which include all central and regional institutions, and the improvement
                         of INSET system and programs. Project funds would be used to better equip teachers training and
                         retraining institutes to improve existing teaching conditions.

                         Building on the capacity developed under Basic Education Project (BEP), this subcomponent would
                         support activities aimed at improving the INSET system and programs, and supporting professional
                         development of the education personnel. The latter includes teachers, methodologists, school
                         principals and the INSET institutions’ pedagogical staff. The subcomponent would also finance
                         INSET courses for teachers, methodologists and directors, which include foreign language training,
                         as well as support to methodological work at rayon and school levels.

                         Subcomponent 2.2 - Supporting the Development and Implementation of Minimum School
                         Standards. The resources of this subcomponent would be used to finance the development and
                         implementation of minimum standards for general secondary education schools, which include
                         requirements for teaching and learning materials, furniture and ICT equipment. The focus is on
                         benefiting the neediest institutions most likely to be located in rural areas of Uzbekistan.

                         This subcomponent would complement the GoU’s and donor’s efforts to provide general secondary
                         education schools located in rural areas with adequate teaching and learning resources, materials and
                         aids, which would be purchased upon completion of any necessary improvements in schools’
                         infrastructure to be financed using State Budget funds. The infrastructure financed by the GOU is a
                         separate and on-going program and some of the sites that will be selected for the project will happen
                         after this govt program has helped with the infrastructure. This is to be done in full alignment with
                         the priorities of the ESP and in coordination with education projects or initiatives supported by other
Public Disclosure Copy




                         donors also focused on equipping schools with teaching and learning resources. By the end of the
                         Project, it is expected an increase in the number of general secondary schools located in rural areas
                         that meet the minimum school standards.

                         This subcomponent would finance equipment to existing cluster schools , which are used to train
                         teachers locally, in addition to existing territorial institutes for in-service teacher training. The cluster
                         schools can be used for technical and pedagogical support to other schools and as places where new
                         technologies and technology-enabled practices can be piloted and evaluated over time, before they
                         are rolled out across the system. This can be a useful approach to introduce, test and then disseminate
                         innovative practices from a ground-up level in ways that are more organic and sustainable over time
                         than a top-down initiative across the entire system.

                         Component 3 – Improving the Capacity to Monitor the Education System (Estimated total cost: US
                         $2.9 million). This component would support activities aimed at: (i) strengthening the existing
                         students assessment system; (ii) improving the Education Management Information System (EMIS)
                         to produce quality information for decision-making and planning; (iii) backing project day-to-day
                         implementation; (iv) monitoring and evaluating project implementation and outcomes; and (v)
                         informing the public at large about project objectives and outcomes. A lean Project Management
                         Team would be established to support the existing structures for project implementation.
                           Subcomponent 3.1 – Strengthening the Education System Monitoring Capacity. This subcomponent
                           would support activities aimed at strengthening the existing capacity to: develop and conduct
                           national standardized assessments of grade 4 students under a regular basis, and use an EMIS to
Public Disclosure Copy




                           produce quality information for decision-making and planning.

                           The existing students assessment system would be improved in order to enable decision-makers to
                           identify the strengths and weaknesses of the education system, based on results of sample-based
                           national standardized tests conducted regularly. TA would be provided by the proposed Project to
                           strengthen the existing capacity to develop and conduct these tests as well as analyze and disseminate
                           the results. By the end of the Project, it is expected that the results of the national assessment of
                           grade 4 students are analyzed and publicly disseminated.

                           Additionally, this subcomponent would support the improvement of the existing EMIS to transform
                           this system into a reliable tool for planning and policy dialogue. As a result of this process, UZ’s
                           EMIS should be able to store data on students, teachers, non-teaching staff and schools,
                           disaggregated at the level of students, as well as produce reports with quality educational
                           information.

                           Subcomponent 3.2 – Project Management. This component would finance the following activities:
                           TA to strengthen MoPE’s capacity to implement the proposed Project; communication campaigns;
                           project monitoring and evaluation studies; project audits; and operational and staffing costs of the
                           Project Management Team.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The activities under this project will be implemented country-wide.

                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           n/a
Public Disclosure Copy




                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Janssen Edelweiss Nunes Teixeira (ECSH2)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         No              There are no civil works included in the project.
                           BP 4.01
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No

                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No

                           Pest Management OP 4.09              No

                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.12
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 05-Aug-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The project is a category C and does not trigger any environmental or other social safeguards
                                      policies.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Janssen Edelweiss Nunes F

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name:                                                                                                                      Date:
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Mario Cristian Aedo Inostroza (SM)                                                                                   Date: 29-Jul-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
