                                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                  CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSC4986

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Aug-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 05-Aug-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:         Lao People's Democratic                       P144330
                                                                          Project ID:
                                             Republic
                            Project Name:    Second Laos Environment and Social Project (P144330)
                            Task Team       Jean-Michel G. Pavy
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       28-Mar-2014                      Estimated        15-Sep-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                  Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: EASTS                             Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                             Instrument:
                            Sector(s):       Forestry (20%), Other Mining and Extractive Industries (20%), Hydropower
                                             (20%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20 %), General water,
                                             sanitation and flood protection sector (20%)
                            Theme(s):        Biodiversity (20%), Environmental policies and institutions (20%), Pollution
                                             management and environmental health (20%), Other enviro nment and natural
Public Disclosure Copy




                                             resources management (20%), Water resource management (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     24.50                  Total Bank Financing:         15.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                             Financing Gap:                  0.00
                              Financing Source                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                         1.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                7.50
                              IDA Grant                                                                  7.50
                              AUSTRALIA Australian Agency for International
                                                                                                           8.50
                              Development
                              Total                                                                      24.50
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a        No
                            Repeater
                            project?
                         B. Project Objectives
                         19.     Comparable to the LENS PDO, a slightly modified PDO is proposed for LENS 2: To
                         strengthen the financing and management of environmental and social issues associated with more
Public Disclosure Copy




                         sustainable use of forest and water resources.
                         C. Project Description
                         The Project will be implemented through 4 components. Components 1, 2 and 3 are entirely
                         executed through medium size sub-grants from $50,000 to $500,000. Each component targets one of
                         the windows defined in the EPF Decree. The list of sub-grants for the first two years-- called
                         “Portfolio 1”--will be adopted during Project preparation but a tentative list is available. Each sub-
                         grant will be designed by its promoter (to become beneficiary) with the assistance of EPF. Once EPF
                         consider the subproject ready, it will join the list of “Portfolio 1” which will be appraised by the
                         Bank. The portfolio for years 3 to 6 of the sub-grants will be identified, prepared and appraised
                         during implementation.

                         Component 1. Policy Implementation and Capacity Enhancement (PICE Window). This component
                         is implemented through three subcomponents.

                         Sub-component 1.1 Institutional Capacity and Strengthening - The subcomponent is expected to fund
                         sub-grants that help improve the strategic, planning, technical and financial capacity of
                         environmental and social institutions or ministerial departments. For Portfolio 1, the following sub-
                         grants have been tentatively identified: (a) Coordination and facilitation of Environment and Natural
                         Resources Working Group and the design of MONRE Natural Resource and Environment Sector
                         Plan 2016-2020 by the Department of Planning and Cooperation (DPC) of MoNRE, (b) development
                         and dissemination of the Environment Protection Law regulations by the Department of Environment
                         Quality and Promotion (DEQP) MoNRE, (c) final design, adoption and dissemination of the legal
                         framework for EPF fund raising, and investment by the Prime Minister’s Office, and (d) Awareness
                         building and training of National Assembly members with information relevant to the natural
Public Disclosure Copy




                         resources, environment and social sectors..

                         Sub-component 1.2 Human Resource Development - This subcomponent is expected to fund sub-
                         grants that help improve the capacity of Laos’ academic institutions to produce environment and
                         social safeguard practitioners and to improve the skills of professionals already in the job world. For
                         Portfolio 1, the following sub-grants have been tentatively identified: (a) Design and adoption of
                         MoNRE Structure and Staffing Plan by Department of Personnel and Human Resources (DPHR)
                         MoNRE, (b) support to NUOL Social Science Faculty for strengthening its curriculum related to
                         involuntary resettlement, and preparing short certificate courses for current staff of public
                         departments involved in involuntary resettlement, (c) support to NUOL Faculty of Forestry for
                         developing short courses on protected area planning and management to be delivered to all staff from
                         DFRM and PFRM, (d) support to NUOL Faculty of Environment Science to strengthen it bachelor
                         curriculum in environment impact assessment and to prepare short certificate courses on EIA to be
                         delivered to all relevant staff from DESIA, PONRE and other ministerial departments, and (e)
                         strengthening curriculum related to Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) and preparing
                         short Courses on IWRM to be Delivered to all relevant staff from the Department of Water
                         Management (DWRM) MonRE.

                         Sub-component 1.3 Environment and Social Safeguards Strengthening – This subcomponent is
                         expected to fund sub-grants that help improve the capacity of public institutions to monitor the social
                         and environmental impacts of industrial, hydro, mining and transport projects. For Portfolio 1, the
                         following sub-grants have been tentatively identified: (a) support to ECC and grievance monitoring
                         by DESIA, PONRE and DONRE in the Boulikhamxay and Khammouane provinces, (b) support to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the development of an Investment Project database and grievance monitoring system in Savannakhet
                         Province and an additional province, (c) support the improvement and dissemination guidelines for
                         Standard Environmental and Social Obligations (SESO) guidelines in hydro, and their development
                         in mining and transport and the design, test and dissemination of guidelines for voluntary
                         biodiversity offsets by DESIA.

                         Component 2 Community and Biodiversity Investments (CBI Window) - This component is
                         expected to fund sub-grants that help improve the capacity of forest resources institutions, civil
                         society and communities to work together to manage forest resources in protection and conservation
                         forests. For Portfolio 1, the following sub-grants have been te ntatively identified: (a) Support to
                         the Community Conservation Network in four provinces through PFRM/PONREs, (b) provincial
                         protected areas and protection forests planning and management in four provinces, (c) fight against
                         forest resource crimes in 2 provinces by the Provincial Office of Forest Inspection (POFI) and
                         provincial customs department.

                         Component 3 Water Resources Management (WRM Window) - This component is expected to fund
                         sub-grants that help improve the capacity of forest and water resources institutions, civil society and
                         communities to collaborate to manage watersheds and water resources. For Portfolio 1, the
                         following sub-grants have been tentatively identified: (a) support to River Basin planning by the
                         Nam Theun Nam Kading River Basin Committee, (b) support to PONRE in 1 province to organize
                         the working groups and initiate the work toward the planning of another river basin, (c) support to
                         existing small scale fisheries initiatives in tributaries of secondary rivers in 2 provinces, (d) design
                         and test of a “comprehensive” environment monitoring system of tributary of secondary rivers by the
                         Water Resources Management Department (MONRE) and PWRM/PONRE in 1 province.

                         Component 4 Project Administration and Monitoring – This component does not fund sub-grants but
Public Disclosure Copy




                         supports EPF management of the Project. It will fund the following activities (a) EPF incremental
                         staff and capacity building for Project implementation, (b) all fiduciary dimensions related to Project
                         implementation such as procurement, financial management, monitoring and evaluation, (c) technical
                         assistance to support the following functions: (i) subproject design, screening and implementation
                         support, (ii) safeguard review monitoring including possibly third party monitoring and (iii) design
                         and implementation of a communication strategy and (iv) monitoring and evaluation, (d) functioning
                         of the Project Steering Committee, and (e) internal and external audits.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project activities will focus on the three LENS1 provinces (Bolikhamxay, Khammouane,
                         Savannakhet) and six new provinces. Project sites are expected to be scattered in all three parts in the
                         country. Physical characteristics of the area ranges from mountainous landscape in the north, plateau
                         in the east along the Vietnamese border that are rich in water resources as tributaries of Mekong,
                         forests and biodiversity to flat land along the Mekong river in the west. Project area covers largely
                         the National Protect Areas, a number of provincial and district protected areas in these provinces.
                         Sub-grants under the Component 2 CBI window may involve some restriction of natural resources
                         uses. These areas are inhabited by a number of ethnic groups, which could potentially meet the
                         definition of Indigenous People Policy (OP/BP 4.10).
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Although some institutions have experience with the World Bank projects, most of them have limited
                           capacity to manage and implement the Bank’s safeguards policies and even the government ESIA-
Public Disclosure Copy




                           related legislations, which are largely consistent with the Bank’s OP/BP 4.01 and OP/BP 4.12. This
                           has been exacerbated by the on-going lack of qualified human resources and expertise in the area of
                           ESIA in the country. The staff of EPF, especially the province facilitators and the sub-grant
                           technical assistants, will receive safeguard training. Some of the potential beneficiaries, e.g.
                           Department of Environment and Social Impact Assessment (DESIA) are staffed with safeguard
                           specialists. Others, such as international environmental NGOs have safeguard experience. One of
                           the project tasks is to help the National University of Laos (NUOL) develop safeguard curriculum.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Viengkeo Phetnavongxay (EASTS)
                           Sybounheung Phandanouvong (EASTS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             Activities under the Component 1 window and
                           BP 4.01                                            Component 4 will mainly include capacity
                                                                              enhancement, networking activities,
                                                                              development and implementation of legal
                                                                              frameworks, procurement of office equipment,
                                                                              small scale renovations and expansion of office
                                                                              facilities.

                                                                              However, sub-component 1.3 will involve
                                                                              providing advice or support to safeguards
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              related legislation, instruments or capacity
                                                                              building activities that subsequently result in
                                                                              physical footprints. In addition, sub-grants
                                                                              under the Component 2 and Component 3
                                                                              windows especially those related to
                                                                              strengthening of the protected areas, forests and
                                                                              water resource management, may involve the
                                                                              construction of small buildings or other
                                                                              structures such as offices. They may also
                                                                              involve communities and may restrict access to
                                                                              and use of the resources. For all these reasons,
                                                                              the Bank OP/BP 4.01 is triggered.

                                                                              Sub-component 1 does not require any specific
                                                                              or separate safeguards instruments. Relevant
                                                                              safeguards policies (objectives, principles and
                                                                              applicable aspects) will be integrated directly
                                                                              into these activities.
                                                                 For Components 2 and 3 windows, however,
                                                                 environmental and social considerations will be
                                                                 incorporated into the Environment and Social
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 Management Framework (ESMF) and the
                                                                 subproject Environmental and Social
                                                                 Management Plan (ESMP).
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes   The project may support the development of
                                                                 conservation legislation, regulation or
                                                                 guidelines that will improve management of
                                                                 natural habitats and protected areas. Sub-grants
                                                                 under the Component 2 windows especially
                                                                 those related to strengthening of the protected
                                                                 areas and forests management, may involve the
                                                                 construction of small buildings or other
                                                                 structures such as offices that may affect natural
                                                                 habitats. It is expected that sub-grants will not
                                                                 cause any significant or irreversible adverse
                                                                 impacts on natural habitats but will protect and
                                                                 improve them. Because sub-grants will involve
                                                                 some interventions on natural habitat the Bank
                                                                 OP/BP 4.04 is triggered. Subgrant proposals for
                                                                 all protected areas will include an ESMP based
                                                                 on the ESMF, describing measures to avoid or
                                                                 mitigate impacts on natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes   The project will not support any logging, but
                                                                 may fund subprojects on improving forest
                                                                 management (e.g. conservation and protection
                                                                 forest); the activities will not cause any negative
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 or adverse impacts on forest areas; the Bank OP
                                                                 4.36 is trigged, because project activity may
                                                                 have an area influence on the forest and forest
                                                                 dependent communities. If forests and/or forest
                                                                 dependent communities are potentially impacted
                                                                 by a sub-grant, its proposals will include an
                                                                 ESMP that mitigates potential adverse impact.
                                                                 Potential impacts on forest dependent persons
                                                                 will also be included in the ESMF.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    Project will not involve any procurement or use
                                                                 of pesticide.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   The project is not expected to have negative
                         BP 4.11                                 impacts on physical cultural resources.
                                                                 However, project will provide sub-grants that
                                                                 will be designed during implementation and
                                                                 may include the area of influence to physical
                                                                 culture resources, which could include natural
                                                                 features or landscapes that have historical,
                                                                religious or other cultural significance. Thus,
                                                                the Bank OP/BP 4.11 is triggered. If physical
                                                                cultural property is potentially impacted by a
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                sub-grant, its proposals will include a Physical
                                                                Cultural Management Plan as part of the ESMP.
                                                                Potential impacts on PCRs will also be included
                                                                in the ESMF, including chance find procedures.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    Yes   The project will provide sub-grants that may
                                                                involve a number of ethnic groups, which could
                                                                potentially meet the definition of Indigenous
                                                                People Policy; the Bank policy OP/BP 4.10 is
                                                                therefore triggered. Under Component 2, sub-
                                                                grants to improve the management of protected
                                                                areas may result in limited access to land, forest
                                                                and water resources by some ethnic groups and
                                                                may affect their livelihoods. If ethic groups are
                                                                present in the sub-grant’s geographic area, its
                                                                proposals will include an Ethnic Group
                                                                Development Plan (EGDP) that mitigates
                                                                potential adverse impact. As part of the ESMF,
                                                                an Ethnic Group Planning Framework will be
                                                                developed to outline compliance to the policy
                                                                requirements.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes   The project will provide sub-grants, which may
                         4.12                                   acquire some private land; the Bank policy OP/
                                                                BP 4.12 is therefore triggered. The sub-grants
                                                                under the Component 2 and Component 3
                                                                windows especially those related to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                strengthening of the protected areas, forests and
                                                                water resource management, may involve the
                                                                restrictions on the use of the resources to
                                                                stakeholder communities. If a sub-grant
                                                                involves land acquisition, its proposals will
                                                                include an Resettlement Action Plan (RAP). If
                                                                a sub-grant involves restriction of access to
                                                                natural resources in a protected area, its
                                                                proposals will include an Action Plan in
                                                                conformity with a prepared Process Framework.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No    The Project will not involve the construction or
                                                                rehabilitation of any dam.
                         Projects on International        No    The Project will not take place in or along
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                   international water way or impact such water
                                                                way.
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No    There is no disputed area in the provinces
                         7.60                                   selected by the Project. When a new province is
                                                                                                                                 selected the Bank will verify that it does not
                                                                                                                                 include disputed territory.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Mar-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      To make sure that the negative environmental and social impacts do not occur and that the
                                      communities and ethnic groups are aware of and have access to the potential benefits from the
                                      project, EPF will prepare an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) that will
                                      guide the screening for environmental and social impacts, procedures for consultations and the
                                      preparation of an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) for the subgrants. This
                                      ESMF will build on the lessons learned from safeguard implementation during LENS 1. Lessons
                                      learned will be identified during the LENS 1 ICR Mission in September 2013.. Annexed to the
                                      ESMF are four frameworks: (1) a Resettlement Policy Framework to guide the design of small
                                      Resettlement Action Plan for small land acquisition if such option is unavoidable, (2) an Ethnic
                                      Group Development Framework (EGDF) to guide the design of the Ethnic Group Development
                                      Plan (EGDP), (3) a Process Framework (PF) to guide the design of action plans to compensate
                                      communities from the loss of access to natural resources in protected areas, and (4) good practice
                                      procedures for environmental and social management of small civil works. The design of the
                                      ESMF will begin in September and be completed in December 2013 ahead of the appraisal
                                      scheduled for April 2014. All sub-grants prepared before appraisal (Portfolio 1) will contain all
                                      relevant safeguard materials related to the policies triggered.

                                      In addition, relevant safeguards policies (objectives, principles and applicable aspects) will be
                                      integrated directly into sub-component activities as per project design.
                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Jean-Michel G. Pavy

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name:                                                                                                                      Date:
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Julia M. Fraser (SM)                                                                                                 Date: 05-Aug-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
