                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA5374
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 20-Aug-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 21-Aug-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Ghana                              Project ID:    P145792
                            Project Name:     Maternal and Child Health & Nutrition Pr (P145792)
                            Task Team         Evelyn Awittor
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         08-Aug-2013                        Estimated   26-Sep-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    AFTHW                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Health (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Child health (30%), Health system performance (20%), Nutrition and food
                                              security (20%), Population and reproductive health (30%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      73.00           Total Bank Financing:                 68.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                       Financing Gap:                         0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                         0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                               68.00
                              Health Results-based Financing                                                             5.00
                              Total                                                                                     73.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a         Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to improve utilization of community-based health and nutrition
                           services by women of reproductive age, pregnant women and children under the age of 2 years.
                            3. Project Description

                                                                       Page 1 of 6
                         The project is organized around two components: (1) community-based maternal and child health
                         interventions; and (2) Institutional strengthening, capacity building, monitoring and evaluation, and
                         project management.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1. Community-Based Maternal and Child Health Interventions

                         The objective of this component is to scale up community-based health and nutrition services for
                         children and pregnant women based on a community-based package of Essential Nutrition Actions
                         (ENA), and other cost-effective interventions. The component will support both demand and supply
                         side interventions to both encourage the demand for services and then, to the extent possible, bring
                         services directly to the community.

                         In the area of maternal health, demand side interventions will include the identification of newly
                         pregnant women and facilitating enrollment with the NHIS; promotion of ante-natal care, assisted
                         delivery (including promoting facility based delivery, providing transportation subsidies and
                         monitoring care provided) and post-natal care; providing counseling on family planning, including
                         adolescent reproductive health; and promoting healthy eating during pregnancy, regular use of bed
                         nets, hand-washing and latrine use. On the supply side, community health workers and volunteers
                         will provide community pregnancy care (including nutrition supplementation, IPT, and bed net
                         distribution), community referral for delivery, post-partum maternal monitoring, and reproductive
                         health commodity distribution.

                         In the area of newborn and child health, demand side interventions will include counseling on
                         effective infant care and feeding practices, and the promotion of facility-based delivery, the use of
                         post-natal visits, exclusive breast feeding for infants under 6 months, the regular use of bed nets for
                         infants and small children and the need for full immunization. An important element in encouraging
                         demand for services will be the identification of the poor by community workers (using the common
                         targeting mechanism designed under LEAP), and then encouraging the poor to register with the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         NHIS. On the supply side, services will include infant and child growth monitoring, outreach
                         immunization, and community distribution of vitamin A, bed nets, deworming and ORS.

                         This sub-component will support the pilot testing of a community performance-based financing
                         mechanism for maternal health, in four of the most vulnerable regions in the country . The CPBF
                         service package has been selected to respond to the priority areas of MDG 5 in the health sector in
                         Ghana. The indicators for which CPBF payments will be made include (i) identification and
                         registration of the pregnant women with the health worker and the NHIS; (ii) pregnant women
                         making the first trimester antenatal visit; (iii) pregnant women delivering in a health facility; and (iv)
                         post natal care within seven days of delivery. It will also support the procurement of bicycles, tools
                         and equipment, such as scales, registers, tools for volunteers as well as software and hardware for
                         community interventions reporting and recording.

                         This component will reimburse costs incurred by community volunteers conditional on achievement
                         of results (Community Results Based Financing-RBF). It will also support the procurement of
                         bicycles, tools and equipment, such as scales, registers, tools for volunteers as well as software and
                         hardware for community interventions reporting and recording.

                         Component 2: Institutional strengthening Capacity Building, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Project
                         Management


                                                                        Page 2 of 6
                         This component will have two major sub-components. First, it will support institutional
                         strengthening to promote good governance, sustainable financing and improved productivity,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         effectiveness, efficiency, equity, sustainability, and accountability in the sector. It would finance
                         technical assistance, training, workshops, and incremental operating costs to establish and build
                         capacity for intersectoral coordination mechanisms; develop/update and implement strategies that
                         mainstream nutrition into the multisectoral development agenda at all levels; develop and implement
                         models for reducing under-nutrition and micronutrient deficiency; design and pilot test performance-
                         based incentive system for community-based service delivery; and develop efficient M&E system for
                         better planning and management (e.g. operational research) of community-based health and nutrition
                         service; and support program coordination. It will also finance the development and implementation
                         of a “balanced scorecard? approach to be used in the regular supervision of community level services
                         and structures.

                         8.      The second sub-component will include developing capacity for supervision, M&E and
                         project management, including base-line and end of project surveys. Community-based monitoring
                         tools will be used to strengthen collaboration between citizens and health facilities in monitoring key
                         aspects of the project. Bank tested tools and approaches such as the citizen score card will be
                         implemented. It will also support the impact evaluation of the CPBF (procurement of research
                         agency for technical assistance, data collection and analysis).

                         Component 3: Unallocated
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project is national in outlook. The project triggers the environmental assessment policy, OP 4.01.

                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         John Bryant Collier (AFTN3)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Beatrix Allah-Mensah (AFTCS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              This policy is triggered to ensure that medical
                          BP 4.01                                             waste, primarily in the form of sharps from the
                                                                              immunization program and long term family
                                                                              planning methods, is properly managed and
                                                                              disposed according to the National Health Care
                                                                              Waste Management Policy and Guidelines.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                          BP 4.11




                                                                      Page 3 of 6
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No               There is no land acquisition for this project.
                            4.12                                                Consequently, there will not be any displacement
                                                                                or resettlement temporarily or permanently or
                                                                                negative impacts on livelihoods; neither will there
                                                                                be any related negative social impacts since there
                                                                                are no rehabilitation and/or construction activities
                                                                                in this project.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The project triggered the environmental assessment policy, as the project activities may require
                              due diligence on medical waste management. The impacts are expected to be minimal and will be
                              managed through proper manage waste system as outlined in the National Injection and Waste
                              Management Policy . The Bank has found the policy to be good practice that meets national
                              requirements.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                              in the project area:
                               N/A
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                               N/A
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                               The Government of Ghana through the Ministry of Health has a national policy for medical waste
                              disposal. The project will ensure training on and distribution of materials about that policy to all
                              staff and part time employees involved in the implementation of clinic and field visits under
                              component 1. There is a clearly outlined institutional responsibility and a budget to help with the
                              implementation of the measures.


                              The government counterpart team continues through a number of ongoing and planned activities
                             in the health sector to work in close collaboration with the Environmental Protection Agency
                             which has a lot of experience working on World Bank funded projects with safeguards issues. It is
                             expected that the small amount of expected medical waste disposal will be handled appropriately
                             and effectively by the client and with the guidance of the Bank.


                                                                        Page 4 of 6
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             N/A
Public Disclosure Copy




                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       30-Jul-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    20-Aug-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          in the credit/loan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?




                                                                    Page 5 of 6
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Evelyn Awittor
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                  Date: 20-Aug-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Abdo S. Yazbeck (SM)                         Date: 21-Aug-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 6 of 6
