                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC3097

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Apr-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Apr-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Andean Countries                  Project ID:      P145345
                            Project Name:      Andes Adaptation to the Impact of Climate Change in Water Resources
                                               (P145345)
                            Task Team          Daniel Mira-Salama
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       00-undefined-0000                    Estimated        12-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: LCSEN                                 Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Focal Area:        Multi-focal area

                            Sector(s):         General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (36%), General agriculture,
                                               fishing and forestry sector (27%), General public administration sector (21%),
                                               Water supply (12%), Forestry (4%)
                            Theme(s):          Climate change (67%), Biodiversity (33%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     30.79                      Total Bank Financing:          0.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                                 Financing Gap:                 0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            21.10
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                              9.69
                              Total                                                                         30.79
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            B. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                           The project has been designed to tackle the challenge of adaptation to climate change on selected
                           sectors from a technology transfer, knowledge exchange and regional collaboration angle. Based on
                           previous experience in the region, the project will select those technologies and approaches that have
                         been proved valid elsewhere and try to adapt and replicate them in the other countries, according to
                         the special needs and gaps of each one of them.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Specifically, the proposed objective of this project is to generate tools and knowledge to enable
                         governments to promote resilient management of their water resources through the inclusion of
                         climate change impacts into policy, planning and on the ground investments on selected sectors, and
                         to promote south-south learning, collaboration and technology transfer.
                         C. Project Description
                         The GEF SCCF-funded “Regional – Adaptation to the Impact of Rapid Glacier Retreat in the
                         Tropical Andes Project - PRAA? can be considered as the antecessor of this proposed new project.
                         PRAA has been active since 2008, implemented by the Andean Community of Nations on behalf of
                         Bolivia, Ecuador and Peru, and has successfully showcased pilot adaptation projects and strategies.
                         The project is being successful in achieving its objectives, and participating countries have owned
                         and led the process from the beginning. It will be closed during 2013, and is currently being
                         evaluated following GEF’s requirements. However, the magnitude of the climate change problem is
                         large, and PRAA has only started to address the issues, create links and propose some pilot-scale
                         solutions. Given the ever-growing needs of the region to better prepare for climate change impacts,
                         and the positive experience gained with PRAA, these adaptation efforts must continue, and the
                         created knowledge, methodologies and piloted technologies in other regions and areas must be
                         transferred and expanded. The focus of the proposed project is adaptation within the hydrological
                         cycle, and how that relates to critical ecosystems and to livelihoods.
                         The new proposed project will gather lessons learnt through PRAA in order to better inform nation-
                         wide policies and strategies that promote climate change resilience, improved efficiency in the use of
                         resources, and better stewardship of critical ecosystems. It will also build on the work done in
                         Bolivia through the Pilot Project on Climate Resilience.
                         A proposed structure of the project, which will be revisited and refined during preparation, would be:

                         Component 1. Generation and exchange of knowledge, technology transfer and institutional
Public Disclosure Copy




                         strengthening (US$0.8M GEF SCCF indicative)
                         This component will, among other things: (i) review the climate projections and techniques used in
                         each country; (ii) promote their exchange and cross-learning; (iii) continue to develop better defined
                         climate change impact modeling on priority sectors; (iv) implement monitoring systems aimed at
                         measuring the effectiveness and sustainability of national and regional adaptation initiatives; and (v)
                         knowledge exchange on climate change adaptation experiences in the region, diffusion of lessons
                         learnt, and studies to understand the replication capacity of those experiences on each participating
                         country.

                         Component 2. Mainstreaming of climate change considerations into policies, strategies and programs
                         (US$0.75M GEF SCCF indicative)
                         This component will be focused on: (i) review and inclusion of climate change variables into national
                         and sectoral policy, ensuring inclusion of best practices and their influence on sectoral development
                         plans; (ii) definition of a methodology useful to ensure the inclusion of climate change concerns
                         during design and implementation of plans, programs and projects at national and sectoral scales; and
                         (iii) contribute to the elaboration of National Adaptation Plans, and their intersection with the
                         objectives and strategies included within the Andean Environmental Agenda.

                         Component 3. Design and implementation of adaptation measures in priority sectors (US$ 6M SCCF
                         indicative plus 1.24M GEF Biodiversity for Ecuador indicative)
                         This component will finance both soft and hard climate adaptation investments, and it will include
                         activities at watershed level such as: (i) design and implementation of adaptation measures, on
                         selected sectors, that incorporate technologies and approaches that have proved to work elsewhere
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and contribute to the increased resilience of the sector (which could include, inter alia, water supply,
                         energy generation, food security, agriculture or biodiversity management);
                         There will be a specific component for Ecuador, using GEF biodiversity funds, and focused on
                         mainstreaming information on climate change impacts into selected sectoral policy, for sectors that
                         have an impact on the integrity of paramo and montane ecosystems. Detailed information on the
                         rationale and justification for these biodiversity funds is offered in Annex 2. The expected outcome is
                         to achieve more resilience and sustainability on High-Andean ecosystem and biodiversity
                         management in selected production landscapes in Ecuador, through the mainstreaming of anticipated
                         water sector climate change impacts into policy, planning and selected on the ground interventions.

                         Component 4. Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$1M SCCF indicative)
                         The component will create and strengthen a project executing unit at the “Secretaria General de la
                         Comunidad Andina?, SGCA. The possibility to create national executing teams, with implementation
                         capacity, will be determined during project preparation. It will also provide for the necessary
                         monitoring and evaluation of project tasks.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The specific location of the different investment activities has not been determined yet. However,
                         they will be undertaken in different water basins that can potentially range from higher mountain
                         ecosystems to low land areas, and might also include urban areas among others. The project is likely
                         to target threatened ecosystems, which would require due diligence on safeguard analysis at the time
                         of preparation and/or the preparation of an appropriate safeguards framework. The variety of sectors
                         that play a role at the selected water basins (e.g., agriculture, energy) will determine the type of
                         activities and therefore provide more clarity on the safeguards to be triggered and especially the type
                         and level of instruments required. Nevertheless, this activity can be considered as a follow-up of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Regional Adaptation to the Impacts of Rapid Glacier Retreat in the Tropical Andes (PRAA), and
                         based on that experience, the team has a more clear sense about the safeguards to be triggered, which
                         will however be fully determined during preparation.

                         In addition and given the nature of the project, the success of any intervention at the water basin level
                         will require the active involvement and participation of the different stakeholders who play a role in
                         the demand and supply of the resource. The project will ensure that an inclusive and comprehensive
                         consultation strategy is implemented. Relevant experience on participatory processes and
                         methodologies has been gained throughout the identification, design and implementation of
                         adaptation activities within the PRAA, experience which has been properly documented and will be
                         used in the preparation and implementation of the proposed project.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The project will be implemented by SGCA (Andean Community General Secretariat) on behalf of
                         the four beneficiary countries, and will include the active participation of the ministries of
                         environment of Bolivia, Ecuador and Peru, and IDEAM (Institute of Hydrology, Meteorology ad
                         Environmental Studies) in Colombia. These have been the main stakeholders for PRAA in the case
                         of Bolivia, Ecuador and Peru, whereas IDEAM was the main stakeholder on the Bank-implemented
                         GEF Integrated National Adaptation Project in Colombia. All these stakeholders have gained direct
                         experience and familiarity with Bank processes and procedures including safeguards.
                           Based on the experience with PRAA, the main responsibility of safeguards implementation fell on
                           the national technical experts (ETN) hired by the project in each country. ETNs worked within the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           respective ministry of the environment in each country, facilitating the identification of
                           environmentally sound procedures to be followed in each case. On social safeguards, the
                           participation of some key stakeholders with a vast experience on participatory processes, including
                           indigenous communities, facilitated this task enormously.
                           Nevertheless, this arrangement where one person –the ETN– had the responsibility to ensure correct
                           safeguards implementation and monitoring, created some challenges (related mostly to the difficulty
                           in prioritizing among the many responsibilities they had, which has led to transferring some
                           oversight to other involved relevant environmental agencies or other professionals within the partner
                           institutions like CARE, who are not necessarily knowledgeable about Bank safeguard policies).

                           Given that a similar arrangement is foreseen for this project, and to build on the experience of the
                           PRAA, some level of strengthening on safeguards issues will be required. During preparation it will
                           be decided if said strengthening is to be met at SGCA level, at each beneficiary country's level
                           (ETNs, key stakeholders), or both.

                           Given that safeguards training was given to ETNs halfway through the PRAA project
                           implementation and thereafter, the Bank team will suggest that they are kept for the proposed project
                           and that they are actively involved in the preparation of all safeguards instruments. The hiring of a
                           social expert will also be assessed during preparation.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Carla Della Maggiora (LCSTR)
                           Alonso Zarzar Casis (LCSSO)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The project will include investment activities in
                           BP 4.01                                              a variety of sectors that play a role within a
                                                                                water basin (e.g., agriculture, water supply,
                                                                                energy generation, ecosystem management, etc.)
                                                                                to be determined during preparation. Given the
                                                                                varied nature of likely interventions, and the
                                                                                different sectors and locations where these
                                                                                could take place, an environmental and social
                                                                                management framework seems to be, at this
                                                                                time, an appropriate mechanism. This will be
                                                                                refined during preparation.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         Yes              No Project components are expected to directly
                                                                                or indirectly cause any significant conversion of
                                                                                or loss to any existing natural habitats. Some
                                                                                investment activities may be undertaken in
                                                                                critical and threatened ecosystems, and
                                                                                promotion of changes in national sectoral
                                                                                policies (at the basin level) can also have an
                                                                 impact on natural habitats. These activities will
                                                                 be designed to improve conditions and
                                                                 management, and therefore no significant
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 negative impacts are expected on any kind of
                                                                 natural habitat. However, in order to capture the
                                                                 beneficial aspects of the policy, the team
                                                                 suggests to trigger it and include its
                                                                 considerations as part of OP4.01.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes   Although locations of investments are not
                                                                 known, water basin activities might include
                                                                 some type of forestry/plantation interventions,
                                                                 or alternatively, might have implications for
                                                                 forests and therefore should be considered in
                                                                 this context.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           TBD   No utilization, promotion or acquisition of
                                                                 pesticides is foreseen during the life of the
                                                                 project. Some activities will likely include
                                                                 interventions on the agricultural sector, as this is
                                                                 one of the key sectors that demands water.
                                                                 Provisions for adequate pest control and pest
                                                                 management will have to be included as part of
                                                                 OP4.01 if needed.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   Based on the experience of the PRAA, the
                         BP 4.11                                 project is not expected to have any significant
                                                                 impact on any kind of physical or cultural
                                                                 resource. Nevertheless, given that the specific
                                                                 interventions have not yet been identified, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 that there is potential in Andean countries for
                                                                 encountering these types of resources in
                                                                 resilience infrastructure projects, the policy is
                                                                 being triggered.

                                                                 Appropriate language will be included as part of
                                                                 the environmental and social instruments
                                                                 prepared for the project to properly handle
                                                                 PCRs.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   Although at this stage specific locations for
                                                                 adaptation measures under project component 3
                                                                 are not known, previous experiences inform that
                                                                 this policy is highly likely to be triggered. If the
                                                                 specific locations are identified before appraisal
                                                                 participating countries will prepare Indigenous
                                                                 Peoples Plans and will carry out adequate
                                                                 consultation processes. If however these sites
                                                                 are to be identified after appraisal, participating
                                                                 countries will prepare an Indigenous Peoples
                                                                                                                                 Policy Framework per country before appraisal.
                                                                                                                                 Regardless of the selected instrument, free, prior
                                                                                                                                 and informed consultations with indigenous
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 peoples that will lead to broad community
                                                                                                                                 support in the preparation and implementation
                                                                                                                                 of the project once the communities are
                                                                                                                                 identified will be undertaken.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    TBD                           No land and physical assets are expected to be
                                 4.12                                                                                            affected by project activities. Similarly no
                                                                                                                                 negative impacts on income are expected as
                                                                                                                                 result of project investments. However, some
                                                                                                                                 reforestation activities, irrigation schemes or
                                                                                                                                 similar activities might imply some land tenure
                                                                                                                                 issues. During preparation this will be
                                                                                                                                 identified, and, should the need arise, an
                                                                                                                                 appropriate resettlement plan or framework will
                                                                                                                                 be developed by the participating countries,
                                                                                                                                 depending on whether the sites have been
                                                                                                                                 determined before or after appraisal.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         TBD                           The project is not expected to work on or
                                                                                                                                 around any dam. However, some irrigation
                                                                                                                                 schemes or basins might be indirectly affected
                                                                                                                                 by them. The team will conduct its due
                                                                                                                                 diligence and include provisions during
                                                                                                                                 preparation.
                                 Projects on International                                         TBD                           Since the proposed project may address some
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            international dimensions of water basins, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 Bank team will decide the need to trigger this
                                                                                                                                 policy during project preparation, in
                                                                                                                                 consultation with the legal department
                                                                                                                                 (LEGEN).
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project will not be developed on disputed
                                 7.60                                                                                            territories.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 10-Mar-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      During preparation the team will have more clarity on which investment activities will be included
                                      as part of the project, so that the adequate instruments (either an environmental and social
                                      management framework, environmental assessments, indigenous peoples frameworks or plans)
                                      can be prepared, consulted and disclosed following Bank’s guidelines.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Daniel Mira-Salama




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Approved By:
                         Regional Safeguards Name:                           Date:
                         Coordinator:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sector Manager:     Name: Karin Erika Kemper (SM)   Date: 19-Apr-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
