                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSA458
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Sep-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Russian Federation                 Project ID:   P125305
                            Project Name:      Financial Market Development and Stability Enhancement Project (P125305)
                            Task Team          John Daniel Pollner
                            Leader:
                            Estimated                                             Estimated   25-Feb-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSPF                              Lending     Technical Assistance Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector:            Capital markets (70%), Banking (15%), Non-compulsory pensions and insurance
                                               (10%), Payments, settlements, and remittance systems (5% )
                            Theme:             Regulation and competition policy (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                               Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      100.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                          50.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Total                                                                         150.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objectives are: (i) strengthen Russia’s legal and regulatory framework for
                           the financial markets in line with global G20 regulatory reform standards; (ii) enhance supervision of
                           the securities sector and non-banks to oversee and enforce regulations and management of risks
                           within and across financial sub-sectors; and (iii) increase the depth of financial services and
                           instruments in Russia’s financial markets, both domestically and internationally, and attract new
                           institutional and retail investors.
                            3. Project Description
                           The following are the main project components:

                           Component 1. Enhance the institutional capacity of the Federal Financial Market Service (FFMS) to


                                                                        Page 1 of 5
                         monitor and supervise the financial market and strengthen its stability. Under this component,
                         reforms will be undertaken and information technology systems developed, to: (i) strengthen micro-
                         prudential supervision of non-bank financial market participants including investment firms, brokers,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         dealers, pension funds, insurance companies, and others; (ii) develop a comprehensive financial
                         market monitoring system and creation of an early warning system for crisis detection; (iii) enhance
                         institutional capacity of FFMS, (iv) improve reliability and security of information collection,
                         sharing, storage and delivery, and efficiency of information processing; and (iv) enhance the
                         attractiveness of the Russian financial market to internal retail investors and international
                         institutional investors. These reforms will enhance the capacity of FFMS to oversee and address risks
                         more effectively, while ensuring market development.

                         Component 2. Support financial market development. This component aims to encourage further
                         development of the securities market and nonbank intermediaries by: (i) setting out proposals and
                         measures aimed at improving the control, supervision, and the legal and regulatory framework of the
                         financial market to, inter alia, ensure its stability and efficiency, (ii) to improve the operation of the
                         financial market infrastructure (including the organized market, regulated and unregulated market for
                         derivative financial instruments, registration of rights aiming the setting up of a central depository,
                         insurance, and other areas); (iii) development of, and regulation of financial instruments and
                         collective investment schemes; (iv) improving corporate governance and mechanisms of protecting
                         shareholder rights; and (v) strengthening regulation of financial intermediaries in line with G20
                         recommendations.

                         Component 3. Set out measures to improve Government policy and regulatory framework of the
                         financial market. This component will support the Ministry of Finance in the development and
                         implementation of the Government’s policy in the financial sector. Activities include: (i) developing
                         proposals for implementing international recommendations and implementation of Government
                         policy in the financial sector, including treatment of systemically important financial institutions; (ii)
                         formulating the strategy for the development of financial markets and establishment of an
                         international financial center in Moscow; (iii) developing proposals for the improvement in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Government's policy on securities market development and financial market instruments; (iv) setting
                         forth proposals and measures for improving Government policy and regulation in the banking sector,
                         insurance sector, securities markets, pension funds, and credit rating agencies.

                         Component 4. Project management. This component will finance the project management function,
                         as well as periodic monitoring and evaluation. This function will be undertaken by the FER Project
                         Implementation Unit (PIU) which was selected according to a competitive public bid. The PIU will
                         provide support to the project implementing agencies for project implementation and management,
                         preparation of bidding documents, implementation of selection procedures, preparation of contracts
                         in line with IBRD practices, payments processing, disbursement monitoring, preparation of financial
                         reports, and other functions. The PIU will undertake responsibilities mentioned above in accordance
                         with an agency agreement to be concluded with the implementing agency.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Moscow, Russian Federation

                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Agnes I. Kiss (ECSOQ)



                                                                        Page 2 of 5
                            6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/        No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Identify and describe any potential l arge scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The project does not contain direct social or environmental impacts, but it does include measures
                              to protect social-related rights. These include project components promoting transparency and
                              consumer protection in the use and in the understanding of risks in financial services.The project
                              also includes provision for the protection of small investors and increased public disclosure of
                              securities operations and transactions. In addition, the FFMS supervisory components include the
                              strengthening of supervision in the mandatory privately funded pension sector, which is in its early
                              stages of development and aims to ensure the protection and sound management of retiree funds.

                              No environmental impacts or effects are foreseen or expected from the project. The project has an
                              environmental category of C.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                               Since this a TA project focusing on regulatory reform in the financial sector, there are no
                              potential indirect impacts anticipated.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                               Not Applicable.



                                                                        Page 3 of 5
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment      borrower
                                       of foreseen
                            There are no             capacity
                                                   safeguard  to plan
                                                             policy    and implement the measures described.
                                                                    issues.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Stakeholders include FFMS, the MoF, the CBR, and industry participants. FFMS and the MoF
                           will see the project as a direct benefit. While the CBR as banking supervisor is not directly
                           involved in the project due to its statutory position and independence, MoF expects continuous
                           consultations to ensure coordination with the CBR for relevant components. This is because MoF
                           is statutorily responsible for issuing any new financial sector laws and has a major policy role in
                           defining macro-prudential regulation. Industry participants will also be consulted. While some
                           regulations will be tightened in line with international standards, the majority of market players
                           will likely see the project as a chance to attract foreign business and partners as part of the Russia
                           international financial center concept.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date
                         Technical Assistance Project
                         For a TA project which will finance the preparation of a specific safeguards instrument, please
                         indicate type of document disclosed, if any.
                         Not Applicable
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:

                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
                         ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the         Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional          Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included       Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project            Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?
                          Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed           Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                          the project legal documents?


                                                                       Page 4 of 5
                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:   John Daniel Pollner
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Michael Edwards (SM)      Date: 24-Sep-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                  Page 5 of 5
