                                                                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                            APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSA347
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 31-Jan-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                       Sri Lanka                               Project ID:                      P122735
                              Project Name:                  Metro Colombo Urban Development Project (P122735)
                              Task Team Leader:              Rosanna Nitti
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 12-Jan-2012                                  Estimated Board Date:            15-Mar-2012
                              Managing Unit:                 SASDU                                   Lending Instrument:              Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                        Flood protection (100%)
                              Theme:                         Natural disaster management (70%), Urban services and housing for the poor (25%), Municipal governance and
                                                             institution building (5%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                     Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                     107.60
                                   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                                  213.00
                                   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                               0.00
                                   Japan Policy and Human Resources Development Fund                                                                         0.90
                                   Financing Gap                                                                                                             0.50
                                   Total                                                                                                                  321.50
                              Environmental Category:        A - Full Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives
Public Disclosure Copy




                              The project development objective (PDO) is to support the Borrower to (i) reduce flooding in the catchment of the Colombo Water Basin, and (ii)
                              strengthen the capacity of local authorities in the Colombo Metropolitan Area (CMA) to rehabilitate, improve and maintain local infrastructure and
                              services through selected demonstration investments.

                              3. Project Description

                              The project comprises the following three main Components:

                              Component 1: Flood and Drainage Management.

                              This supports priority improvements to flood and drainage management infrastructure in the Colombo Basin, as well as the development of an
                              integrated flood management system (IFMS) and complementary interventions to enhance the economic value and aesthetic qualities of the water
                              bodies.

                              This component includes the following subcomponents:

                              Sub-Component 1.1
                              Primary and secondary canals and lakes, to include (i) enhancement of runoff from the southeastern upper section of the basin toward Kelani
                              Ganga; (ii) creation of lakes/retentions areas in the central section of the Colombo Basin, around Parliament Lake; (iii) removal of bottlenecks in
                              the downstream reaches of the canals to maximize their conveyance capacity; (iv) improvement of the outflow capacity of Saint Sebastian South
                              Canal; (v) improvement of the outflow capacity at Mutwal, North Lock, and Gotatuwa; and (vi) improvement and construction of canal bank
                              protections.
                              Sub-Component 1.2
                              Micro-drainage system within the CMC (localized floods), with a focus on 15 priority flood-prone areas where localized flooding regularly takes
                              place.
                              Sub-Component 1.3
                              Capacity enhancement for flood and drainage management. This aims to improve the Colombo Basin’s and SLLRDC’s capacity to ensure the
                              sustainability of project investments over time. It includes the purchase of maintenance machinery, the development of an IFMS for the Colombo
                              Basin, and selected investments to support a pilot water-based transport system aimed at enhancing the usability of the canals system.
                              Sub-Component 1.4
                              Beira Lake Linear Park and Beddagana Park, to include (i) improving embankments and developing promenade along the east and southwest
                              shores of Beira Lake, and (ii) establishing a natural park around degraded wetlands of the Parliament Lake system (generally referred to as
                              Beddagana Park).

                                                                                                                                                                        Page 1 of 9
                               Component 2: Urban development, infrastructure rehabilitation, and capacity building for Metro Colombo local and central authorities.
                               This component aims to (i) support local authorities in the CMA to rehabilitate and manage their streets and drainage infrastructure, and improve
                               local public facilities, solid waste collection, and other urban services, and (ii) strengthen strategic planning processes at the metropolitan level. It
                               comprises the following two subcomponents:

                               Sub-Component 2.1
Public Disclosure Copy




                               Investment support to local authorities will build local capacity through implementing select high-priority infrastructure improvements in four local
                               authorities in the Colombo Metropolitan Area (Colombo, Sri Jayawardenapura-Kotte, Dehiwela Mount. Lavinia, and Kolonnawa) to rehabilitate and
                               improve drainage and roads, upgrade local public facilities, and purchase needed equipments to improve local public services.
                               Sub-Component 2.2
                               Institutional strengthening and capacity building for local and central authorities will comprise of technical assistance to the PLAs including
                               geographic information system (GIS), asset management for urban roads and related drainage, setting of technical standards, preparation of street
                               and drainage rehabilitation and maintenance works (including quality control), and improvements in solid waste collection. It will also support
                               metropolitan development strategies and planning, feasibility, and engineering studies for central authorities, including a Metropolitan Colombo
                               City Development Strategy (MCCDS), an integrated master plan (including a transportation plan) for the CMA, as defined by the MCCDS; a Solid
                               Waste Management strategy and action plan for the CMA; and another detailed study for selected priority metropolitan services as identified by the
                               MCCDS.

                               Component 3: Implementation Support.
                               This comprises: (i) implementation support in the areas of project management, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), procurement, financial
                               management, and environmental and social safeguards; (ii) public awareness and communications support regarding project interventions,
                               management ofpublic expectations, behavior changes and resettlement; (iii) support to the SLLRDC, UDA, and PLAs in construction, supervision,
                               and compliance with environmental and social safeguards; (iv) purchase of cars, office furniture, and IT equipment for the Project Management
                               Unit (PMU); and (v) operating costs of the PMU.

                               4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)




                               5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                               Nadeera Rajapakse (SASDI)
                               Satya N. Mishra (SASDS)
                               Darshani De Silva (SASDI)

                               6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                     Yes         No     Explanation
                               Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                  ✖                 Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) will be triggered as the project will
                                                                                                      support flood and drainage improvement that will involve medium/large scale
                                                                                                      civil construction work, dredging, pond creation, canal construction and
                                                                                                      widening etc.
Public Disclosure Copy




                               Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                     ✖
                               Forests OP/BP 4.36                                              ✖
                               Pest Management OP 4.09                                         ✖
                               Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11               ✖                 Physical and Cultural Resources (OP/BP4.11) will be triggered as the project
                                                                                                      proposes to upgrade and restore the historic flood management structures at
                                                                                                      the end section of the Colombo Water Basin, around the Beira Lake system.
                               Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                   ✖      Social Assessment confirms that no indigenous people live in Colombo area.
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                  ✖                 OP 4.12 has been triggered based on the social assessment in view of
                                                                                                      unavoidable land acquisition and resettlement requirements. A Social
                                                                                                      Management Framework (SMF) providing a Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                                                                      has been prepared for the Project along with Social Screening Report and an
                                                                                                      Abbreviated RAP for the Stage-I sub-projects. For stage II, completion of the
                                                                                                      SIA and implementation of RAPs will constitute disbursement criteria for
                                                                                                      individual sub-projects.
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                       ✖
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                       ✖
                               7.50
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                           ✖

                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                  The project triggered three safeguard policies as indicated above- OP 4.01: Environmental assessment, OP 4.11: Physical Cultural proprieties
                                  and OP 4.12: Involuntary Resettlement. OP/BP 4.10 has not been triggered based on Social Assessment results.

                                                                                                                                                                              Page 2 of 9
                         Environment: The proposed project interventions are expected to generate many positive environmental and public health impacts through
                         improved flood/drainage management and local services in the Colombo metropolitan area. Achieving the desired outcomes and sustaining
                         them in the long-term would depend upon how the project will address environmental risks and challenges when planning and implementing
                         sub-projects, which have been the focus of the safeguards documents prepared hitherto and include an (i) Environmental Management
                         Framework (EMF) (ii) Environmental Assessment (EA) and (iii) environmental screening reports to supplement the EA for the short list of 8 sub-
                         projects ready for implementation in year 1.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         As revealed by the safeguards assessments and screening carried out so far, the environmental footprint of a majority of investments are
                         associated with construction impacts that include air pollution, noise, debris disposal, public safety, inconvenience, restricted access, traffic
                         congestion, removal of vegetation in the work sites, extraction of construction material, etc. which would be localized and temporary in nature
                         and mitigatable with good construction, housekeeping, public safety and debris disposal practices. Currently, the water quality in the canal
                         network show high levels of pollution, especially in the lower part of the basin which is slow-flowing and receives a considerable load of
                         wastewater and sewage from domestic and commercial establishments. Therefore, impacts on water quality from canal rehabilitation work will
                         be insignificant and temporary. Since drainage and wastewater discharge are the main functions of the canal network there will be no impacts
                         resulting from restriction on other uses due to construction work. Improving water quality in the rehabilitated canals and waterways will be
                         considered part of the overall canal rehabilitation. However, given the nature of technical, regulatory and institutional intervention and co-
                         ordination required to address the issue in its entirety, the project will only be able to provide support on a demonstration scale (e.g. sewer
                         collector line to capture informal sewerage discharges in the Beira Lake, improved solid waste collection at municipal level) that would trigger
                         longer-term water quality maintenance activities by the implementing agencies.The terrain of the project area being flat, there will be no major
                         concerns of soil erosion and sedimentation. Of the project sites, the only ecologically important areas are the remaining wetlands in the
                         Colombo basin, which at present exists as several blocks of inter-connected marshes covering an area of approximately 286 ha. Protecting
                         these wetlands from further shrinking has been identified as an absolute priority for effective flood management within the city and its suburbs.
                         In addition to flood detention, the wetlands offer great potential for nature conservation, recreation, and education which the project will seek to
                         optimize through investments such as the Beddagana and Kotte Ramparts park. Other parts of the basin are highly modified and urbanized and
                         as such, there will be no serious ecological impacts.

                         As part of improving the macro-drainage network in the Colombo basin, dredging would be undertaken in selected canals and lakes to increase
                         the water conveyance and storage capacity. This could give rise to the most potentially significant adverse environmental impact under the
                         project in case it is determined that the dredge material is contaminated with hazardous chemicals. Haphazard disposal of potentially
                         contaminated dredge material can lead to many irreversible environmental and public health risks, and as such the project will adopt a cautious
                         approach and undertake adequate assessment of sediment quality prior to the commencement of dredging activities. Given the level of urban/
                         industrial activity, the risk of pollution by hazardous elements could particularly be relevant in lake/canal sediments in the lower part of the
                         Colombo basin while the risk of contamination should diminish from lower to upper catchment areas. In addition, the periodic cleaning and
                         desilting carried out by the Sri Lanka Land Reclamation and Development Corporation (SLLRDC) and Colombo Municipality Council (CMC) on
                         the main/secondary canal network and the storm water drainage system reduces the likelihood of sediment contamination resulting from long-
                         term accumulation of chemical substances in these waterways. The EMF provides the necessary technical guidelines to follow in planning
                         dredging activities and disposal of dredge material. An analysis of sediments in a sample of significant locations in the Colombo Basin has
                         already been initiated based on which the need to prepare a special Dredge Material Disposal Plan will be determined. This process will be a
                         contribution to SLLRDC’s and CMC’s future O & M plans for the Primary and Secondary Canals.

                         Solid waste management (SWM) and water quality improvement in waterways in the Metro Colombo area are two key complementary
                         challenges linked to the project with implications on the sustainability of project outcomes in the long-term. Haphazard disposal of garbage in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the city that get washed into waterways and informal disposal of sewage are the main reasons causing poor drainage and water quality in the
                         city's canals and drains. The poor state of SWM in the country reflects chronic underinvestment with regard to operations and maintenance and
                         appropriate technologies, inadequate information and community education and lack of environmentally acceptable disposal facilities. While
                         solutions to these challenges go beyond the scope of the MCUDP, the Project will benefit from ongoing initiatives by the Solid Waste
                         Management Center at the Ministry of Local Authorities and Provincial Councils and by parallel programs by the Ministry of Environment. The
                         project will complement these on-going efforts by specifically investing in selected physical interventions to help (i) improve the operational
                         efficiency of waste collection in the project area and (ii) intercept sewer discharges to Beira Lake, which are a main source of pollution to the
                         nutrient rich lake. The project will also support feasibility studies to find practical and economical solutions for the treatment and disposal of
                         municipal waste and sewerage which will pave the way for potential follow-on projects on solid waste and sewerage management in the Metro
                         Colombo area.

                         Social: The Project includes flood control measures which may involve minimal land acquisition and some involuntary resettlement impacts.
                         However, the majority of the works, chiefly improvement of existing infrastructure such as canals, micro/storm drainage, streets, recreation
                         areas, and similar works will have only temporary impacts relating to access, mobility, health, and safety. The key social risks and issues
                         identified for the project are associated with: (i) mitigating potential involuntary resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) and any adverse impacts on physical
                         and cultural resources (OP/BP 4.11), (ii) promoting social inclusion and accountability, and (iii) supporting sustainable management for
                         resettlement sites developed to re-house displaced households. In fact, it is estimated that about 1,500 squatter households living in
                         underserved settlements (USSs) along the Beira Lake and canal banks will be relocated to permanent housing. In addition, the Project
                         authorities will resettle some 200 squatter families earlier living on government plots identified for the construction of resettlement sites.

                         While the exact number of households and magnitude of private land required for the whole project are not known, the eight subprojects
                         prepared for implementation in the first batch have been assessed and require no land acquisition. These sub-projects include: 4 subprojects
                         proposed by CMC, namely [1] The Walkability and Parking Improvements to eleven road sections of the City; [2] Improving public convenience
                         by erecting public toilets at fourteen locations; [3] Model zone development of Town Hall Square; and [4] the Marine Drive Development which
                         will address flooding and drainage issues around the Marine Drive area. The SLLRDC has proposed two subprojects: [5] Improvements to main
                         drain, Mutwal Tunnel and to Aluthmawatha culverts and [6] Improvements to Dehiwala canal bank from Galle Road bridge up to the sea outfall.
                         The UDA has proposed two projects: [7] Beira Lake Restoration Project which will construct Linear Park, Lake Bank protection wall, foot bridge
                         and rehabilitation of McCallum Lock Gates and [8] Beddagana and Kotte Ramparts Park. These activities mostly involve temporary impacts
                         including relocation of only two shops and one commercial kiosk which will be undertaken by the concerned implementing agency with R&R
                         assistance provided as per the Social Action Plan in line with the SMF. Social Screening has been completed for these eight sub-projects and
                         Social Action Plans have been prepared in line with the Social Management Framework compliant with Bank safeguard policies.

                         Key social risks and impacts associated with the activities to be undertaken in the later stage are expected to involve private land acquisition
                                                                                                                                                                 Page 3 of 9
                           required for infrastructure works and the resettlement of vulnerable households living in informal settlements on low-lying lands, as part of the
                           flood and drainage management investments under Component 1. A few works proposed by the participating Local Authorities under
                           Component-II may in some cases involve possible involuntary resettlement impacts on account of land acquisition or resumption of occupied
                           public lands in the Metro Colombo area. Specific activities that may generate involuntary resettlement impacts include: flood and drainage
                           management works (rehabilitation and improvement of the drainage and canal systems with dredging and widening to reduce flood risks) to be
                           undertaken by the SLLRDC; development of the Beira lake and other lakes by UDA; civil works planned by the participating municipalities
                           including rehabilitation or, and improvement of municipal roads; construction of schools, libraries, etc. These activities may require acquisition of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           private lands/structures, and may affect residences and businesses in the area, especially those located in low lying areas, community facilities
                           and physical and cultural properties. In some cases resumption of public lands for civil works under the occupation of unauthorized residents
                           and shops could also generate resettlement impacts. The long term impacts of relocation of people from the low lying areas are expected to be
                           positive. The positive impacts identified in the Social Assessment are: prevention of loss of assets and economic activities due to flood risks,
                           avoidance of public inconvenience due to reduction in water logging in some residential areas, improved mobility for the city dwellers due to
                           rehabilitation of walakbility infrastructure, provision of formal ownership of house for squatters likely to be affected by the project, social
                           recognition and security associated with formal tenure, improvement in living conditions in new condominiums, integration of the younger
                           generation in the middleclass mainstream of the capital region, enhanced credit-worthiness, and poverty alleviation.

                           Most of the people likely to be affected live in under-served settlements (USS) without secure tenure; have informal incomes and access to
                           minimum basic services including water, electricity, and common toilets; and are poorer than the mainstream population of the metropolitan
                           area. Some of them belong to linguistic or religious minorities, but not indigenous communities. Although the main objective of resettlement will
                           be to ensure a better quality of life for communities occupying environmentally sensitive flood-prone low lying lands, the relocated people might
                           face temporary or longer term livelihood impacts or income losses due to the loss of existing business tied to their location. Interventions
                           involving involuntary resettlement (IR) will have a long gestation period, and will therefore be implemented in the Stage-II with mitigation plans
                           prepared and implemented for the Project as per the Social Management Framework.

                           The key social issues associated with this Project which are addressed in the Social Management Framework are: (a) assessing and mitigating
                           social safeguard risks due to land acquisition (LA) and involuntary resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) and likely impact on physical and cultural
                           resources (OP/BP 4.11); (b) promoting social inclusion and accountability to enhance the implementation quality and outcomes; (c) sustainable
                           self-management of the multi-storey resettlement buildings and sites with effective and affordable estate management arrangements.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                           Environment: The anticipated future activities in the project area would be very similar to activities proposed to be carried out by this project and
                           related to urban upgrading, disaster management, improvement to urban transportation etc. As such, the net cumulative impact from better
                           urban planning and disaster risk mitigation is expected to be positive. The negative environmental impacts from these anticipated future
                           activities will be similar to this project and could be mitigated with early planning and implementation of appropriate mitigation measures.

                           Social: The anticipated future activities will be mostly related to maintenance of infrastructure created by this project. Expansion of activities of
                           similar nature as proposed in this Project may involve long term impacts including temporary impacts as in case of Stage-I investments and
                           permanent impacts as in case of Stage-II activities. The development of Beira lake front and canals may open the water bodies for recreational
                           use and generate new economic activities and incomes for people. The project may also promote changes in land use around water bodies in
                           order to better manage flood risks. The households impacted due to such changes will be compensated and rehabilitated as per their eligibility.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The project implementation time-line has been prepared to allow adequate time for the preparation of sub-projects that may trigger adverse
                           impact, so that the necessary investigations, alternative analysis and mitigation can be planned and completed in support ofproject
                           implementation. For example, sub-projects involving dredging with the potential to cause serious impacts will be deferred to second year of
                           project implantation onwards giving the borrower ample time to conduct necessary investigations to identify suitable technologies in case the
                           issues are significantly adverse or avoid continuing proposed activities if impacts are found to be irreversible with no means of mitigating. Some
                           of the other measures taken to avoid or minimize adverse environmental and social impacts include (a) use of the existing right of way in case
                           of rehabilitation/upgrading existing infrastructure; (b) avoidance of design alternatives that may affect heavily built up areas; and (c) works along
                           existing canal and drainage paths with required section corrections.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                            and implement the measures described.
                           Environmental Assessment: The borrower has undertaken the preparation of several important documents to address safeguard policy issues
                           of the project that primarily include an (i) EMF for the project and an (ii) EA for a long list of sub-projects earmarked for implementation during
                           the early phase of project implementation. The EMF provides the overall environmental safeguards management framework for the MCUDP
                           and specifies the principles and procedures to be followed and instruments to be applied in identifying, managing and monitoring potential
                           adverse environmental impacts of sub-projects. The criteria set out in the EMF primarily recommends that each sub-project be subjected to a
                           detailed screening, using the template provided, based on which the requirement for a stand-alone and site-specific assessment and the type of
                           assessment are determined. The EA provides an overall assessment of the regulatory framework for natural resources management in Sri
                           Lanka, its relevance to the long list of sub-projects considered, their anticipated environmental impacts and mitigation. The EA recommends
                           that activities requiring dredging be scheduled only after sediment quality within the basin has been established that will support
                           environmentally sound decision making for the disposal of dredged material.

                           In addition, the application of the EMF to the first batch of 8 sub-projects have been carried out and detailed screening reports to supplement
                           the EA have been prepared with the conclusion that site-specific EMPs are suffice to commensurate with the issues identified in each of the
                           sub-project. For all other sub-projects in the pipeline the same methodology will be systematically applied wherein first the detail screening will
                           be carried out for each sub-project soon after the technical designs have been completed and the sub-project scope has been defined. Based
                           on the screening outcome, the appropriate safeguard instrument will be determined and carried out, as necessary, with any proposed
                           consequent changes to the designs effected prior to commencing the procurement process. As guidance to the PMU, the EMF provides a
                           classification of sub-projects in the pipeline in accordance with (a) safeguard categories of OP 4.01 and (b) prescribed thresholds of the Sri
                           Lanka National Environmental Act (NEA), and recommends the type of environmental analysis suited for each type of investment
                           commensurate with the magnitude of potential impacts. This classification is only a broad guidance and will be r-evaluated at the time of
                           screening for each specific sub-project.


                                                                                                                                                                     Page 4 of 9
                         The EMF also provides technical guidelines, as summarized below, to guide the planning of dredging activities and disposal of dredged
                         material, which is identified as the most significant of potential environmental issues under the proposed project.
                         •          Sediment quality assessment – since there is inadequate sediment quality data the project will develop sediment Sampling and
                         Analysis Plan (SAP) for the basin to determine the environmental acceptability of the dredged material. This process has already been initiated
                         by the borrower. The SAP would provide the technical framework for sampling and analysis for each identified location and would determine the
                         presence/absence of potential toxic chemicals. In the case of a negative determination the project can commence dredging activity any time as
                         there would be no specific restriction on the disposal of dredged material.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •          Evaluation of dredge material management and disposal alternatives - In the case of a positive determination, disposal would be
                         restricted and the project will prepare a Dredge Material Disposal Plan (DMDP). Classification of the sediment according to the level of toxicity
                         and quantification of the dredged material would be pre-requisites to preparing this plan. While Sri Lanka does not have reference standards for
                         sediment quality or technical guidelines on sediment toxicity classification, the project could use the Environmental Improvement Study for the
                         Port Of Colombo carried out in 1999 as a useful reference in developing the required technical framework.
                         •          As Sri Lanka does not operate large engineered landfills the project will consider other major alternatives available for disposal of
                         potentially hazardous dredged material such as off-shore disposal, incineration and beneficial use. Each of these alternatives involves its own
                         set of unique considerations and hence selection of an alternative will be made based on environmental, technical and economic
                         considerations.
                         •          Dredging equipment and techniques - The DMDP will also specify the dredging equipment and techniques used for excavation and
                         material transport, which would depend on a number of factors such as sediment quality, type of dredgers available in the country, dredging
                         depth and distance to disposal site etc.
                         •          Project planning and Information management – The SAP and the DMDP will be closely linked to the project work plan and effectively
                         communicated to key stakeholders directly involved, so that proper sequencing and scheduling of activities as well as implementation and
                         monitoring of control measures can take place effectively.

                         The EMF recommends important strategic interventions by the project in order to ensure long-term sustainability and maximum economic
                         returns of its investments. The sustainability of project outcomes, especially those of water management and drainage, would critically hinge
                         upon safeguarding the current system, hence (a) a strategy for conservation of the remaining Colombo Flood Detention wetlands (b) an action
                         plan for solid waste management within the Colombo Metropolitan Area (c) a strategy for water quality management and monitoring within the
                         basin have been recommended as essential contributions by the project. In addition, the EMF also recommends that development of the
                         Strategic Development and Growth Plan for the Colombo Metropolitan Area and the subsequent Master Plan be supported with a Strategic
                         Environmental Assessment, in order to ensure that sustainable urban planning based on the environmental resource base and capacity can be
                         ensured.

                         Sri Lanka has a comprehensive regulatory framework for the protection of its environment and natural resources. By and large, it is consistent
                         with the safeguards polices of the World Bank. Under the NEA, the country’s basic national decree for environmental management, all
                         development projects that fall into prescribed categories are required to go through a comprehensive environmental screening and mitigation
                         planning process (EIA or IEE). The Central Environmental Authority (CEA), which is the country’s key environmental regulatory agency, has
                         demonstrated technical expertise and a good track record of evaluating environmental impact assessments. It has been determined that the
                         NEA will not apply to the list of 8 sub-projects which are ready for implementation at project onset and is unlikely to apply to any of the sub-
                         projects in the pipeline. As such, the safeguards assessment and documentation carried out so far meets primarily the requirements of OP/BP
                         4.01. In the event NEA becomes applicable for projects in the pipeline, EIA requirements under the NEA and OP 4.01 will be harmonized.
                         Although the CEA will be little involved in the approval of sub-project, as a member of the project Steering Committee its expertise and
                         guidance is expected to be available. Furthermore, some of the key stakeholders of the project such as the Urban Development Authority,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Colombo Municipal Council have experience in EIA related work required by GoSL regulations as well as those of multi-national donors.

                         Implementation arrangements: The main responsibility of ensuring compliance with environmental safeguards requirements of the project will
                         be borne by the PMU which is supported by a full-time environmental specialist who is suitably qualified and experienced in managing urban
                         environmental issues. Among its key tasks, the PMU will be responsible for providing the overall policy direction, technical assistance, review
                         and endorsement of screening reports, environmental assessment and management plans, capacity building for effective safeguards
                         management to the implementing agencies, monitoring of environmental compliance and progress reporting to the World Bank. In addition, the
                         SLLRDC, UDA, CMC and the 3 local authorities will appoint an Environmental Officer as the nodal point directly responsible for the day-today
                         implementation and monitoring of the safeguards at the agency level. While the SLLRDC and the UDA are regularly staffed with Environmental
                         Officers and the project is expected to benefit from the available expertise, Environmental Officers will be appointed to assist the CMC and the
                         other local authorities. They will be primarily responsible for sub-project screening, preparation of environmental assessments/plans, ensuring
                         EMPs are reflected in bid documents, implementation of EMPs at the site level together with site engineer and the Environmental focal point of
                         the contractor and progress reporting to the PMU. The PMU together with the project units in the implementing agencies will encourage
                         community participation in the planning, management, operation and monitoring of sub-projects.

                         In order to ensure safeguard procedures, instruments and monitoring needs of the MCUDP are well understood by its implementing partners,
                         the capacity of PMU and project units in the partner agency will be strengthened with resources available under the institutional capacity
                         component. The PMU will hire consultants to aid the implementing agencies in carrying out sub-project specific screening for the first 5 sub-
                         projects under each agency. The respective environmental officers of each agency will work closely with the consultants in order to receive an
                         on-the-job training. The technical assistance thus provided will ensure creating the necessary understanding, standards and capacity within the
                         agencies to carry out screening for subsequent sub-project independently. Where stand alone Environmental Assessments and Management
                         Plans are required as screening outcomes, the PMU will hire independent consultants. All screening reports, EAs and EMPs will be prior
                         reviewed and cleared by the PMU. In addition, screening reports, EAs and EMPs for all Category A type of sub-projects and a sample of
                         Category B type sub-projects will be prior reviewed by the World Bank.

                         For contracts such as dredging in sites proven to be contaminated and for the subsequent disposal of such dredged material, the PMU will hire
                         specialist services who will prepare disposal plans, carry out additional sampling (if needed) and site monitoring, conduct awareness for
                         implementing agencies and contractors of disposal plan, monitor compliance and ensure control measures are adequately implemented. The
                         project will also explore the possibility of building long-term capacity, especially within the participating local authorities, on the management of
                         urban environmental issues, with a focus on solid waste management and environmental monitoring, through training programs and
                         procurement of necessary equipment.

                         Environmental Monitoring: The MCUDP will focus strongly on effective environmental monitoring. While day-to-day monitoring will be largely
                                                                                                                                                           Page 5 of 9
                         confined to compliance monitoring based on a monitoring checklist and is expected to take place through regular site supervision by the
                         responsible officers, monitoring of environmental parameters (such as air, water, salinity, sediment quality, etc.) will be conducted based on the
                         requirements specified in the EMPs. Most importantly, the project will support independent environmental audits on an annual basis throughout
                         project implementation.


                         Social:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Social Assessment. The Government has carried out a Social Assessment (SA) to understand social issues and risks associated with the
                         project and prepared a Social Management Framework through consultations with the key stakeholders and the affected community groups As
                         per the SA, the majority of the works, chiefly improvement of infrastructure such as existing canals, micro/storm drainage, streets, recreation
                         areas, and similar works are expected to have significant positive social impacts by way of improving the urban environment and livability of
                         CMA. Such works would mostly involve temporary risks relating to access, mobility, health, and safety. A major positive impact will be the
                         improvement in living conditions of households in selected under-serviced settlement that would be preventively relocated from low lying flood-
                         prone areas to secure housing. Long term adverse impacts of the project are likely to be caused by unavoidable land acquisition and
                         resettlement impacts in some subprojects to be implemented in the later implementation stages. As a result, OP 4.12 on Involuntary
                         Resettlement has been triggered for the project.

                         While the exact number of households and magnitude of private land required for different subprojects is not known, based on the SA, it is
                         estimated that about 1,500 squatter households living in underserved settlements (USSs) around the Beira Lake and along canal banks could
                         be relocated to resettlement sites. Ethnic composition of people living in the project area is similar to that of larger population living in the CMC
                         area. The sample survey showed the population of under-served settlements to be distributed mostly between Sinhalese (38.6%), Muslims/
                         Malay (31.4%) and Tamil (28.5%). A Bank-financed Livelihood Assessment of Under-Serviced Settlement in floodable areas in CMC is currently
                         being carried out in partnership with UN-Habitat, together with a prominent NGO and a research institute. This study will further deepen the
                         knowledge of these settlements and the findings of this assessment will be available by project launch, further informing the design and
                         implementation of the resettlement process under the project..

                         Policy and Regulatory Environment: The Government of Sri Lanka (GoSL) has a well developed Land Acquisition (LA) Act with latest
                         administrative regulation of 2008 and a National Involuntary Resettlement Policy (NIRP, 2001) to deal with land acquisition and involuntary
                         resettlement risks. The NIRP (2001) provides for payment of compensation at replacement cost along with adequate resettlement and
                         rehabilitation benefits. The LA Regulation of 2008 provides detailed guidelines for calculating land and structure value at replacement cost and
                         current market value and compensation for damage and injurious affection as well as associated expenditures to the affected people. The
                         government has managed several projects involving LA and IR applying safeguards policies acceptable to external donors such as ADB, JICA,
                         and IDA/IBRD. The capacity and experience of application safeguard legislations and policies have been diverse across projects including
                         some widely acknowledged best practices such as in case of the Lunawwa Project and the Southern Highway Project. Workshops on urban
                         resettlement have been organized over the course of project preparation for the PMU and the stakeholder agencies to strengthen their
                         understanding of social safeguards issues and build their capacity for safeguards management.

                         Social Management Framework: The Social Management Framework has been prepared with sample field survey and a two-stage
                         consultations with the stakeholders including the people likely to be affected. The SMF has been finalized through community, technical
                         stakeholder, public consultation and with the government approval and disclosed. The SMF sets out principles and procedures for: (i) social
                         screening and IR impact survey; (ii) procedure for preparing and implementing RAPs; (iii) legal framework; (iv) entitlement matrix; (v) framework
Public Disclosure Copy




                         for stakeholder consultation and community participation including of NGOs; and (vi) implementation arrangements (for paying compensation
                         and assistance, relocation and post-resettlement support, grievance resolution, coordination of LA and R&R with civil work, monitoring and
                         evaluation and indicative budget). The SMF also provides guidelines for promoting social accountability/demand side governance measures in
                         the implementation process. The Entitlement Matrix provides the following entitlements: compensation at replacement cost for land and
                         structures, alternative houses to the displaced squatters, shops on lease to relocated commercial units, rental allowance to the tenants, income
                         restoration assistance to shops, property owners, and residences losing employment or income, reconstruction of affected community facilities
                         and mitigation measures for temporary impacts.

                         Gender considerations have been taken into account both at the general level of project design and specifically embedded in the proposed in
                         the SMF. In particular, both women and children are expected to greatly benefit particularly from subprojects of urban scale implemented in the
                         CMC and other local authorities aimed to deliver easy-to-access, open and safe public spaces and playgrounds, with plenty of public lighting
                         along highly frequented streets, parks and beach fronts. The public convenience sub-project will provide separate facilities for women,
                         benefitting especially working women, students and visitors to the city from other parts of the country. Specific gender considerations in the
                         SMF include: (a) provision of title of the alternative house in the joint name of spouses, and in the name of the mother in case of deceased
                         husband; (b) special attention to women headed households with livelihood restoration support; (c) equal provision of employment training
                         opportunities for male and female youths; and (d) gender sensitive provision of facilities in resettlement sites including women and day care
                         centers; (e) and ensuring women’s participation in condominium management process.

                         Resettlement Sites: The Government of Sri Lanka is implementing a pro-poor housing program, under which it has commissioned construction
                         of new multi-storey buildings with flats of 400 sft. each in several locations in the Colombo area to re-house people living in USS. Of these, the
                         GoSL has committed to earmark 1,500 flats and a proportional number of commercial units and social facilities to meet the potential
                         resettlement requirements for the MCUDP. The flats will be made available in condominiums, currently under construction in two government
                         sites closest to the MCUDP project areas. The Bank oversight in this regard shall be limited to the relocation of the project affected households
                         in such condominiums.

                         Social Accountability and Inclusion: Specific guidelines for addressing social inclusion and accountability in the resettlement process include
                         information disclosure, consultation, grievance redress, community civil society participation in R/R implementation, special support for
                         displaced vulnerable households to restore livelihoods (e.g. credit access and skill training support for youths from vulnerable resettled families,
                         continuation provision of government welfare poverty alleviation schemes (samrudhi, old age pension) for eligible resettled families, extending
                         housekeeping assignments at resettlement sites and employment in project related works, and opportunity to avail of a shop at the resettlement
                         site on long term lease. Resettled families losing livelihood will receive cash assistance to enable re-establishment of their income

                         Implementation Arrangements: The PMU has identified UDA as the nodal agency for coordinating LA and R&R activities for the Project. The
                                                                                                                                                         Page 6 of 9
                           PMU has appointed a senior officer of the UDA managing the urban resettlement scheme as the director of its social unit. UDA has a large
                           social survey team and has established database management systems for planning and implementing the urban resettlement scheme. In Sri
                           Lanka, land acquisition is undertaken by Ministry of Land through their divisional secretaries, and the PMU will appoint a special officer for
                           coordinating LA activities. Each major PPA such as the SLLRDC, CMC, and UDA has special land acquisition cells.

                           Key institutional arrangements for implementing SMF/RAP will include: (a) establishment of Social Management Cell at the PMU and, as
                           necessary, and establishment of Land Acquisition and R&R cells in each project partner agency (PPA) to carry out/coordinate social screening
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and impact survey; prepare and implement RAPs for the Stage-II activities (with the help of external consultants if needed); (c) unified
                           mechanism at UDA to address and monitor post-resettlement sustainability issues; (d) a multi-stage Grievance Resolution Mechanism; and (e)
                           Independent Safeguard Monitoring and Review Mechanisms. A Metro Colombo Stakeholder Forum (MCSF) will be established, which will be
                           an advisory body including representatives from government, professional experts and civil society for discussing overall progress, issues of
                           importance, and providing advice to the PMU. A Steering Committee of relevant government departments will be established to review progress
                           and ensure implementation coordination at the highest level. These bodies will meet periodically, in which the designated officers or their
                           representatives will participate.

                           Key safeguards compliance arrangements will involve instituting systems and capacity for safeguards management at the PMU and sub-project
                           implementing agencies. This will include: establishing an inclusive Land Acquisition and Resettlement Committee (LARC) for the Project, hiring
                           of social development specialists for PMU and social development officers (SDOs) to assist implementing agencies handling resettlement
                           activities; mobilizing community development officers (CDO) from the social welfare department field level operations and hiring Consultants for
                           resettlement planning and NGO for implementation support; and establishing Land Acquisition and R/R capacity in implementing agencies.
                           MoDUD will establish mechanisms for independent monitoring and quality audit of the safeguards management including land acquisition, R/R
                           and EMP. The safeguards monitoring and review consultants will provide quarterly implementation progress reports (QPR) and yearly
                           Safeguard Review Reports. Social accountability measures proposed include information disclosure, civil society participation in planning and
                           monitoring of the project; and grievance resolution mechanisms..

                           Linking Social Management Actions to Civil Works: Social Screening will be carried out for each activity and based on the magnitude of impacts
                           and scale of resettlement required, SIAs will be commissioned through independent consultants or will be carried out by the Social
                           Development Specialists with the help of Social Development Officers. Based on the SIA, RAPs will be prepared in consultation with the
                           affected communities and disclosed. The eligibility lists will be disclosed at the community and at the implementing agency level for objections
                           before finalizing the same. Eligibility will be determined on the basis of census survey and once the beneficiary list is finalized, the affected
                           families will be issued Family Identity Cards. The LA and R&R benefits will be provided before handing over the site for civil work. The Chief
                           Engineer from the concerned implementing agency will certify that the necessary actions have been completed as per the RAP for handing over
                           encumbrance free land for civil work. The SMF provides for giving rental allowance to the affected families till final relocation in permanent
                           buildings in the case of emergency shifting.

                           A Multi-stage Grievance Redress Mechanism will be established, with clear procedures for handling PAP complaints at local, sub-project
                           implementing agency, PMU, and department levels. Above this, there shall be an Independent Grievance Panel (IGP) comprising
                           representatives from the Ministry of Land, Department of Valuation, Ministry of Women Affairs, in addition to an eminent NGO, a lawyer and a
                           retired civil servant of the rank of a Secretary of the GoSL to hear and resolve complaints unresolved by GRCs operating in the Project. There
                           shall be a Technical Assessment Committee instituted by the PMU comprising structural engineering and survey experts to aid and advise the
                           LARC and IGP in resolving compensation related issues. SMF requires holding consultations during resettlement planning and implementation
                           to discuss risks, entitlements, RAPs, and relocation and site handover schedules; and disclosure of relevant documents on project website, in
Public Disclosure Copy




                           newspapers, and public project outreach centers established at the PMU and implementing agency levels..

                           Monitoring and Evaluation: The PMU will hire external consultants/NGO for providing need-based implementation support to the PPAs and for
                           carrying out independent monitoring and quality assurance. The Project will have a participative implementation monitoring system established
                           at the bottom, which will enable the local resettlement committee to participate in the implementation process in planning and monitoring roles.
                           The PMU will submit quarterly implementation progress and quality monitoring reports with yearly “safeguard reviews” which will be carried out
                           by independent consultants. These will form the basis for any improvements to be brought about in the safeguard policy framework and
                           implementation arrangements.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                            on potentially affected people.
                           Environment – During preparation of the EMF, EA and screening reports for the 8 selected sub-projects for implementation in year 1, the public/
                           communities in project sites have been consulted to hear their concerns about the projects’ environmental impacts and the outcomes have
                           been documented. In general, public opinion of the project from an environment perspective is largely positive and welcomed. In addition,
                           consultations with other primary stakeholders such as the implementing partners (SLLRDC, UDA and the 4 LAs) and regulatory agencies (CEA)
                           have been carried out during this time and documented. The EMF and the EA have been placed in public domain in-country and through the
                           World Bank’s Infoshop since 16/11/2011and will comply with the 120 day disclosure requirement of a Category A project. On 25/01/2012 the
                           public was invited to a hearing on the safeguard documents disclosed through a media notice where an opportunity was provided to the public
                           to discuss the project design, its environmental and social implications. Similarly, for all types of environmental analyses conducted
                           subsequently, affected communities would be consulted, process documented and account taken of the results of consultation, including any
                           actions agreed resulting from the consultation. Public disclosure of the relevant safeguards documentation will be a pre-requisite for bidding of
                           works contracts. The contract documents for each contract package will mandatorily include the relevant environmental mitigation provisions
                           stipulated in the EMPs for the given sub-projects in order to ensure contractor compliance with the safeguards requirements.

                           Social: Primary stakeholders include the affected persons, the beneficiaries of the project, the host population of the transit and resettlement
                           sites, the project partner agencies such as SLLRDC, UDA, LAs and more importantly the project proponent and the Ministry of Defence &
                           Urban Development and Ministry of Finance. The secondary stakeholders are the others who have an interest on the project such as the
                           National Government, the political authority, policy-makers, advocacy groups, NGOs and other private and public sectors which have indirect
                           involvements with the project.

                           Most of the people likely to be affected live in under-served settlements (USS) without secure tenure; have informal incomes and access to
                           minimum basic services including water, electricity, and common toilets; and are poorer than the mainstream population of the metropolitan
                           area. Some of them belong to linguistic or religious minorities, but not indigenous communities. The SA and SMF were prepared after sample
                                                                                                                                                                  Page 7 of 9
                              survey in USS colonies and interactions with the people living therein. The SMF shall be finalized after holding another round of community
                              consultation in the USS colonies and other stakeholders including the implementing agencies.

                              Consultation and Disclosure: The SMF provides a framework for holding consultations during planning and implementing the RAPs.
                              Consultations will be carried out and documented while preparing and designing the sub-projects to discuss alternatives, during Screening/SIA
                              to discuss risks and impacts, and while preparing the RAP to discuss entitlements, disseminate the implementation process and time schedule
                              for disbursement of compensation and benefits. During implementation, consultations will be held to plan actual relocation to the condominiums
Public Disclosure Copy




                              and to help with income restoration support. All the relevant safeguard documents will be disclosed at the MoDUD website, and on the websites
                              of the implementing agencies, whereas key information will be disclosed through the newspapers depending on the requirement. The eligibility
                              lists, entitlements, implementation schedule, etc will be disclosed at the level of settlements affected by the project. Each implementing agency
                              and the PMU will establish public information centers where the relevant project documents will be available for public reference

                              The Social Management Framework and the Social Screening and A-RAP have been prepared through multiple stakeholder interactions and
                              finalized with community consultation held on January 23, 2012, technical stakeholder consultation on January 24, 2012 and public hearing
                              held on January 25, 2012 at Colombo. Further consultations will be held during the course of implementation. This document has been
                              disclosed on the MoDUD website and available at the PPAs for public reference.

                            B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                            Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                              Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                            Yes
                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                               11-Oct-2011
                              Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                           16-Nov-2011
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                            16-Nov-2011
                              For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive            15-Feb-2012
                              Directors
                             Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                              Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                            Yes
                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                               04-Nov-2011
                              Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                           16-Nov-2011
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                            16-Nov-2011
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                            disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                            C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                              Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                Yes [     ]      No [    ]          NA [   ]

                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                              Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts on          Yes [     ]      No [    ]          NA [   ]
                              cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                              If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the        Yes [     ]      No [    ]          NA [   ]
                              plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?                Yes [     ]      No [    ]          NA [   ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language        Yes [     ]      No [    ]          NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for     Yes [     ]      No [    ]          NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?                Yes [     ]      No [    ]          NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard      Yes [     ]      No [    ]          NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same          Yes [     ]      No [    ]          NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Signed and submitted by:                                                Name                                                     Date

                                                                                                                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                         Task Team Leader:                  Rosanna Nitti                       31-Jan-2012
                         Approved By:
                         Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Sanjay Srivastava (RSA)             01-Feb-2012
                         Comments:    cleared. Please see email dated 01/26/2011 for details.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sector Manager:                    Ming Zhang (SM)                     02-Feb-2012
                         Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                              Page 9 of 9
