                                                                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                             APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA834
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-May-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        Uruguay                                  Project ID:                        P118064
                              Project Name:                   OSE Sustainable and Efficient (P118064)
                              Task Team Leader:               Carmen Rosa Yee-Batista
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 14-May-2012                                    Estimated Board Date:              05-Jul-2012
                              Managing Unit:                  LCSUW                                    Lending Instrument:                Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                         General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%)
                              Theme:                          Climate change (50%), Vulnerability assessment and monitoring (25%), Water resource management (25%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                          Amount
                                   Borrower                                                                                                                     42.00
                                   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                                        42.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                        84.00
                              Environmental Category:         B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase the sustainability of OSE by improving the reliability and resilience of its water supply and
                              sanitation systems, enhancing its efficiency, and strengthening its management capacity

                              3. Project Description

                              In an effort to ensure its future sustainability, OSE will improve the reliability of its water supply and sanitation systems, use water and energy more
Public Disclosure Copy




                              efficiently, strengthen company management, promote forward looking knowledge activities, and incorporate climate variability response measures
                              into its operative strategy.

                              Component 1: Investing in Reliable Water Supply Infrastructure (US$22.20 million). This component will finance the construction, expansion and
                              rehabilitation of water system facilities in order to increase the reliability of the water supply system, which will be defined in terms of the shortages
                              that result from failures of the systems’ physical components. In addition to increasing reliability, these infrastructure improvements will enhance
                              the efficiency of water services and build resilience to future climatic challenges. This component is divided into the following three
                              subcomponents.

                              Subcomponent 1 – Aguas Corrientes Intake Structure & Electrical System Improvements. This subcomponent will finance the construction of a
                              new water intake structure and improvements to the electrical system of the finished water pump station. The objective of the water intake
                              structure is to increase the standby capacity of the system. The installed capacity will be 20,000 m3 per hour. This additional capacity will help
                              OSE perform routine maintenance procedures and shield against unexpected failures and disasters. The subcomponent will also finance activities
                              to improve the efficiency and reliability of 10 finished water pumps at the Aguas Corrientes WTP by replacing 10 motors.

                              Subcomponent 2 – Construction of Two Water Treatment Plants. This subcomponent will finance the replacement of two water treatment plants in
                              Durazno and Treinta y Tres that are located in areas that are prone to flooding and are underperforming. The Durazno WTP will serve a population
                              of about 50,000 and Treinta y Tres will serve a population of about 35,000 people. Both WTPs will be built to meet the cities’ estimated water
                              needs for 2035. For the Durazno WTP, the Project will finance the installation and construction of the (i) raw water intake pumps, (ii) water main
                              from the intake to the plant, (iii) treatment system, and (iv) finished water force main. For the Treinta y Tres WTP, the Project will finance the
                              construction of the water treatment system and the rehabilitation of the administrative building. OSE will produce a detailed design, prepare bidding
                              documents, and supervise the Project.

                              Component 2: Managing Water and Energy More Efficiently (US$37.50 million). This component focuses on optimizing water and energy efficiency
                              to increase OSE’s sustainability. The Project will finance activities to support OSE’s flagship Non-Revenue Water and the Energy Management
                              Programs. Water and energy are brought together under this component because of the synergies between the two sectors. Promoting efficiency
                              in these areas will reduce costs, reduce GHG emissions and prolong the useful life of equipment.

                              Subcomponent 1 – Non-Revenue Water Reduction Program. The aim of this subcomponent is to improve OSE’s flagship non-revenue water
                              reduction program’s capacity to prevent, reduce and control real (physical) and apparent (commercial) water losses. The subcomponent will
                              pursue these goals through supporting the establishment of Districts of Measurement and Control (DMCs) throughout the country, building
                              institutional support for the NRW Program and enhancing the metering capabilities of OSE. The DMCs would coordinate institutional, physical and

                                                                                                                                                                            Page 1 of 7
                         socio-environmental actions and lead the effort to prevent and reduce non-revenue water. Under this Project, DMCs will be established in
                         Montevideo, Paysandú, Mercedes, Rivera, Salto, and La Piedras-La Paz. The program will strengthen institutional support for non-revenue water
                         loss through, among other activities, establishing standardized procedures for construction of water connections, implementing capacity building
                         activities for staff across OSE, holding annual evaluation workshops and developing a secure budget for the program. This subcomponent will also
                         assist in the replacement of micro and macro meters throughout the country and support a pilot program for telemetry. The Project would support
                         the development of this subcomponent through the financing of consulting services, goods and works, and training.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Subcomponent 2 – Energy Management Program. The aim of the energy management subcomponent is to strengthen OSE’s energy
                         management program through strengthening OSE’s energy management plan, replacing inefficient equipment and improving OSE’s capacity to
                         measure and conserve energy use. The EMP aims to integrate non-revenue water reduction and short-term energy conservation measures into a
                         comprehensive energy strategy that clearly outlines objectives and delegates responsibilities. Energy reduction measures would improve OSE’s
                         operational efficiency, reduce expenditures, and contribute to Uruguay’s climate change mitigation efforts. The Project will replace 250 pumps and
                         associated equipment that is underperforming. The Project will also finance training activities and the acquisition of monitoring equipment and
                         software to promote energy efficient management. This subcomponent will finance consulting services, goods and works, and training to develop
                         and carry-out these activities.

                         Component 3: Preparing for the Future: Management, Planning and Risk (US$11.10 million). This component will finance management, planning
                         and risk assessment activities to improve OSE’s social reach, environmental management and economic efficiency. The advances OSE makes
                         through this component will be captured in the Business Management Efficiency Index that OSE and the Bank Project team jointly formulated. The
                         BMEI will serve as a stepping stone for using more advanced benchmarking and utility scorecardsat OSE. This component is divided into the
                         following three subcomponents.

                         Subcomponent 1 – Corporate Management. The subcomponent will finance the development of a number of cutting edge corporate management
                         programs that OSE has identified as key to enhancing management’s efficiency, efficacy and transparency. Among other activities, the
                         subcomponent will finance the development of an asset management program, a logistics management model, and a knowledge and innovation
                         management model. These activities, which are all part of OSE’s Strategic Plan, will consolidate and build on the corporate management
                         improvements made during the APL2 Project.

                         Subcomponent 2 –Risk Management& Planning. This subcomponent will support OSE’s efforts to develop a long term, strategic plan that
                         thoroughly analyzes and mitigates potential risks and to strengthen OSE’s capacity to manage risk in day-to-day operations. The Project will help
                         OSE consolidate its strategic vision through financing consulting services to coordinate upper management’s vision with the sectors’ lines of
                         action. To help integrate risk analysis into strategic planning, the Project will finance a climate vulnerability risk assessment. To systemize risk
                         management at OSE, the Project will finance the development of contingency plans for droughts and floods and water safety plans to mitigate risks
                         relating to water quality. These activities will help OSE establish protocol for identifying risks, resolving those risks that come to fruition, and
                         planning for a sustainable future.

                         Subcomponent 3 – Environmental Sustainability. This subcomponent would enhance OSE’s ability to operate in an environmentally sustainable
                         manner by strengthening the environmental and sanitation units at OSE and supporting OSE’s participation in water source protection activities.
                         The Project will strengthen the Environmental Management Unit at OSE through building the unit’s capacity to ensure that OSE is following
                         environmental safeguards during construction and operations. A key environmental mitigation measure that this Project would support is the
                         development of a sludge master plan. The Project will also build the capacity of the Sanitation Unit through, among other activities, developing a
                         comprehensive strategic wastewater plan and strengthening operational capacity. In addition, the Project will support OSE’s participation in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         regional watershed management programs. OSE, in collaboration with the University of the Republic and MVOTMA, will implement a water quality
                         and quantity monitoring program and a hydraulic management plan for Laguna del Sauce as part of the watershed’s integrated management plan.

                         Component 4: Knowledge Sharing and Project Management Activities (US$2.00 million). This component would finance knowledge sharing
                         activities, such as documenting best practices, participating in conferences, and conducting seminar/conferences on water, energy and climate
                         related topics. Particular emphasis will be placed on South-South knowledge exchange. This component will also provide funding for project
                         management, supervision and engineering support, and financial and technical audits.

                         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         Component 1 includes improvements to the Aguas Corrientes WTP, which is located 56 km from Montevideo in Aguas Corrientes in the
                         Department of Canelones. The Aguas Corrientes WTP is located in the Santa Lucía River Basin. The Government of Uruguay is evaluating a
                         proposal to establish Santa Lucía’s floodplain area and buffer zone as a protected management area, under the category “sustainable use of
                         natural resources.? The new water intake will be situated on the river bank, 50 meters from the existing intake system and 350 meters from the
                         treatment facilities. The intake and pipeline construction will only disturb a small portion of the riparian area (300 m2), and the pump station and
                         force main will be constructed in disturbed areas adjacent to the plant. The electrical upgrades will take place in existing facilities within the plant
                         site.

                         Under Component 1, two water treatment plants in the cities of Durazno and Treinta y Tres that have been affected by floods and have surpassed
                         their useful lives will be replaced. In the case of Durazno, the plant will be reconstructed at a higher elevation on a new site located within 500
                         meters of the existing intake structure. The intake structure at Rio Yi will not be replaced, but it will be improved by replacing aged pumps. The new
                         plant site was recently acquired by OSE. The Durazno WTP and associated water mains will be built in a disturbed suburban area of the city where
                         natural habitats are not found. The Treinta y Tres WTP will be located at a higher elevation on the existing plant site owned by OSE, and the intake
                         structure at the Olimar River and its associated equipment will not be replaced.

                         Under the non-revenue water reduction program in Component 2, Districts of Measurement and Control (DMCs) will be established in Montevideo,
                         Las Piedras-La Paz, Mercedes, Paysandú, Rivera and Salto, and meters will be replaced throughout the country. The other components are
                         nationwide, non-structural activities involving consulting services and the purchase of equipment and software.

                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                         Ricardo Schusterman (LCSSO)
                         Elba Lydia Gaggero (LCSEN)
                                                                                                                                                                        Page 2 of 7
                               6. Safeguard Policies                          Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                               Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01            Yes              Explanation included in Section II.
                               Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                    Yes              Explanation included in Section II.
                               Forests OP/BP 4.36                             No               The project will not support management of forest.
Public Disclosure Copy




                               Pest Management OP 4.09                        No               This safeguard does not apply as the project does not require the purchase,
                                                                                               application or storage of pesticides and will not lead to an increased use of
                                                                                               pesticides.
                               Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11         Yes              Explanation included in Section II.
                               Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                  No               This safeguard does not apply as indigenous peoples, as defined by the four
                                                                                               required characteristics in OP4.10, are not present.
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12            Yes              Explanation included in Section II.
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                      No               This safeguard does not apply as the trigger characteristics are not present in the
                                                                                               Project.
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP      Yes              Explanation included in Section II.
                               7.50
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60          No               This safeguard does not apply.


                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                   Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01). The physical interventions foreseen in the Project are included in Components 1 and 2 and refer to
                                 (i) the construction of a new water intake structure at the Aguas Corrientes WTP; (ii) electrical system improvements by replacing water pump
                                 motors and upgrading electrical switchgears and transformers in the same plant; (iii) the replacement of two medium-size water treatment
                                 plants in the cities of Durazno and Treinta y Tres; and (iv) the replacement of water distribution pipes, meters, and valves under the non-
                                 revenue water program. Based on the nature of the works, this Project is classified as Category B and requires a partial environmental
                                 assessment (EA) in accordance with the World Bank’s Environmental and Social Safeguards Policies.

                                 The Project’s environmental impacts will primarily be positive. They include reducing water losses and energy consumption and introducing
                                 green elements, such as asset management, water source protection, climate risk assessment, and environmental and wastewater
                                 management into OSE’s strategic planning and operational management. In particular, the Project will support training and assistance to help
                                 develop and standardize tools and procedures on environmental management practices related to the provision of WSS services. The Project
                                 will generate significant benefits in the provision of water to the 1.87 million residents of Montevideo, Durazno and Treinta y Tres by increasing
                                 reliability and efficiency of service, while maintaining the sustainability and quality of the water sources.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 The proposed works do not involve new water sources. The new intake construction at the Aguas Corrientes WTP does not aim to increase the
                                 production of the plant but to add a 20,000 m3/h backup intake capacity to gain maintenance and operational flexibility. Specific works include
                                 trench excavations, construction of an 80 meter concrete channel, and installation of pipes (approx. 1000 m) and pumps. Electrical system
                                 investments aim to improve energy efficiency by replacing and upgrading equipment. There will not be an increase of water withdrawal or
                                 modification of existing processes. Therefore, the planned investments would not alter the conditions of the Santa Lucía River. The Durazno
                                 WTP (with a 700 m3/h design capacity) and Treinta y Tres WTP (500 m3/h design capacity) will be built at higher elevations in areas that are
                                 not prone to floods. The Durazno WTP will be built on a new plot of land, and the Treinta y Tres WTP will be built on another area within the
                                 boundaries of the existing plant site. In both cases the technological upgrades involve sludge treatment and disposal, which at present are
                                 discharged to the Yí River and the Olimar River.

                                 The design capacities of the three water plants are based on the estimated maximum daily flow required to meet the projected 2035 water
                                 demand. Existing water withdrawal authorizations are maintained since the water source locations do not change, and they already take into
                                 account future flows. Water resources regulation gives priority to drinking water use and includes provisions to restrict potential adverse
                                 impacts associated with water withdrawal.

                                 No significant, irreversible adverse impacts are anticipated for the Project; however, there are some potential minor adverse impacts in the
                                 construction and operation phases of the Project. Potential impacts from the construction of the infrastructure works include construction
                                 staging, dust emissions, noise, debris and other solid waste generation, traffic, public and workers safety and other standard impacts of
                                 construction. During the operation phase the main environmental risks are related to water withdrawal, solid waste and wastewater generation,
                                 and handling of chlorine gas. The main impacts from equipment and pipe replacement are associated with earthworks and solid waste
                                 generation. All of the Project’s adverse impacts are expected to be manageable; known technological and management solutions have been
                                 included in the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) of the Project.

                                 Almost all of the works to be financed under the Project will be conducted on disturbed land where sensitive natural habitats and cultural
                                 resources have not been found. However, the Natural Habitats (OP 4.04) and the Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11) are triggered for the
                                 reasons explained below.

                                 The other components involve institutional development, training, and capacity building activities, such as the development of a strategic plan
                                 focusing on risk management, water source monitoring and evaluation, a comprehensive wastewater management plan, and a sludge master
                                 plan. The studies will evaluate the benefits, potential adverse environmental impacts, and mitigation measures when evaluating and
                                 recommending actions.

                                                                                                                                                                        Page 3 of 7
                           Natural Habitats (OP 4.04). The Government of Uruguay is evaluating the possibility of establishing the Santa Lucía floodplain and buffer zone,
                           an area of approximately 160 km2, as a protected area under the “sustainable use of natural resources? category to ensure the protection of a
                           wetland system located in the lower basin close to the river confluence. The Project area is located within the proposed protected area;
                           however, no sensitive ecosystems have been identified. The Project area is located in the middle basin, about 50 km from the wetland system.
                           The environmental assessment indicates that natural habitats will only be affected in an area of approximately 300 m2 located in the Santa
                           Lucía River bank, within the boundaries of the plant site, where the new intake pipe and channel of Aguas Corrientes WTP will be installed. The
                           pump station and force main will be constructed in disturbed areas of the plant site. A hydrological study was conducted to select the intake
Public Disclosure Copy




                           location to ensure that appropriate environmental flows are maintained.

                           Some vegetation loss would result and would include the removal of trees and shrubs for the installation of the new intake structure. During
                           final stages of construction activities, the stream bank, soils and vegetation disturbed by the Project would be re-graded and restored. Disturbed
                           riparian areas would be seeded with native riparian vegetation. During operation, the intake structure will deliver raw water to the Aguas
                           Corrientes WTP for treatment as required, since its purpose is to add redundancy to the existing system to improve maintenance capabilities
                           and increase operational flexibility. The Project will not increase the plant water withdrawal.

                           The proposed protection category does not imply incompatibilities with the WTP operation, which has been operating in the site for almost 150
                           years (the first intake has been in operation since 1871). Furthermore, it would leverage OSE´s own objective of protecting its water sources.

                           Non-structural activities, including strategic planning, sludge management plan, water safety plans, and water source protection will include
                           natural habitats considerations as the two main water sources, the Santa Lucía River Basin and Laguna del Sauce River Basin are considered
                           protected areas.

                           Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11). The Bank’s experience in Uruguay with previous projects has led the team to conclude that excavation
                           and building processes should not uncover any physical cultural resources (PCR). During Project preparation, it was found that the Santa Lucía
                           lower basin had been identified as an important archaeological site. This area is located about 50 km from the Project and from previous works
                           in the area, it is not expected that PCRs will be found in the Aguas Corrientes WTP site. Nevertheless, since construction and excavation
                           activities will take place, OSE will implement procedures for screening known and unknown cultural property in the project area and incorporate
                           “chance find? procedures in the event that culturally significant resources are discovered during implementation. Procedures for the
                           identification and protection of physical cultural resources have been included in the ESMP.

                           International Waters (OP/BP 7.50). The Project triggered Projects on International Waterways (OP 7.5) since the activities described above
                           involve the use of rivers that are tributaries to international waterways as set out in paragraph 1, b of OP 7.50. The relationship between the
                           Project plants and rivers are included below.

                           (i) The Aguas Corrientes WTP extracts water from the Santa Lucia River, which then flows into the Rio de la Plata (an international waterways
                           between Uruguay and Argentina).
                           (ii) Durazno WTP extracts water from the Yi River. The Yi River flows into the Negro River. The Negro River flows into the Uruguay River, which
                           is an international waterways between Uruguay and Argentina.
                           (iii) Treinta y Tres WTP extracts water from the Olimar River. The Olimar River flows into the Cebollati River. The Cebollati River flows into the
                           Merin Lagoon, which is an international water body between Uruguay and Brazil.

                           As these works represent expansions of existing systems that will not adversely change the quality or quantity of the water flows or be
Public Disclosure Copy




                           adversely affected by the other riparians’ possible water use, the proposed Project falls within the exception set forth in paragraph 7(a) of OP
                           7.50. The works to be financed will not increase water withdrawal or alter the ongoing scheme. As mentioned above, in the case of Aguas
                           Corrientes, the intake structure will not increase the amount of extracted water since the structure will be added to increase standby capacity. In
                           the case of the Durazno and Treinta y Tres WTPs, both plants are being replaced and the existing intake structures and withdrawal permits will
                           be maintaine d.

                           According to national regulations, the works under the Project do not require environmental authorization since they are drinking water projects
                           and withdrawal permits are maintained because estimated withdrawals will not increase. In addition, the Rio Uruguay, the River Plate and the
                           Merin Lagoon treaties do not require notification for the works and conditions under this Project.

                           Social Aspects and Resettlement Policy. This Project is not likely to have any adverse social impacts. Rather, the Project would bestow positive
                           social impacts on Uruguay by increasing the reliability and efficiency of the provision of water, as well as improving the capacity for effective
                           management. The key social issue is ensuring regular consultations with key stakeholders and periodic communication of Project activities and
                           results. To that end, the Project would develop and implement a communication strategy within the company and include training and
                           consultation procedures for Components 1, 2 and 3. The Project EMP includes a communication plan to be implemented during the
                           construction activities that would draw on existing procedures that OSE has in place, such as the customer service call center and complaint
                           hotlines.

                           Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12). The Bank has reviewed the main civil works that OSE included in the Project, and the assessment
                           indicates that there would not be involuntary resettlement, land acquisition or easements. However, the Bank team and OSE triggered OP 4.12
                           in the event that easements and land acquisition are identified during implementation. Thus, OSE in collaboration with the Bank prepared a
                           Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to guide the resettlement process in the case that land acquisition becomes necessary. OSEs and
                           Uruguay’s country rules are consistent with OP 4.12’s mitigation and compensation measures for unavoidable physical or economic
                           displacement, making it highly probable that land acquisition will entail no conflicts with Bank policies

                           For the construction of the Durazno WTP, OSE expropriated a piece of land. The expropriation process was initiated in August 2009, before the
                           Project Identification Mission, and concluded in December 2011.The expropriated land had no buildings, dwellers, economic activity, nor
                           improvements of any type. The process did not reach judicial status because OSE and the landowners reached an agreement. OSE accepted
                           the landowners’ request to increase the estimated land value. OSE paid almost three times the amount estimated by Dirección Nacional de
                           Catastro. OSE followed national rules, which are consistent with OP 4.12’s mitigation and compensation measures for unavoidable physical or
                           economic displacement.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:

                                                                                                                                                                  Page 4 of 7
                             No potential indirect and/or long term adverse impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area have been identified. Potential
                           long term impacts of this investment Project are highly positive: improved efficiency, reliability and resilience of the water systems will ensure
                           sustainable sources of drinking water in Uruguay.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                            A hydrological study of Aguas Corrientes was conducted to select the intake location to ensure that appropriate environmental flows are
                           maintained. OSE, through engineering studies and planning, sought to eliminate the need to acquire land except in the case of Durazno.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                            and implement the measures described.
                            Addressing safeguard policy issues. OSE has undertaken an Environmental Assessment in accordance with the environmental policies of the
                           Bank for Category B projects and the national environmental regulations. The EA is organized in three main sections:

                           (i)        Description of the Project, environmental characteristics of the study area, and the legal and institutional framework to ensure that the
                           Project is compliance with national laws. The section also includes a description of the Bank safeguard policies, with emphasis on those that
                           are triggered.

                           (ii) An assessment of all potential impacts associated with the planned investments and identification of any mitigation measures during
                           construction and operation. Particular emphasis on analysis of potential impacts on any known cultural resources, natural habitats, and
                           involuntary resettlement.

                           (iii)     A comprehensive Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) for the Project that covers three thematic programs: (i)
                           Project specific ESMP that includes mitigation measures for specific investments as needed, implementation responsibilities during the
                           construction and operation phases, monitoring arrangements, and an implementation schedule with an adequate budget; (ii) environmental
                           management consolidation, which includes capacity building and strengthening of the overall environmental management procedures and
                           instruments in OSE; and (iii) a sludge management that includes short and long-term solutions for the treatment, disposal and reuse of sludge
                           generated from water and wastewater treatment plants.

                           Programs 2 and 3 of the EMP are included under Component 3 , of the Project. Under this subcomponent, the Project would support the
                           consolidation of environmental management at OSE through the following activities: (a) strengthening the environmental team through
                           restructuring and assigning specific roles and responsibilities to each team member, increasing the number of technical experts in the team,
                           and holding capacity building workshops; (b) ensuring that legal and regulatory requirements are applied and followed throughout OSE’s
                           operations; (c) implementing and streamlining procedures, guidelines and manuals for the design, construction and operation phases; and (d)
                           creating a monitoring and information management system to ensure that environmental guidelines are being carried out throughout OSE.

                           In addition, the Project will support the development of a sludge master plan for the entire company that emphasizes short term and long-term
                           measures that will contribute to the efficiency and environmental sustainability of the company. The Project would finance the following
                           activities: (a) the compilation of basic information on sludge generated by water and wastewater treatment plants in Uruguay; (b) pilot studies to
                           test different reuse methods and technologies; and (c) the development of a strategic sludge master plan.

                           Environmental Construction Manual. The EA involved the revision and improvement of the OSE’s Construction Environmental Manual (Manual
                           Ambiental de Obras). The manual, which was developed for the APL1 as a guide for appropriate environmental practices, aims to ensure that
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the Project’s works do not result in environmental degradation. The implementation of the manual is responsibility of the construction
                           companies, and the UGA is responsible for overseeing the works to make sure the guidelines are being properly applied. The manual includes:
                           (i) the Project's social and environmental management system; (ii) environmental actions and rules related to the execution and management of
                           civil works; (iii) environmental actions and rules related to the construction activities; and (iv) a plan for the control and recovery of disposal or
                           excavation areas. The Manual also provides environmental specifications for contractors to prepare project specific construction environmental
                           management plans. The plans must: (i) designate a professional to lead the environmental management of the works; (ii) comply with
                           regulations and the guidelines of the Environmental Construction Manual; and (iii) be presented and approved before work can begin.

                           Resettlement Policy Framework. OSE in collaboration with the Bank has prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to guide the
                           resettlement process in the case that resettlement becomes necessary. OSEs and Uruguay’s country rules are consistent with OP 4.12’s
                           mitigation and compensation measures for unavoidable physical or economic displacement, making it highly probable that land acquisition will
                           not entail conflict with Bank policies. The RPF is constructed to address situations of (i) additional land acquisition and easements for water
                           works construction should it be needed and (ii) physical and/or economic displacement resulting from the removal of squatters or encroachers
                           from the impact zones of the plants or any of the other physical infrastructures to be built under Project. The RPF is attached to the ESMP.

                           Communication Plan. The Project specific ESMP includes an external communication plan to be implemented by OSE’s social and
                           communication units during the implementation of the water works. This plan also includes grievance handling mechanisms to be implemented,
                           by both OSE and contractors, during the execution of works. OSE will also develop an internal communication strategy under the Component 4
                           of the Project to coordinate and document the various studies, workshops, and other knowledge sharing activities.

                           In addition, under Component 3, the Project will support the development of corporate communications within OSE to facilitate internal
                           communication and to improve the company’s institutional image with customers. The Project would finance consulting services to assist in the
                           development of the group through drafting: (i) communication policies; (ii) procedures and guidelines to implement relevant policies; (iii) an
                           organizational structure for corporate communications; and (iv) action plans for internal and external communication strategies.

                           Assessment of Borrower Capacity. OSE has a long history of working with the World Bank. As with the APL1 and the APL2 Projects, the
                           proposed Project will be implemented by OSE through the Gerencia de Programas con Financiamiento Externo (PFE), OSE’s unit in charge of
                           managing projects financed by Multilateral Development Banks. The social and environmental units within OSE will work in close coordination
                           with the PFE and other technical departments to manage the social and environmental safeguards. These two units were created during the
                           implementation of APL1 Project, and they have been further strengthened through support and close monitoring of OSE during the
                           implementation of APL2.

                           During Project implementation, the UGA will be responsible for: (i) supervising the implementation of the EMP; (ii) coordinating with other
                                                                                                                                                                     Page 5 of 7
                           departments about their environmental responsibilities in the Plan; (iii) supervising contractors’ implementation of environmental guidelines; and
                           (iv) ensuring compliance with national environmental regulations. Although a moderate risk was identified in relation to the capacity of UGA to
                           manage the increasing number of works OSE is undertaking, the Bank team has been working hand in hand with OSE during preparation to
                           mitigate this risk. Risk mitigation measures include: (i) strengthening the UGA through restructuring and assigning specific roles to each team
                           member, (ii) hiring more technical experts to join the team and (iii) establishing clear safeguards implementation and supervision arrangements.
                           The Project will also finance training and capacity building workshops and provide environmental and social expert assistance to mitigate this
                           risk. The mitigation measures are clearly stated in the ESMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                            on potentially affected people.
                            Key stakeholders include local authorities (Aguas Corrientes, Durazno y Treinta y Tres), Project-affected groups, government representatives
                           (MVOTMA, DINAMA, DINAGUA), universities, and local NGOs. The EA terms of reference were disclosed on the OSE website from September
                           1-15, 2011. The draft EA was disclosed on the OSE Website on March 27, 2012 and through the Bank’s Infoshop on April 2, 2012. OSE
                           conducted a public consultation on April 16, 2012 to give stakeholders the opportunity to comment on the EA. The meeting was announced in
                           national newspapers and to stakeholders, including local and national authorities, NGOs, and universities. A representative from the local
                           government of Aguas Corrientes expressed his support for the Project, while the President of the Regulator Agency (URSEA) highlighted the
                           importance of energy reductions efforts since OSE is the major consumer in Uruguay. Further consultation meetings will be announced by the
                           PFE at each site that civil works will take place. The final EA incorporated the results of the consultations and the participants’ views. The final
                           EA was disclosed in the OSE Website and in the Infoshop on May 11, 2012.

                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                    25-Apr-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                                11-May-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                 11-May-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                           Directors
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                    25-Apr-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                                11-May-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                 11-May-2012
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                         disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                           Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                     Yes [     ]      No [   ]      NA [    ]

                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                           If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) natural   Yes [     ]      No [   ]      NA [    ]
                           habitats, does the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                           Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts on               Yes [     ]      No [   ]      NA [    ]
                           cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                           If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the             Yes [     ]      No [   ]      NA [    ]
                           plan?
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                           Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                                                Yes [     ]      No [   ]      NA [    ]

                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                           Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?                     Yes [     ]      No [   ]      NA [    ]

                           Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language             Yes [     ]      No [   ]      NA [    ]
                           that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                           Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for          Yes [     ]      No [   ]      NA [    ]
                           the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                           Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?                     Yes [     ]      No [   ]      NA [    ]

                           Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard           Yes [     ]      No [   ]      NA [    ]
                           impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

                                                                                                                                                                   Page 6 of 7
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same   Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Task Team Leader:                 Carmen Rosa Yee-Batista
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By:
                            Sector Manager:                   Name Niels B. Holm-Nielsen (SM)                                        Date: 15-May-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                                          Page 7 of 7
