                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC2513

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Apr-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Apr-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Pacific Islands                  Project ID:      P132134
                            Project Name:       Pacific Regional Program: Practical Climate Resilient Approaches and Tools for
                                                Food and Water Security and Coastal Zone Management ( P132134)
                            Task Team           Samuel G. Wedderburn
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       00-undefined-0000                    Estimated        13-Feb-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: EASNS                                 Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%), General water, sanitation
                                                and flood protection sector (50%)
                            Theme(s):           Climate change (60%), Other environment and natural resources management
                                                (10%), Water resource management (10%), City-wide Infrastru cture and
                                                Service Delivery (10%), Natural disaster management (10%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      6.11                      Total Bank Financing:           0.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                                 Financing Gap:                  0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                       0.00
                              Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                                   6.11
                              Total                                                                          6.11
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The objective of the project is to improve the quality of and access to climate responsive tools,
                           technologies, and practices for agriculture and fisheries production, water security and coastal zone
                           management in the Pacific Islands.
                         C. Project Description
                         The proposed project aims to support the PPCR goals for the Pacific Region by synthesizing, testing
                         and sharing climate data, best practices and lessons. Through earlier consultations with PICs and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         available vulnerability assessments, food security, water security, and managing vulnerable coastal
                         areas were the priority sectors/activities identified for attention through the project. Working through
                         the Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC) the proposed project would pilot proven and
                         promising approaches to climate risk assessment and management in these areas in two countries.
                         [Kosrae in the Federated States of Micronesia (FSM) and Kiritimati (Christmas) Island in Kiribati are
                         provisionally proposed candidates, but further consultation with the governments is required, and
                         subject to CMU confirmation.] From the results of community-based activities in these priority
                         sectors and other activities in the region, the proposed project would produce an array of
                         operationally relevant and practical knowledge products for use by all countries in the Pacific
                         Region.

                         The proposed project would comprise four components.

                         Component 1: Climate Resilient Agriculture and Fisheries, and Water Security (US2.8m): This
                         component would pilot approaches to (a) build climate resilient food production systems in PICs,
                         focusing on integrated farming methods and enhancing the role of fisheries (coastal and freshwater)
                         in meeting local food demand; and (b) assist national and local governments, and affected
                         communities, to increase their capacity in drought assessment and response through improved
                         collection, analysis and communication of water resources information.

                         Climate Resilient Agriculture: The project, working in collaboration with the Ministries of
                         Agriculture, associated extension agencies and/or NGOs, would undertake field testing and scaling-
                         up of improved cultivars of crops (with climate resilient traits such as tolerance to salinity, flooding
                         and drought), held at the SPC Center for Pacific Crops and Trees (CePacT), for distribution to a
                         small group of volunteer farmers . These crops would comprise, inter-alia, taro, yams, sweet potato,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         breadfruit and papaya. They would be introduced into resilient production systems, therefore farmers
                         would also be provided with a range of climate smart agriculture practices from around the region,
                         such as crop diversification, seed based cropping, and pest and disease control measures to enhance
                         resilience. Over the course of the project, the approach, response of farmers and results would be
                         closely monitored and documented.

                         Fisheries: The project would focus on coastal fisheries and aquaculture in both islands. It would
                         develop tools to assist sustainable fishing and fisheries management including aquaculture and
                         involve some ground-truthing of habitats both inside and outside the reef. Activities would also
                         include maintaining reef ecosystem resilience through better land management practices and
                         sustaining climate change impact monitoring to help guide the timing of necessary adaptation
                         responses. The project would also be coordinated with the Pacific Regional Oceans Project (PROP)
                         to ensure there is no overlap in activities.

                         Water security: In Kosrae the project would demonstrate risk assessment of drinking water and
                         sanitation options and assessment of the feasibility of safe and sustainable alternatives to reduce the
                         risk from climate variability and change. In Kiritimati, building on the activities of Kiribati
                         Adaptation Project III, the project would demonstrate effective collection and analysis of
                         hydrographic data to determine resilience of potable groundwater lenses in the face of climate change
                         and development pressures and development of responses to strengthen water security. It would also
                         strengthen the capacity of water managers to utilize the information generated.

                         Component 2: Enhancing resilience of vulnerable coastal areas (US$2.0m). Activities under this
Public Disclosure Copy




                         component would synthesize current knowledge of various vulnerability assessments of coastal
                         areas, the use of different approaches and data sources (such as participatory approaches, biophysical
                         analysis, data from local sources, remote sensing, and LIDAR), and the best way to store and make
                         the data available to decision-makers (such as GIS, Google-based systems, etc.). An indicative
                         activity under this component would be the preparation of hazard risk maps to identify areas of the
                         coast in the two countries that are most vulnerable to climate-related hazards, including sea level rise,
                         coastal flooding from storm surge and increased rainfall and stronger and more frequent storms,
                         which would guide the planning process including location of critical infrastructure. A second
                         activity could be the development of community based coastal zone management plans formulated
                         on the basis of climate risk assessments which also identify adaptation options for implementation at
                         community and landscape levels. The focus would be on pilo ting ecosystem based approaches,
                         building on the results of similar activities in Samoa. Again, the approach used would be carefully
                         documented with a view to developing more broadly applicable guidelines and inform peer-to-peer
                         learning and knowledge-sharing.

                         Component 3: Knowledge Dissemination (us$0.7m). As the pilots are implemented, lessons learned
                         would be actively gathered and knowledge products generated to inform climate resilient approaches
                         in the targeted sectors that could be used in other PICs. These knowledge products will be shared
                         with other countries in the region through workshops supported by the project, dialogues amongst the
                         PIC countries during regional events and through south-south and peer-to-peer knowledge sharing,
                         and a web portal or platform that is usable in low-bandwidth environments. Specific knowledge
                         products, principally climate risk assessment and management tools could be in the form of: (a)
                         information and data on secondary climate impacts such as hazard risk maps (e.g., for hazards such
                         as flooding and storm surge); (b) guidance to users for identification, gathering and analysis of data
                         for climate risk assessment in management decisions at community and national level; and (c)
                         knowledge sharing which offers space for sharing information on climate risk management among
Public Disclosure Copy




                         practitioners. These knowledge products will be shared with other countries in the region through
                         workshops, peer-to-peer field based exchanges, and a web platform. Each tool would also have to be
                         assessed in terms of its context and purpose, need for stakeholder involvement, data requirement,
                         cost, timescale in application, capacity required to implement and how it improves decision making.

                         Component 4: Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$0.61m). Project coordination,
                         monitoring and evaluation would be the responsibility of SPC. A small project management team
                         would be established in the SPC Suva office with responsibility for overall management, financial
                         management and procurement. SPC would retain full responsibility for these functions in each
                         participating country. Oversight would be provided by the main office in Noumea. The project
                         management team would also ensure liaison and close coordination with the Regional Pacific PPCR
                         coordination unit to be based in SPREP.

                         Gender Analysis and Action. There is a strong link between gender and climate change, as women
                         and men face different vulnerabilities and may also require different adaptation responses. The
                         effective engagement and involvement of youth is also an area that warrants particular attention as
                         they are often among the most vulnerable groups. The project will draw on analytical work currently
                         being undertaken in Samoa on the gender differentiated impacts of climate change and in other
                         countries in the region. It will also work closely with SPC’s gender, youth and culture mainstreaming
                         initiative as well as the Pacific Gender Climate Coalition to integrate a number of gender related
                           activities into the above components, including : (i) gender-sensitive data collection that support
                           gender-sensitive climate risk assessment; and (ii) awareness raising on gender differences and
                           vulnerabilities in developing the risk management mechanisms and their full incorporation into
Public Disclosure Copy




                           adaptation actions.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Kosrae in the Federated States of Micronesia (FSM) and Kiritimati (Christmas) Island in Kiribati are
                           provisionally proposed candidates, but further consultation with the governments is required, and
                           subject to CMU confirmation

                           Kosrae Island is a volcanic high island and Kiritimati Island is a low lying atoll. They have similar
                           climate risks, although sea level rise and storm surge is a bigger problem for a low lying atoll.

                           Agricultural pilot studies are likely to take place on land already used for agriculture, and farmers
                           will be beneficiaries of, and volunteer to be part of, the study. Aquaculture studies will be carried
                           out within existing fisheries / pond systems. There will be no expansion of reef or open water
                           fisheries in this project. The locations and physical characteristics of the studies into land
                           management practices for protecting reef ecosystems, and for the studies into water security, are
                           currently unknown and may be further developed during project preparation.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC) will be the implementing agency. SPC was founded
                           in 1947 with its own governing Board, organisational and management structure, headquartered in
                           New Caledonia, and with regional offices in Fiji, the Federated States of Micronesia (Pohnpei) and
                           the Solomon Islands. Its mission statement is to "develop the technical, professional, scientific,
                           research, planning and management capability of Pacific Island people and directly provide
                           information and advice, to enable them to make informed decisions about their future development
                           and well-being.? It has previous experience of working with the World Bank.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Beverly Ann McLean (EASNS)
                           Penelope Ruth Ferguson (EASNS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The borrower will prepare and submit an
                           BP 4.01                                               Environmental and Social Management
                                                                                 Framework (ESMF) for Bank approval by
                                                                                 appraisal. The ESMF should explain the process
                                                                                 to be followed to address environmental and
                                                                                 social impacts for each type of sub-project
                                                                                 covered under this project and will provide the
                                                                                 screening and procedures for the development
                                                                                 of Environmental and Social Management Plans
                                                                                 (ESMPs) and/or Environmental Codes of
                                                                                 Practices (ECOPs). In addition, ESMPs and/or
                                                                                 ECOPs will be prepared prior to appraisal for
                         sub-projects that are known by appraisal.
                         The ESMF should include, but is not limited to,
                         the following:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (i) The project objective and a description of its
                         components;
                         (ii) The screening procedure and criteria for
                         selection of pilot sites;
                         (iii) Legal requirements in FSM, Kiribati and
                         World Bank safeguards requirements, and the
                         associated pilot project preparation and
                         processing steps: The ESMF should describe the
                         World Bank safeguards requirements as well as
                         the legal requirements of the countries where
                         the pilot projects are located;
                         (iv) Technical and institutional capacity: The
                         ESMF should include an assessment of the
                         institutions that sponsor the project, the
                         institutions that sponsor and/or operate the sub-
                         projects, and the institutions that function as the
                         regulatory authorities during sub-project design,
                         construction, and operation. The ESMF should
                         indicate how their technical and institutional
                         capacity will be assessed and how identified
                         weaknesses will be strengthened;
                         (v) Potential adverse environmental and social
                         impacts and their associated mitigation
                         measures. Social impacts other than involuntary
                         resettlement that are covered by OP 4.01 and a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         social assessment commensurate to the potential
                         social impacts on Indigenous peoples will be
                         undertaken to inform the design of the project;
                         (vi) ESMPs and/or ECOPs for each sub-project
                         that will have potential adverse and irreversible
                         environmental and social impacts. These will
                         include, but are not limited to, mitigations
                         measures, environmental monitoring with
                         parameters and frequencies of monitoring,
                         responsibilities for monitoring, roles and
                         responsibilities of the institutions, budget for
                         implementation, reporting procedures and
                         technical and institutional capacity building
                         measures;
                         (vii) Resettlement Framework (RF);
                         (viii) How monitoring and reporting will be
                         carried out;
                         (ix) The procedures of public consultations and
                         a Grievance Redress Mechanism.
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       Yes                           The policy could be triggered because project
                                                                                                                                 interventions may recommend activities such as
                                                                                                                                 replanting mangroves and coastal forests and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 rehabilitation of natural habitats such as coral
                                                                                                                                 reefs. These activities could cause changes to
                                                                                                                                 natural habitats.
                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No                            N/A

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           TBD                           This policy should not be triggered as the
                                                                                                                                 measures to be tested under the project are
                                                                                                                                 alternatives to the use of chemicals and
                                                                                                                                 pesticides.
                                                                                                                                 The project will not involve the procurement or
                                                                                                                                 use of pesticides.
                                                                                                                                 The ESMF can stipulate criteria for pest
                                                                                                                                 management to avoid triggering this policy.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   TBD                           There is flexibility as to the location of the pilot
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         studies and therefore impacts on physical
                                                                                                                                 cultural resources can be avoided. The ESMF
                                                                                                                                 can stipulate criteria to avoid triggering this
                                                                                                                                 policy.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     Yes                           A social assessment proportionate to the
                                                                                                                                 potential project impacts on IPs communities
                                                                                                                                 will be undertaken as part of the ESMF. No
                                                                                                                                 Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) will be
                                                                                                                                 developed; the requirements of OP 4.10 will be
                                                                                                                                 directly integrated into the project design since
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 the overwhelming majority of project
                                                                                                                                 beneficiaries are Indigenous Peoples.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           As a part of the ESMF a Resettlement
                                 4.12                                                                                            Framework (RF) will be prepared. It will lay out
                                                                                                                                 the requirements and protocols for voluntary
                                                                                                                                 land donation. If there are restrictions of access
                                                                                                                                 in designated protected areas, the client will
                                                                                                                                 prepare a Process Framework (PF) to address
                                                                                                                                 potential adverse effects on livelihoods.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            N/A

                                 Projects on International        No                                                             N/A
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 16-Sep-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                             The project will prepare an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to
Public Disclosure Copy




                             provide methodologies and criteria for assessing and managing risks during project
                             implementation. During preparation of the ESMF stakeholder consultation will be undertaken.

                             The draft ESMF shall be prepared and submitted to the bank by 30 August 2013.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:     Name: Samuel G. Wedderburn

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                            Date: 17-Apr-2013
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Michel Kerf (SM)                               Date: 18-Apr-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
