                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA3179
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Apr-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-Apr-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          India                              Project ID:    P143382
                            Project Name:     Tamil Nadu and Puducherry Coastal Disaster Risk Reduction Project (P143382)
                            Task Team         Deepak Singh
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         08-Apr-2013                        Estimated   31-May-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    SASDC                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Housing construction (40%), Flood protection (30%), General agriculture,
                                              fishing and forestry sector (20%), Other social services (1 0%)
                            Theme(s):         Natural disaster management (50%), Climate change (20%), Rural services and
                                              infrastructure (20%), Social risk mitigation (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     337.20           Total Bank Financing:                236.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                       Financing Gap:                         0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                       101.20
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                              236.00
                              Total                                                                                    337.20
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           Increasing the resilience of coastal communities in Tamil Nadu and Puducherry, to a range of hydro-
                           meteorological and geophysical hazards along with improving project implementing entities’
                           capacity to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible crisis or emergency.



                                                                       Page 1 of 9
                         3. Project Description
                         The Coastal Disaster Risk Reduction Project (CDRRP) has the following five components, with each
                         of the component details varying as per the specific needs of Tamil Nadu and Puducherry.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1.      Vulnerability Reduction;
                         2.      Sustainable Fisheries;
                         3.      Capacity building in Disaster Risk Management;
                         4.      Implementation Support; and
                         5.      Contingency Emergency Response.

                         Tamil Nadu

                         Component 1: Vulnerability Reduction - US$ 190.6 million

                         The objective of this component is to reduce the vulnerability of coastal communities through
                         infrastructure such as permanent houses, evacuation shelters and routes, and resilient electrical
                         networks.

                         Subcomponent 1.1 (Resilient Housing) - Construction of about 14,400 multi-hazard resilient
                         permanent houses was commenced in ETRP, across 11 coastal districts. This would be completed by
                         the Rural Development & Panchayati Raj Department (RD & PRD) under the project. The
                         component will also provide relocation benefit during the period of reconstruction of houses and a10
                         year insurance for houses against natural hazards.

                         Subcomponent 1.2 (Evacuation Shelters, routes and Early Warning Systems) This infrastructure has
                         been sorely inadequate in Tamil Nadu and access to evacuation shelters would help save lives .This
                         component therefore includes construction of about 120 Multipurpose Evacuation shelters,
                         installation of about 440 early warning systems and laying out evacuation routes with signage.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Designs were completed during ETRP and works are now being tendered.

                         Subcomponent 1.3 (Cyclone Resilient Electrical Network) - Coastal electrical infrastructure,
                         primarily the transmission and distribution which is over ground, is prone to high winds, rains,
                         thunderstorms, storm surges and flooding. Cuddalore (HT- 162 km; LT - 512km) and Nagapattinam
                         (HT - 250 km; LT - 60 km) towns have been identified for laying the underground electrical network.

                         Component 2: Sustainable Fisheries - US$59.2 million

                         The fisheries sector provides livelihoods to a large community of fishers and a much larger
                         population engaged in fishing related activities. Fishery dependent communities are the most
                         vulnerable to natural disasters, climate change and the degradation of the marine environment. The
                         objective of this component is to address gaps in the context of a long term vision for the Fisheries
                         sector. The component aims at upgrading infrastructure, developing an approach for co-management
                         of fisheries and addressing safety at sea.

                         Subcomponent 2.1 (Fishing Infrastructure) –This subcomponent, as part of the earlier ETRP, consists
                         of seven works. These include construction of two fish landing centers, reconstruction and
                         modernization of two fishing harbors, providing permanent opening of two river bar mouths and
                         establishing one tube ice plant. In addition two new infrastructure projects are included as part of the


                                                                       Page 2 of 9
                         CDRRP: the reconstruction and modernization of a fish landing center and of a fishing harbor have
                         been included.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Subcomponent 2.2 (FIMSUL – II) - Based on lessons from the earlier FIMSUL, activities will
                         include putting into practice, key reforms for the marine fisheries sub-sector in Tamil Nadu and
                         Puducherry, particularly around fisheries co-management. It will implement local reform processes
                         to support improved performance in the marine fisheries sub-sector. This would be characterized by
                         more sustainable flows of social and economic benefits to coastal fisheries communities, and a
                         healthy marine environment. Provision of a wireless communication system for the safety of fishers
                         at sea is also included. In addition linkages with the Global Environment Facility’s (GEF), Bank
                         implemented Areas Beyond National Jurisdiction (ABNJ), Bank led Global Partnership for Oceans
                         (GPO) Program and FAO’s Technical Cooperation Program (TCP), together with associated
                         coordination and governance mechanisms, will be established for providing technical support for the
                         implementation of the activities to the Fisheries Department’s PIU.

                         Component 3: Capacity building in Disaster Risk Management - US$9.7 million

                         This c omponent will focus on strengthening the capacity of Government institutions, civil society,
                         the school education system and coastal communities through four sub-components: (i) strengthening
                         of State Disaster Management Authority, (ii) Community Based Disaster Risk Management Program
                         (CBDRM), (iii) curriculum development on disaster risk reduction for schools and training
                         institutions, and (iv) completing preparation of the ICZM plan for Tamil Nadu, completing erection
                         of High Tide Line (HTL) pillars across all 13 coastal districts and stake holder training on coastal
                         zone management.

                         Component 4: Implementation Support - US$13.4 million

                         This will include incremental operating costs, that of operating the Project Management Unit (PMU)
                         and respective Project Implementation Units (PIUs) in the line departments. In addition, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         component will include consultancies required for the preparation and supervision of specific
                         activities, trainings, exposure visits and knowledge exchange programs.

                         Puducherry

                         Component 1: Vulnerability Reduction - US$34.0 million

                         Subcomponent 1.1 (Resilient Housing) - About 1450 multi-hazard resilient permanent houses are
                         being built by owners themselves and 300 through a contractor under the ETRP. Ongoing house
                         construction will be completed. In addition about 1000 new multi-hazard resilient houses will be
                         rebuilt, in the place of thatched houses in vulnerable areas.

                         Subcomponent 1.2 (Restoration of Government Buildings, Bridges and Culverts) - This
                         subcomponent would strengthen and rehabilitate existing public infrastructure like the Marine
                         Building (Town Hall) and a few other similar public buildings, old existing bridges and rebuilding of
                         culverts in Puducherry. These works would make the existing infrastructure multi-hazard resilient
                         and also help restore the heritage of Puducherry.

                         Subcomponent 1.3 (Cyclone Resilient Electrical Network) - Cyclone Thane caused widespread
                         damage to the electricity infrastructure, resulting in human deaths and disruption. The losses

                                                                     Page 3 of 9
                         amounted to over US$150 million. The replacement of overhead (O.H.) lines with underground (U.
                         G.) cables (865 km.) will be undertaken as part of the project to reduce power losses and the time for
                         restoration of the service.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2: Sustainable Fisheries - US$22.8 million

                         Subcomponent 2.1 (Fishing Infrastructure) - Improve the sustainability of fisheries through provision
                         of fishers work shelters, modernization of fishing harbors and fish markets. Out of 17 works, 10 were
                         started under ETRP and these are under construction. For the balance, statutory clearances have been
                         obtained; designs and bidding documents are at an advanced stage of readiness. These would be
                         taken up for completion under the project.

                         Subcomponent 2.2 (FIMSUL II) – Activities complementary to and coordinated with Tamil Nadu,
                         details included in Annex 3.

                         Component 3: Capacity building in Disaster Risk Management- US$2.7 million

                         Emergency operation centre along with a decision support system for disaster response planning has
                         been established in Puducherry that is functioning on a stand-alone basis for individual territories of
                         Puducherry. It will be expanded and integrated to make it more useful and user friendly. The capacity
                         of the Fire Service, the first line of response in times of emergency, will be strengthened with
                         modern equipment and training. A Community Based Disaster Risk Management Programme will be
                         integrated within this component.

                         Component 4: Implementation Support- US$4.8 million

                         This component would finance cost of operating the Project Implementation Agency (PIA),
                         Department-level Project Implementation Units (PIU) and for external consultancies required for the
                         preparation and supervision of specific activities including training, exposure visits and knowledge
Public Disclosure Copy




                         exchange programs.

                         Component 5 – Contingent Emergency Financing- US$ 0 million (both Tamil Nadu and Puducherry)

                         Following an adverse natural event that causes a major natural disaster, the respective governments
                         may request the Bank to re-allocate project funds to support response and reconstruction. This
                         component would draw resources from the unallocated expenditure category and/or allow the
                         government of Tamil Nadu and/or Puducherry to request the Bank to re-categorize and reallocate
                         financing from other project components to partially cover emergency response and recovery costs.
                         This component could also be used to channel additional funds should they become available as a
                         result of an emergency.

                         Disbursements would be made against a positive list of critical goods or the procurement of works,
                         and consultant services required to support the immediate response and recovery needs. All
                         expenditures under this component, should it be triggered, will be in accordance with BP/OP 8.0 and
                         will be appraised, reviewed and found to be acceptable to the Bank before any disbursement is made.
                         In accordance with BP/OP 8.00, this component would provide immediate, quick-disbursing support
                         to finance goods (positive list agreed with the Governments), works, and services needed for
                         response, mitigation, and recovery and reconstruction activities. Operating costs eligible for



                                                                      Page 4 of 9
                         financing would include the incremental expenses incurred for early recovery efforts arising as a
                         result of the impact of major natural disasters.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis (if known)
                         The project activities are located in the twelve coastal districts of Tamil Nadu (Thiruvallur,
                         Kancheepuram, Villupuram, Cuddalore, Nagapattinam, Thanjavur, Thiruvarur, Pudukottai,
                         Ramanthapuram, Thoothukudi, Tirunelveli, Kanyakumari) and the districts of Puducherry and
                         Karaikal in Puducherry in India. All the project districts are recognized to be disaster prone, broadly
                         regarded as sensitive in nature by virtue of their location along the coast and also are home to large
                         number of fishermen communities. However, the actual sub-project locations are carefully selected
                         to avoid impacts on the sensitive environmental habitats, coastal flora and fauna and fishermen
                         communities.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Shankar Narayanan (SASDS)
                         Bokepalli Kanaka Durga Raja (SASDU)
                         Harinath Sesha Appalarajugari (SASDI)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes               Project investments are expected to cause
                          BP 4.01                                              moderate and temporary impacts during
                                                                               construction stage. Hence categorized as
                                                                               ‘Category B’ project. EAs have been prepared for
                                                                               sub-projects to be retroactively financed and
                                                                               ESMF has been prepared to address the
                                                                               safeguardissues of the project.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/     Yes               Project investments in Puducherry involves
                          BP 4.11                                              restoration of old public buildings to be disaster
                                                                               resistant. These are heritage buildings and a
                                                                               cultural properties management plan will be
                                                                               prepared for these sub-projects as per the ESMF.
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      Yes               There is unlikely to be any large scale
                          4.12                                                 significant/irreversible social impacts due to sub-
                                                                               project activities. OP 4.12 on Involuntary
                                                                               Resettlement is triggered and a Resettlement
                                                                               Policy and Entitlement framework has been
                                                                               developed detailing the measures required and
                                                                               compensation to be paid in the event that


                                                                       Page 5 of 9
                                                                                 temporary loss of access to land or assets is
                                                                                 necessitated either on account of the laying the
                                                                                 underground electric lines or in the unlikely case
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 of construction of an evacuation shelter involving
                                                                                 land acquisition or affecting loss of crop/assets.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The project investments, although in the sensitive coastal areas of Tamil Nadu and Puducherry,
                              are generally in-situ in nature and involve moderate construction activities. The environmental
                              impacts are hence expected to be moderate and temporary in nature.

                              Similarly, there is unlikely to be any large scale significant/irreversible social impacts due to sub-
                              project activities. OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement is triggered and a Resettlement Policy and
                              Entitlement framework has been developed detailing the measures required and compensation to
                              be paid in the event that temporary loss of access to land or assets is necessitated either on account
                              of the laying the underground electric lines or in the unlikely case of construction of an evacuation
                              shelter involving land acquisition or affecting loss of crop/assets.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                               Since the project activities are aimed at restoring / upgrading housing and fishery infrastructure
                              against future disasters, no indirect and / or long term impacts are anticipated. However some of
                              the activities such as renovation of heritage buildings in Puducherry could have indirect impacts
                              on cultural properties. To mitigate such impacts, the ESMF incorporates the need for detailed
                              assessment of both direct and indirect impacts of these activities and preparation of cultural
                              properties management plans. Similarly, the laying of underground electric lines in both the
                              project states might result in temporary impacts on access to land or damage to crops/assets and
                              other environmental resources (if any), these would be compensated for as per the provisions of
                              the entitlement framework and suitable EMP in line with the requirements of the ESMF.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                               The locations of various project activities, by virtue of the PDO are located in the coastal areas of
                              the Tamil Nadu and Puducherry. However, each of the sub-projects have been selected /
                              prioritized based on the vulnerability of coastal and fishermen communities and the impacts
                              caused by Tsunami 2004 and other disasters. Further each of the sub-project designs considered (i)
                              resource optimization and use of local resources in housing component (ii) minimizing dredging
                              and avoiding impacts of coastal / marine flora / fauna for sustainable fisheries component and (iii)
                              avoidance of impacts on the movement of coastal habitat and use of local species as bio shields in

                                                                         Page 6 of 9
                           Puducherry to avoid / minimize adverse impacts in the project area.

                           Further, the ESMF provides measures to ensure minimal impact to land and assets therein
Public Disclosure Copy




                           wherever possible, by choosing optimal alignment for underground electric lines.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            The Governments of Tamil Nadu and Puducherry continued with the Project Management Unit
                           (PMU) and Project Implementing Agency (PIA), despite the closure of Emergency Tsunami
                           Reconstruction Project (ETRP) in December, 2011. This ensured that the Environmental and
                           Social Safeguards Specialist at the PMU and the Project Management Consultants of the PIA
                           monitor the implementation of safeguard management plans agreed during ETRP. A ‘Quick
                           Review of Safeguard Issues’ of the project indicates no major issues with regard to the sub-
                           projects that are being proposed to be retroactively financed under CDRRP. Based on this review
                           and also considering the fact that all the project implementing agencies were also part of the
                           ETRP, safeguard management capacity of borrower can be considered moderately satisfactory.

                           As part of the safeguard preparation for the project, the borrower has (i) revised the existing ESMF
                           (prepared in ETRP) and (ii) prepared ESAs / EMPs for all the investment activities in compliance
                           with the safeguard policies of the Bank (iii) integrated EMPs in the respective bid documents to
                           ensure implementation by the contractors.

                           Further, (i) the PMU in Tamil Nadu has appointed a dedicated social safeguard specialist (ii) PIA
                           in Puducherry has appointed an environmental cum social safeguard specialists and (iii) the PIUs
                           will designate environmental and social safeguard specialists, to strengthen the supervision and
                           monitoring of safeguards implementation of various sub-projects as well as the Community Based
                           Disaster Risk Management (CBDRM).

                           This (as required by the ESMF), will also be supported by a ‘Third Party monitoring of safeguards
Public Disclosure Copy




                           implementation’ by the independent agencies. The findings of these monitoring reports will form
                           the basis for assessing the safeguard compliance status of the project. In addition the project will
                           carry out an audit of safeguards implementation (one each during mid-term and end-term) and
                           implement its recommendations.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The coastal communities whose structurally vulnerable houses are being replaced with disaster
                           resistant housing, fisher men communities who will be benefitted by the sustainable fishery
                           activities and all sections of the community living in the coastal villages across the State of Tamil
                           Nadu and Union Territory of Puducherry are the key stakeholders for the project. These
                           communities as part of the ‘Community Based Disaster Risk Management (CBDRM) component
                           are being organized into ‘Village Disaster Committees (VDC)’ under the overall aegis of the
                           Village Panchayat and headed by the Gram Panchayat President. The VDCs will be the key focal
                           points for the stake holder participation, consultation and disclosure, during the project
                           implementation.

                           The key stake holders were involved during the preparation of the safeguard instruments (ESAs
                           for sub-projects and in the preparation of ESMF) of the project and have been disclosed locally.
                           The ESAs for the new components and the Rehabilitation Action Plan (RAP) in case land



                                                                      Page 7 of 9
                           acquisition or resettlement is required for any sub-project, shall be disclosed to these VDCs and
                           Gram Panchayats of all participating villages in the project area.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      14-Mar-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   22-Apr-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            14-Mar-2013
                           Comments: Respective State Government Website
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      14-Mar-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   22-Apr-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            14-Mar-2013
                           Comments: Respective State Government Website
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [       ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [       ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [       ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [       ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [       ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies




                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Deepak Singh
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name:                                                Date:
                            Coordinator:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Bernice K. Van Bronkhorst (SM)                 Date: 15-Apr-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 9 of 9
