                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                   Report No.: ISDSC691

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Aug-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            India                             Project ID:       P125928
                            Project Name:       Informal Settlements Improvement Project (P125928)
                            Task Team           Barjor E. Mehta
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           01-May-2013                       Estimated         09-Jul-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      SASDU                             Lending           Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector:             Housing finance (50%), General water, sanitation and flood protection sector
                                                (20%), Public administration- Other social services (10 %), Sub-national
                                                government administration (10%), Other social services (10%)
                            Theme:              Urban services and housing for the poor (70%), Other urban development
                                                (15%), Poverty strategy, analysis and monitoring (15%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                               Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                              500.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                           500.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                       0.00
                              Total                                                                          1000.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective is to improve physical living conditions in informal settlements
                           in selected cities in India. This will be achieved through the provision of basic infrastructure (access
                           roads/paths, water, drainage, street lighting and solid waste collection) in informal settlements.
                           C. Project Description
                           Approach:
                         The project would function as a national financing window which will be accessible to cities that
                         meet agreed minimum requirements and which are supportive of GOI's RAY and JnNURM and
                         related state-level programs. The project seeks to: (a) incentivize and support states and cities in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         implementing their slum-free city strategies through in-situ upgrading of tenable slums as well as
                         sites and services initiatives; and (b) provide technical assistance to states and cities in addressing
                         regulatory and policy challenges that impact the urban poor and which relate to tenure, land use and
                         land markets. The project would thereby demonstrate scalable approaches to dealing with informal
                         settlements in an integrated manner.
                         Participation of states and cities in the proposed Project would be based on their meeting a set of
                         criteria to be defined and agreed upon jointly by the Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty
                         Alleviation (MHUPA) and the World Bank. The criteria will ensure that the participating states and
                         cities are (i) willing to put a focus on the implementation of cost effective and socially sustainable
                         solutions to the challenge of slums, and (ii) have the capacity to implement the proposed solutions at
                         city-wide scale within the time frame of the project.

                         Project Components: The project will have the following four components:

                         Component 1: Financing of selected physical infrastructure investments (US$ 400 million).
                         This component would provide assistance as a back to back loan to selected states and cities to
                         finance a share of their contribution as defined under the RAY, JNNURM, or state-level program.
                         Financial terms and share of this financing would be defined during project preparation based on
                         discussions with the GoI, states, and cities. Only investments identified as sustainable and cost
                         effective solutions to the challenge of slums will be eligible for financing under this component and
                         could include:
                         1.1     Integrated slum improvement services packages to households: water, toilets, sewage,
                         solid waste collection, electricity, paving, and street lighting.
                         1.2     Connection of neighborhood services to trunk infrastructure.
                         1.3     Sites and services (e.g. serviced land).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2: Support to community mobilization/participation in planning for and supervision of
                         settlement level infrastructure provision (US$ 50 million).
                         This component would fund the facilitation and mobilization costs at each participating city and
                         settlement to ensure the resident community participation in the planning and design of settlement
                         level infrastructure. Enabling the recording of community information and undertaking community
                         mapping and street addressing will be required to establish credible community frameworks. Global
                         experience with successful slum upgrading initiatives clearly indicates that resident community
                         participation at the design as well as implementation stages of upgrading is not only required but is
                         essential.

                         Component 3: Project implementation and technical Assistance to implementing agencies at city and
                         state level (U$ 40 million).
                         This component would fund the PMU/PMCs at the state and city level. The TA would be provided
                         to participating states and cities with the objective of creating an integrated platform to implement
                         programs for the poor and to ensure adequate implementation of the proposed physical investments
                         as well as piloting of innovative approaches. These would focus on the following:
                         3.1.     Financial management
                         3.2      Basic planning and planning for future growth
                         3.3 Project development and implementation
                         3.4 Community mobilization and participation
                         3.5 Urban poverty programs
                         3.6 Related policy reform such as tenure security/property rights, land use regulations and land
                         markets
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 4: Project implementation and technical assistance to Ministry of Housing and urban
                         poverty alleviation (U$ 10 million)
                         This component would fund the PMU at the Ministry level. The TA would be provided with the
                         objective of creating a strong unit that can provide direction to and support the programs at the state
                         and city level, and would support both the RAY and JNNURM programs as well as the National
                         Urban Livelihoods Mission in an integrated way.

                         Beneficiaries:

                         The key beneficiaries of the proposed project would be (a) the households provided with integrated
                         slum improvement services; and (b) state and urban local governments whose capacities would be
                         developed to (i) plan, implement, monitor and evaluate slum-free city and integrated urban poverty
                         reduction strategies, (ii) undertake urban upgrading and land management, and (iii) plan for future
                         urban growth and for the expected demand for low-income housing.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the              safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The number of participating states and cities needs to be limited to a manageable number. It is
                         therefore envisaged that this would result in around 10 to 15 cities participating in the project.
                         Preliminary calculations indicate that the total population across all such participating cities should
                         be between 10 million and 20 million . A two-phase selection process is currently envisaged. Under
                         the first phase, up to six cities would be selected, for a total Bank financing of up to US$ 200 million.
                         The selection of Phase-I cities would be completed prior to appraisal in order for detailed
                         assessments to be carried out in these cities as part of the Project appraisal process. A second
                         selection process would be open shortly after completing project preparation and would build on the
                         lessons learned from detailed appraisal carried out in the Phase-I cities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Inclusion of states and cities in the proposed project will be limited to those that:
                         a.       are willing to focus on the implementation of cost effective and socially sustainable -
                         predominantly in-situ upgrading - solutions to the challenge of informal settlements; and
                         b.       have demonstrated the capacity to implement proposed solutions at city scale within the time
                         frame of the project.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         Project implementation will be coordinated by MHUPA, and will involve the nodal agencies for
                         RAY at the state and ULB levels. While MHUPA's project implementation capacity is very weak,
                         and it has no prior experience of implementing Bank-funded projects, it is currently being supported
                         by a World Bank supported Capacity Building for Urban Development Project (CBUDP), which also
                         includes the Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD). CBUDP became effective in January 2012
                         and a dedicated Project Management Unit (CBUD-PMU) has been set up to support MHUPA. The
                         CBUD-PMU will support MHUPA to prepare this proposed Project, including completing the
                         environment and social assessments and preparing the Environmental and Social Management
                         Frameworks. The CBUD-PMU includes a Social Development Specialist and a Community
                         Mobilization Specialist, and MHUPA has agreed to recruit two additional full-time staff to assist
                         project preparation, including an Environment Specialist.
                               A dedicated multi-level support structure is envisaged for project implementation. A Program
                               Management Committee (PMC), chaired by the MHUPA Secretary, will be established as the highest
                               decision-making body for the project. It will take decisions on the state/ULB selection process, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                               annual work plans and budget allocations, as well as carry out periodic reviews of project progress.
                               A Program Support Cell (PSC), chaired by the Joint Secretary and Mission Director of RAY, will be
                               responsible for day-to-day administration of the project. Social and environment capacity is
                               expected to be established within the PSC.

                               Participating states will establish an analogous structure, i.e., a State Program Management
                               Committee (SPMC) headed by the relevant Secretary/Principal Secretary, and a State Program
                               Support Cell (SPSC) headed by the State Mission Director for RAY which would prepare and
                               implement the state and ULB-level activities. At the ULB level, a Program Support Cell (UPSC)
                               will be established, headed by a Director and reporting to a ULB-level Program Management
                               Committee (UPMC). The UPSC will be responsible for implementing project activities in the ULBs.
                               Social and environment capacity is expected to be established within the SPSCs and the UPSCs.
                               F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                               Mridula Singh (SASDS)
                               Ruma Tavorath (SASDI)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                                 Safeguard Policies                                                Triggered?                    Explanation (Optional)
                                 Environmental Assessment OP/                                      Yes
                                 BP 4.01
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No
                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     TBD

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes
                                 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 04-Feb-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             Social and Environment Assessments are expected to be launched in September 2012 and the
                             respective draft Management Frameworks are expected to be completed by February 2013.
                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Task Team Leader:     Name: Barjor E. Mehta

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Sanjay Srivastava (RSA)                       Date: 06-Aug-2012
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Ming Zhang (SM)                               Date: 05-Aug-2012
Public Disclosure Copy
