                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA3058
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Mar-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Feb-2013, 08-Apr-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           India                              Project ID:    P130339
                            Project Name:      India Second Kerala State Transport Project (P130339)
                            Task Team          Simon David Ellis
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          13-Feb-2013                        Estimated   14-May-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASDT                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (90%), Injuries and non-
                                              communicable diseases (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     445.00           Total Bank Financing:                  216.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                       Financing Gap:                           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   229.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                      216.00
                              Total                                                                                      445.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           The project's development objective is to improve condition, traffic flow and road safety with a focus
                           on vulnerable road users on selected roads in Kerala.
                            3. Project Description
                           The proposed project will have three components building on the work already undertaken in the first

                                                                        Page 1 of 7
                         KSTP project as follows:

                         Component A: Road Network Upgrading and Safety Improvement (US$403 million): This
Public Disclosure Copy




                         component will include upgrading 363 kms of strategically important State Highways to complete
                         network connectivity in the state with the objective of reducing travel time between key socio-
                         economic centers. The existing intermediate lane roads will be upgraded to a full two lane standard
                         with paved shoulder of 1.5 m on either side. The civil works would include road widening and
                         strengthening of pavement, improving bridges, cross drainage and longitudinal drainage structures,
                         improving stability of side slopes in rolling / hilly stretches and enhancing road safety and traffic
                         management measures. Particular attention has been given to protection of vulnerable roads users
                         such as through the provision of sidewalks, raised pedestrian crossings and segregation of slow
                         moving traffic. The works will predominantly be contracted with FIDIC based input contracts but
                         one 132 km corridor will be contracted through a PPP annuity contract to pilot the approach in the
                         state. The component will also include supervision and quality control services, environmental
                         management and preconstruction activities such as resettlement and utility shifting.

                         Component B: Road Safety Management (US$21 million): This component will support the
                         strengthening of the road safety management systems in Kerala with the objective of arresting the
                         increase of crash fatalities in the state. The strategic planning and the development of this work will
                         also be supported and funded in collaboration with the World Bank Global Road Safety Facility
                         (GRSF). This component will finance various initiatives building on the work already undertaken
                         during the first project as follows:

                         (a)      Safe Corridor Demonstration Project: Multi sectoral interventions will be implemented on a
                         77 km corridor (Taikod-Kottarakkara-Ador) to demonstrate road safety best practice. Such
                         interventions will include not only physical infrastructure innovations, but also best practice
                         behavioral interventions adapted to the local context to bring about behavioral changes in the road
                         users’ behavior (pedestrians and drivers of different types of vehicles). The project will support
                         procurement of related goods, civil works and consultancy services and implementation of a multi-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         year result focused safety action plan.
                         (b)      Challenge Fund: Lessons from the safe demonstration corridor will be used to help district
                         road safety councils (DRSCs) learn and replicate this model by using funds from the challenge fund.
                         The objective of this program is to develop, through local partnerships, another 10 “Safe Corridors/
                         Zones? across the State, and rigorously evaluate the impact and effectiveness of various safety and
                         traffic management strategies, and refine the strategies in order to continuously improve road safety
                         and mobility. The DSRCs will be supported by the road safety cell at PWD and the newly formed
                         Road Safety Working Group (RSW) in the RSA.
                         (c)      Strengthening Road Safety Management Capacity: This would include (a) providing
                         advisory support to the RSW in the RSA and Road Safety Cell in PWD, on international best
                         practices on road safety management, by mobilizing a recognized road safety expert, and (b)
                         strengthening the role of RSA with particular emphasis on monitoring and evaluation, data analysis
                         and the consequent rationalization of funding and resource allocation. This will be done by building
                         the capacity of the RSA secretariat through the mobilization of a team of national specialists.

                         Component C: Institutional Strengthening Component (US$8.5 million): The objective of this
                         component is to improve the sustainability of Kerala’s state road network with respect to its
                         functional adequacy, financial viability and capacity of key state road sector institutions to deliver
                         road infrastructure and services that are responsive to road user needs. The following sub-
                         components would be financed:

                                                                       Page 2 of 7
                         (a)      Road Sector Modernization Action Plan (MAP): This sub-component is designed to support
                         the strengthening of the institutional and financial capacity of Kerala PWD and related entities to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         efficiently develop and maintain the physical assets of the road network, and mobilize necessary
                         financial resources for this task. It will finance support for implementation of the new PWD manual,
                         roll-out of various aspects of e-government, strengthening PWD’s program / project management
                         capabilities and institutional studies for future development, management and finance of the state’s
                         road network.
                         (b)      Network Maintenance Planning, Funding and Implementation: This sub-component is
                         designed to support the maintenance planning, funding and implementation arrangements needed to
                         reduce the percentage of the network in poor condition. It will finance implementation of a simple
                         maintenance management system, a strategic options study for 33,000 km of the network, developing
                         a systematic approach to maintenance contracting and to support the preparation of 5 year rolling
                         expenditure and funding plans.
                         (c)      Community Engagement and Road User Satisfaction: This sub-component will support the
                         empowerment of road users and engagement of local communities to provide Kerala PWD and other
                         related entities with regular feedback on their satisfaction with the provision of road infrastructure
                         and services. The development of local partnerships to help promote, design and monitor initiatives
                         to improve road safety and asset management is considered key in the Kerala context. Local
                         partnerships will be developed with Gram Panchayats, faith-based organizations, Non-Governmental
                         Organizations (NGOs) and extensions of local initiatives such as KudumbaSree and Anganwadi.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Social: The proposed project builds upon the lessons learnt from KSTP-I where slow progress in land
                         acquisition and other resettlement activities led to major delays and cost over-runs of the project. It is
                         unlikely that proposed KSTP-II for upgrading 360 km, will face the same land acquisition
                         constraints. The implementation of Resettlement Action Plan coincides with the preparation of the
                         project. A total of about 120.4 ha. is required (excluding land for Perumbilavu – Pattambi, new road)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of which about 97 percent of the required land for the project roads is under the possession of PWD.
                         The major cause of the delay and cost over-runs for KSTP-I was slow progress in land acquisition
                         and other resettlement activities mainly caused by lack of staff and a centralized approvals process
                         for Land Acquisition. The state too faced delays in domestically funded projects. Past experience
                         enabled the state to adopt a revised resettlement and rehabilitation policy, modeled on the Bank
                         policy, which has expedited subsequent resettlement activities. The new R&R policy provides for
                         enhanced compensation and grants to restore the livelihood of the people which is an improvement
                         of the policy agreed for KSTP-I. All R&R activities under this project have used this policy which is
                         in full compliance with Bank’s Operational Policy 4.12. In addition, one more road, link number 41
                         and 47, is included in the project. This covers a total of 41 km for which consultants are preparing
                         the detailed designs and RAP and will be ready by 28 February 2013.

                         Environment: The proposed project will be implemented in different parts of Kerala and across
                         several districts that are primarily in the North and central parts of the State. There are three road
                         links - Kasaragodu–Kanjangad, Pilathara–Pappinassery and Thalassery–Valavupara Road – that have
                         short stretches that are in the close proximity to Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ) areas. As per Indian
                         legal requirements, these road links will require CRZ clearances, which have been obtained. During
                         construction, extra care is required in these stretches as a part of implementing safeguard
                         management. There is expected to be no permanent, irreversible impact in these stretches and in any
                         of the road links.


                                                                       Page 3 of 7
                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Vaideeswaran Sankaran (SASGP)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Srihari Gopalaswamy (SASDU)

                            6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes
                            BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      Yes
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                Environment: In the project, there are three road links that are in the coastal areas and require
                              statutory clearance under the Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ) notification, which are in the process
                              of being obtained. These are short stretches in CRZ areas and the project road will not cause any
                              major irreversible impacts on the coastal ecosystems. The general physical environmental impacts
                              include construction-related impacts, slope stability and drainage issues, impacts on mangroves,
                              impacts on rivers / streams due to new bridge construction and improved alignments, illegal
                              coastal sand mining, and possibly small cultural heritage sites. All of these impacts will be
                              mitigated through management measures. There is no potential large scale, significant and /or
                              irreversible environmental impacts due to project.

                             Social: The project has adverse impact on approximately 21,000 families out of which 14,800 are
                             titleholders and remaining 6188 are non-titleholders. More than 95% of the affected people have
                             lost less than 5 percent of the asset; 3 percent between 5-10 percent and the remaining relocated
                             either on their balance land or land purchased for the landless.



                                                                        Page 4 of 7
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            Environment: There are no potential indirect and / or long-term environmental impacts due to
Public Disclosure Copy




                           anticipated future activities in the project area. With the road improvement, there will be a greater
                           and more regulated flow of traffic but this will not have any long-term adverse impacts.

                           Social – None
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             Environment: A “No Action alternative? was considered and rejected, as the project upgradation
                           is a requirement of the people. The identified roads are important state highways and vital for the
                           economic development of the state. Taking into account the adjoiningland use, environmental
                           features (trees) and road geometry, only the optimum levels of improvements have been proposed,
                           e.g. realignments proposed only where absolutely necessary and no bypasses included.
                           Environmental issues such as tree-cutting, flooding and landslides have been addressed in the
                           design as feasible.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             Environment: At the project level, the environmental measures are defined explicitly in the EMPs
                           for each of the five road links. For the remaining two road links, an Environmental Management
                           Framework (EMF) has been prepared and will guide the preparation of the EAs & EMPs. The
                           borrower has environmental capacity within the Project Management Team (PMT), and has also
                           made environmental capacity as a requirement in the teams of the Supervision Consultants and the
                           Contractors. In addition, at the institutional level, there is environmental capacity within the PWD
                           that will be further strengthened during the project implementation. The organizational
                           arrangements ensure that there is sufficient capacity to plan and implement environmental
                           measures.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Social: RAP of the project clearly provided for an action plan to ensure the affected improved their
                           livelihood. Review of the implementation establishes that the affected have greatly benefitted with
                           improve and increase in asset holding. District Level Purchase Committee constituted under the
                           Chairmanship of the District Collector emerged as a viable institutional arrangement to firm up
                           land value through negotiation with the land owners in groups. This approach is simulated in other
                           projects and in the new R&R Policy as well.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Environment: The key stakeholders are the community and the various road users. Focus group
                           discussions were conducted with them. Both their generic and specific queries were suitably
                           addressed, and incorporated to the extent feasible in the project design. Follow-up community
                           consultations for the Phase II roads will be organized during the construction period till the
                           completion of the project. Disclosure of the documents - executive summary, EA and EMPs - has
                           been done for those completed road links. The executive summary has been translated in local
                           language and disclosed as well. EMF has also been disclosed. Other EA reports will be disclosed
                           as and when these are ready.

                           Social: The affected people are the primary stakeholders. Continuous consultation enabled the
                           project authorities to establish mutual trust and partnership. Disclosure of project details and


                                                                      Page 5 of 7
                           entitlements of PAPs as well as the grievance redressal mechanism enhanced the transparency of
                           the project.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      08-Oct-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   18-Dec-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            18-Dec-2012
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      15-Nov-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   20-Dec-2012
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            20-Dec-2012
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?


                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Simon David Ellis
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Zia Al Jalaly (RSA)                          Date: 25-Mar-2013
                            Coordinator:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Karla Gonzalez Carvajal (SM)                 Date: 26-Mar-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 7 of 7
