                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA4685
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Jul-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-Jul-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Uganda                             Project ID:    P144102
                            Project Name:     UGANDA REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH VOUCHER PROJECT (P144102)
                            Task Team         Peter Okwero
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         01-Jul-2013                        Estimated   31-Jul-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    AFTHE                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Health (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Population and reproductive health (70%), Health system performance (20%),
                                              HIV/AIDS (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      13.30           Total Bank Financing:                 0.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                       Financing Gap:                        0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                      Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                 0.00
                              Global Partnership on Output-based Aid                                                  13.30
                              Total                                                                                   13.30
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed project development objective is to increase access to skilled care among poor women
                           living in disadvantaged areas during pregnancy and delivery.
                            3. Project Description
                           The proposed operation would be funded by a US$ 13.3 million grant from SIDA channeled through

                                                                       Page 1 of 5
                         GPOBA. The The project builds on the existing voucher model derived from the previous
                         Reproductive Health Voucher Program (RHVP) which closed in March 2012. The project intends to
                         expand the Reproductive Health Voucher Program (RHVP) and build national capacity to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         mainstream voucher management functions for RHVP services in Uganda and comprises two
                         components:

                         (a) Component One - Safe Delivery. The objective of the component is to provide subsidized
                         vouchers to vulnerable and poor pregnant women, enabling their access to a package of safe delivery
                         services from contracted service providers: four antenatal visits, safe delivery and one postnatal visit
                         as well as to treatment and management of selected pregnancy related medical conditions and
                         complicated deliveries from contracted service providers. The project will largely rely on health
                         centers to provide safe delivery services.

                         (b) Component Two - Capacity Building and Project. The objective of this component is to support
                         project management functions and build national capacity to mainstream and scale up
                         implementation of the safe delivery voucher scheme in the health sector. Under the component the
                         project will finance (a) specific project management activities/functions including: voucher
                         management agency, independent verification agent, quality assurance and audit, and monitoring and
                         evaluation; and (b) capacity building activities to harmonize, mainstream and scale up voucher
                         implementation in the sector.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented through existing health facilities selected on the basis of a set and
                         approved criteria and will neither involve any civil works/construction, nor any land acquisition. The
                         interventions with environmental and social implications center on component one, which involves
                         the handling of medical products and thus contributing to increased generation of medical waste in
                         the contracted health facilities.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Herbert Oule (AFTN3)
                         Constance Nekessa-Ouma (AFTCS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes                The project will contribute to generation of
                          BP 4.01                                              medical waste in the contracted health facilities.
                                                                               However based on the scope and nature of the
                                                                               project, no Environmental Assessment is
                                                                               envisaged. Instead, Uganda’s National Health
                                                                               Care Waste Management Plan, which was also
                                                                               used in another Bank funded UHSSP (P115563),
                                                                               will be used. Specific guidance on the handling
                                                                               and disposal of the HCW is included in the draft
                                                                               Project Operational Manual, drawing lessons
                                                                               from the Health Care Waste Guidance Note used
                                                                               under a piloted Uganda Reproductive Health
                                                                               Vouchers Program financed by the German




                                                                       Page 2 of 5
                                                                                 Development Bank (KfW) and the Global
                                                                                 Partnership on Output-Based Aid (GPOBA).
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No                Voucher schemes are ‘provider-led',-i.e., there
                                                                                 must be facilities in the area able to provide the
                                                                                 contracted services. The IPs in Uganda reside in
                                                                                 areas where facilities with the capability to
                                                                                 provide comprehensive emergency are lacking.
                                                                                 The issue here is not about population
                                                                                 characteristics but the fact that there are no
                                                                                 facilities that be contracted to provide services.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The project will be implemented through existing health facilities selected on the basis of a set
                              and approved criteria and will neither involve any civil works/construction, nor any land
                              acquisition. The interventions with environmental and social implications center on component
                              one, which involves the handling of medical products and thus contributing to increased
                              generation of medical waste in the contracted health facilities. The project is expected to generate
                              minimal localized medical waste related impacts; it is important that the waste is properly handled
                              and disposed to avoid negative environmental impacts.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                               None
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                               None



                                                                         Page 3 of 5
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             The Ministry of Health has substantial experience in the handling of medical waste in compliance
Public Disclosure Copy




                           with Uganda's National Environmental requirements, and experience with World Bank safeguards
                           gained from implementation of UHSSP (P115563). Environmental compliance is the
                           responsibility of the Environmental Health Division (EHD) of the Ministry of Health which is
                           charged with executing the National Health Care Waste Management Plan under the overall policy
                           guidance of the National Environment Management Authority. The National Health Care Waste
                           Management Plan for 2009/2010 – 2011/2012 was completed and disclosed under the UHSSP.
                           The HCWP was also disclosed under this project. Under the project, the Voucher Management
                           Agency working under the oversight of the Environmental Health Division of the Ministry of
                           Health will ensure that contracted service providers properly dispose medical waste in accordance
                           to the guidelines outlined in the Project Operational Manual. The Health Care Waste Guidance
                           Note developed in previous project will be updated to reflect the new changes and included in the
                           Project Operation Manual. A study on Health Care Waste Management in Uganda noted that
                           Health Care Waste (HCW) generated by facilities varies from under 20 kg per day in small health
                           centers to 90 kg per day in big hospitals. Of this, 30% to 40% is considered hazardous. The study
                           further identified challenges affecting HCW management and recommended measures to improve
                           the HCW management practices in Uganda. These shall be taken into consideration when updating
                           the Project Operational Manual. The government is working on a number of measures to improve
                           HCW management: (a) a new strategy for the handling and disposal of pharmaceutical waste is
                           under preparation; (b) the infrastructure standards were revised to take into consideration measures
                           to reduce infection control; (c) installation of incinerators is underway in 40 hospitals in the
                           country; and (d) infection control guidelines including tuberculosis infection control have been
                           developed for use in the hospitals. In addition, private operators have been contracted to handle
                           the disposal of medical waste generated by private practitioners in Kampala.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Public Disclosure Copy




                             The main stakeholders are the MoH, Voucher Management Agency; Service Providers and
                           Patients. The HCWP was prepared in a consultative manner. In addition, the specific guidance
                           notes for use by service providers were also prepared in a consultative manner with the service
                           providers. They will again be reviewed and updated as part of the project.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        24-Apr-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     12-Jul-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                                                                     Page 4 of 5
                            Health care Waste Management Plan was disclosed in April 2010 during preparation of the Uganda
                            Health Systems Strengthening Project in the country. A copy is also available in the MoH website
                            accessible to the public.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Peter Okwero
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                    Date: 15-Jul-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Olusoji O. Adeyi (SM)                          Date: 15-Jul-2013




                                                                      Page 5 of 5
