                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA5754
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Sep-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Sep-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Mali                               Project ID:    P122826
                            Project Name:      Bamako Water Supply Project (P122826)
                            Task Team          Matar Fall
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          09-Sep-2013                        Estimated   21-Nov-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTU2                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Water supply (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Urban services and housing for the poor (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         81.11               Total Bank Financing: 70.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                           11.11
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                  70.00
                              Total                                                                                        81.11
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The overall objective of the proposed project is to support the GoM’s efforts to increase access to
                           sustainable water services in Bamako.
                            3. Project Description
                           The IDA project aims at: (a) ensuring that the additional water production capacity financed by other
                           development partners under the Bamako Water Supply Program (the Kabala Project), will be turned

                                                                        Page 1 of 6
                         into expanded access and improved level of service and (b), supporting the ongoing urban water
                         sector reform.
                         It will comprise three components.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1 – Water Storage and Transmission component (US$50.02 million): This component
                         will finance (i) the expansion of the water storage infrastructure by approximately 20,000 m3
                         through the installation of two groundwater storage tanks in Bacodjicoroni; (ii) provision and
                         installation of about 13 km of water transmission mains (primary network).
                         Component 2 – Water Distribution component (US$28.16 million): This component will help to (i)
                         expand the water distribution networks, and (ii) increase access to piped water by installing 20,000
                         social household connections and 400 standposts on the right bank of the Niger River.
                         Component 3 – Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building (US$2.93 million): This
                         component will include the following activities:
                         (a)      Institutional support to the urban water sub-sector institutions, including: (i) assistance to
                         SOMAPEP in information technology, communication and organization; (ii) updates of business
                         plans; (iii) financial audits, technical audits and assessments; (iv) customer satisfaction surveys; and
                         (iv) relevant technical assistance and impact studies.
                         (b)      Capacity building assistance for SOMAPEP, SOMAGEP and the staff of the MEW involved
                         in sector reform, and development of regulatory skills of CREE.
                         (c)      Environmental and social management of the project and capacity building for safeguard
                         requirements.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project area is Bamako, on the right bank of the Niger River. The locations of the large civil
                         works infrastructure (water reservoirs and water transmission mains) are known but specific areas of
                         intervention for the extension of secondary and tertiary water distribution networks will be
                         determined by detailed technical studies. Since the project implementation sites are located in urban
                         area, there is no natural resources threatened or to be impacted apart from the Niger River which will
                         provide the expected water volume needed for the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Demba Balde (AFTCS)
                         Maman-Sani Issa (AFTN2)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes
                          BP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No                 -
                          BP 4.11
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No




                                                                       Page 2 of 6
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      Yes
                            4.12
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        Yes
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The project has been classified category B with the following policies triggered: OP 4.01 on
                              Environmental Assessment; OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement; and OP 7.50 related projects on
                              international waterways. The project implementation sites hosts no significant vegetation, natural
                              habitat, farming land or any other basic resources exploited by local communities and other
                              population for their livelihood. The water storage tanks funded by the Bank are to be constructed
                              on a land owned by the SOMAPEP (the urban water utility) while the water transmission mains
                              would be installed alongside the roads in public domains. Thus, no significant or irreversible
                              physical or biological impact will occur during the project implementation and the infrastructures’
                              exploitation phase, but minor disturbances and nuisances such as noises, dust flow, displacement
                              of temporary street retailers or occupants, will happen. The Environmental and Social Impact
                              Assessment (ESIA) report summarizes the impacts as follow: (i) the loss of few Vitellaria
                              paradoxum trees especially on the water treatment plant site; (ii) the disturbance of road traffics
                              and small socioeconomic activities during the installation of the water transmission mains; (iii)
Public Disclosure Copy




                              fortuitous pollutions due to inappropriate handling of wastes on the building sites; (iv) the
                              increased amount of untreated wastewater discharged into the river.

                             No large and significant negative impact or risk has been identified during the environmental and
                             social assessment study. Though, the amount of water to be uptake from the Niger River may
                             appear important (144.000 m3 per day), it is in accordance with the Niger Basin Authority (NBA)
                             water agreement, and not that critical to impact the Niger river rate of flow. The NBA cleared the
                             notification of this amount to be uptake.

                              On the other hand, the project will induce numerous benefits for local communities namely the
                              poor households that are unable to pay for their household connection to the water system, and
                              especially women usually in charge of water supply duty. The EIA states that benefits will
                              include: (i) the improvement of safe water accessibility for Bamako residents as well as for
                              population of suburb districts; (ii) the decreasing of the prevalence of waterborne diseases and
                              child mortality; (iii) the creation of direct and indirect small scale employments; (iv) the
                              improvement of the services delivered by the SOMAPEP; and (v) the improvement of the quality
                              of life as a whole.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                               The only concern is the increased volume of wastewater which will be discharged in the Niger


                                                                        Page 3 of 6
                           River without treatment, and will likely contribute to worsening the sanitation conditions in poorly
                           drained areas. To mitigate such impact, the GoM is planning major improvements of urban
                           sanitation services in Bamako to address inter alia the development gap between water and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           sanitation services. Various donors (including AfDB, AFD, BOAD and the Islamic Development
                           Bank) have already expressed intents to co-finance this priority investment program for a total
                           amount of US$98 million.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            No alternative was found more sustainable.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            In accordance with the Bank safeguards policies requirements and the Mali legislation on
                           environment, the borrower has prepared an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)
                           and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The EIA and the RPF have been finalized, reviewed
                           by the Bank and disclosed in-country on 03/06/2013 and at Infoshop on 02/13/2013 and
                           06/12/2013 respectively. The notification process required under O.P. 7.50 was completed at the
                           country level; the Niger Basin Authority gave its no-objection to the abstraction of water on
                           November 1, 2011, on behalf of the riparian countries and in accordance with the Niger River
                           Water Charter.

                          Most of the mitigation measures to the civil work impacts will be addressed in the bidding
                          documents and work contracts; general provisions on nuisance (noise, dust) management as well
                          as adequate handling and disposal of construction site waste will also be included in the work
                          contracts. In line with that, the SOMAPEP-SA (safeguard specialist) will have the responsibility,
                          in collaboration with the DNACPN, to receive and approve the specific ESMPs (developed based
                          on the ESIA) and ensure that the measures are adequately planned and embedded within the
                          overall civil works breakdown schedule. Regarding the social aspects (OP4.12), the SOMAPEP-
                          SA will use the provisions and recommendations of the adopted RPF to ensure, as soon as the
Public Disclosure Copy




                          optimum right-of-way of water distribution networks are definitely identified and agreed on and
                          prior the commencement of works, that specific RAPs are prepared, consulted upon, disclosed and
                          PAP are fully compensated.

                          SOMAPEP-SA, the Asset Holding Company that will be responsible for the project
                          implementation, is a newly established company with mainly former Ministry of Energy and
                          Water staff. The main recommendation is that one permanent staff of SOMAPEP be trained to
                          carry out the implementation and reporting on the safeguards issues; this role will be
                          complementary to the mission of the environmental department to be established within the
                          SOMAGEP.

                          The Directorate of Sanitation and Pollution Control (DNACPN) of the Ministry of Environment
                          and Sanitation, in close collaboration with SOMAPEP, will take the lead in monitoring and
                          overseeing the implementation of environmental and social mitigation and corrective measures,
                          including the validation of the specific ESIAs and RAP of secondary and tertiary mains, and
                          genuine consultation of beneficiaries. DNACPN will also ensure that monitoring and evaluation
                          reports are submitted. ANGESEM will be giving its contribution when matters related to the
                          management of wastewater arise.

                          A provision of 135 million CFA (US$270,000) is budgeted under the project for the capacity

                                                                     Page 4 of 6
                           building of institutions (SOMAPEP-SA, DNACPN, and ANGESEM) involved with the
                           implementation of the environmental and social management plan (ESMP) of the project.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The SOMAPEP and the DNACPN have the responsibility to process the safeguard documents
                           through the national licensing procedure and, later on during the project implementation phase, to
                           ensure the execution of mitigation measures and the enforcement of specific provisions included in
                           the work contracts. For the licensing of the ESIA and the RPF, the DNACPN organized four
                           specific workshops on December 1-7, 2012 with the participation of, amongst others, the local
                           authorities (mayors), the representatives of populations affected by the project, the ANGESSEM
                           and the Agency of Environment and Sustainable Development (AEDD); the executive summary
                           and the license have been published in local newspapers on 3/06/2013 as well as on the websites
                           of the Ministry of Environment, of AEDD (www.environnement.gov.ml) and www.malipages.
                           com on 3/11/2013. During the preparation of the RPF, people potentially affected (car mechanic,
                           craftsmen, on-street sailors), by the construction of the transmission mains, have been consulted at
                           Medina Coura suburb where the civil works are likely to be located; their perspectives have been
                           reflected in the mechanisms proposed for the compensation and the grievance resolution
                           mechanism. The local authorities, the potentially affected populations, the ministry of urbanism,
                           the consumer association and the DNACPN will participate in the consultation for the final
                           decision on the right–of-way of the mains as well as to the preparation, the adoption and the
                           execution of the subsequent RAPs.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      18-Dec-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   13-Feb-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Mali                                                             06-Mar-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      18-Dec-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   12-Jun-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Mali                                                             06-Mar-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment


                                                                     Page 5 of 6
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                             Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the            Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                             Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                             Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Matar Fall
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name:                                                   Date:
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name:                                                   Date:


                                                                        Page 6 of 6
