                                                                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                             CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                          Report No.: ISDSC471
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Feb-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        Philippines                           Project ID:                      P127741
                              Project Name:                   Philippines National Community Driven Development Program (P127741)
                              Task Team Leader:               Sean Bradley
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 18-Mar-2013                                 Estimated Board Date:            18-Jul-2013
                              Managing Unit:                  EASPS                                 Lending Instrument:              Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                         Public administration- Other social services (50%), Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (20%), Water
                                                              supply (20%), Primary educ ation (10%)
                              Theme:                          Rural services and infrastructure (34%), Participation and civic engagement (33%), Other social development (33%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                  Financing Source                                                                                                     Amount
                                  Borrower                                                                                                               480.00
                                  International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                                  300.00
                                  Free-standing Single Purpose Trust Fund                                                                                   0.00
                                  Bilateral Agencies (unidentified)                                                                                       50.00
                                  Foreign Multilateral Institutions (unidentified)                                                                        50.00
                                  Total                                                                                                                  880.00
                              Environmental Category:         B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              B. Project Objectives
Public Disclosure Copy




                              The overall goal of this program is to reduce poverty in the poorest areas of the Philippines. The proposed project development objective (PDO) of
                              this investment operation would be to: improve community participation in the management and governance of publicsector resources and
                              enhance access to and utilization of basic barangay-level infrastructure and services.

                              C. Project Description

                              The proposed NCDDP will draw on the successful experiences of the Government’s various CDD programs, particularly the KALAHI-CIDSS
                              program managed by DSWD. Since 2003 (through to the end of 2010), this program has invested over Php. 5.3 billion (US$118 million equivalent)
                              in 5,326 community sub-projects for roads, water systems, schools, health stations, day cares, etc., in 4,229 barangays in the poorest provinces
                              and municipalities in the country. As noted previously, the end-of-project impact evaluation showed improvements in measures of household
                              income, access to basic services, and local level trust and governance. Separate evaluations of the project have also shown that overall sub-
                              project investments yield an average economic internal rate of return of 21 percent, and that unit costs are between 8 and 76 percent lower than
                              similar public sector works, depending on the type of sub-project.

                              The NCDDP would build on the core elements of KALAHI-CIDSS and similar CDD operations in the country. The principal components and
                              estimated levels of Bank financing, which would be confirmed during project preparation, are presented below.
                              Component 1: Community mobilization and leadership for local investments (estimated US$ 250 million IBRD). This component would support the
                              training and facilitation for the four-stage cycle of activities that empowers communities to analyze and prioritized local level development needs;
                              and to identify and plan, appraise and approve, and manage the implementation of sub-projects. The component would help establish or
                              strengthen the barangay assembly as a fora for community-LGU engagement. The component would also finance at least four-rounds of block-
                              grants to rural barangays (based on population and possibly poverty incidence level) in support of basic social and economic investments and
                              services.

                              Component 2: Local capacity building and implementation support (estimated US$ 20 million IBRD). This component would standardize and
                              institutionalize training for CDD in the country, possibly through the support of a training institute. The component would target municipal and
                              provincial LGU staff to support and oversee the participatory assessments, planning and sub-project implementation of community infrastructure;
                              to ensure quality of infrastructure investments and the integrity of resource management; and for national government agencies (NGAs) at sub-
                              national level to enhance their participation in the NCDDP. The component would also support the integration of the CDD within existing
                              structures, systems and procedures of the LGUs through training and other forms of capacity building.
                              Component 3: Strengthening national institutional support for CDD (estimated US$ 5 million IBRD). This component would support analysis and
                              implementation of efforts to enhance the use of CDD across sectors as a core poverty reduction measure, to remove systematic obstacles to
                              integrating CDD implementation modalities within different sectoral departments and LGUs, and develop policies and incentives that would help to
                           harmonize the approach and sustain it over time (including resource mobilization). Support would be provided to specific sectoral department units
                           that are most directly involved in the facilitation and technical support of basic services (possible through CDD focal points/units). Assistance could
                           also be provided to the departments of Interior and Local Government, of Treasury, of Budget and Management, and to the National Anti-Poverty
                           Commission to adapt LGU performance measures and fiscal transfer processes, and to enhance monitoring and evaluating of the poverty impacts
                           of the program.

                           Component 4: Program management support (estimated US$ 25 million IBRD) to support the oversight, coordination and overall management of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the program from national and regional levels, to monitor and evaluate outcomes and impact, to support third-party monitoring of program
                           elements, and to oversee and evaluate pilot testing of additional features and concepts under the program.

                           While building on the successes of earlier CDD operations in the country, the NCDDP will also support a significant evolution in the approach
                           through four important enhancements: (i) strengthening the direct role and responsibility of LGUs in program implementation and sup porting
                           efforts to improve their performance by linking program resources to governance indicators under the Department of Interior and Local
                           Government’s “Seal of Good Housekeeping? and “Performance Challenge Fund?; (ii) better integration with and leveraging resources from other
                           line agencies to increase and improve the delivery of basic services; (iii) strengthening vertical linkages between barangays, municipalities and
                           provinces and closer integration with existing government systems (planning, fiduciary, reporting, etc.); and (iv) adapting procedures to the special
                           conditions found in conflict-affected regions, areas more prone to disasters, and with large indigenous populations.

                           The NCDDP would also seek to enhance efficiencies by rationalizing different CDD operations (e.g., further streamlining support and procedures
                           of CDD components of, for instance, the Mindanao Trust Fund or the ARMM Social Fund, with those of the NCDDP). Lastly, the program would
                           seek better integration (or convergence in the national parlance) with on-going anti-poverty efforts of DSWD; specifically the Pantawid Pamilyang
                           (4P’s) and the Self-Employment Assistance-Kaunlaran (SEA-K) programs. This would also apply to other sector programs such as the School-
                           based Management program of the Department of Education, or the Community Based Resource Management program of the Department of
                           Environment and Natural Resources.

                           Given the complexities of these enhancements, as well as the sizeable scale-up intended, the program would involve a transitional phase that
                           would support the process of moving from the current project structures and procedures of KALAHI-CIDSS to one that is more embedded in the
                           existing structures of local and national government agencies. While some of the changes are reasonably well understood and would be guided
                           by existing efforts and knowledge (like the shift from DSWD to MLGU-led management of the process at the municipal level), others are less so
                           (like how the NCDDP would support and enhance existing community-based sectoral approaches). Therefore, it is estimated that this transitional
                           phase would take approximately three years during which time systems would be established and pilot initiatives undertaken to inform and support
                           a new program approach and management structure.

                           Shifting CDD from a project to a program that can effectively promote better local governance, ensure integration of CDD efforts within LGU
                           planning and budgeting processes, and engage national line agencies through a single platform will take many years to achieve. The NCDDP will
                           help move the program in that direction, but final achievement of these goals is likely to require a longer-term commitment beyond the program
                           and the loan for this operation. Nonetheless, the Bank’s support would help to promote this vision and outcome over the long-term.

                           It is proposed that the program cover all of the rural municipalities in the country that have a poverty incidence above the current national average
                           of 32 percent (currently estimated at 965). Based on the results of the impact evaluation of KALAHI-CIDSS, it is also proposed that a minimum
                           per capita investment of US$6 per sub-project funding cycle be applied and that the program include at least four cycles. These basic parameters
                           suggest a program that would cost approximately US$880 million for five years, but which could range up to US$1.1 billion if additional per capita
Public Disclosure Copy




                           financing is provided for poorer municipalities. Significant co-financing for the proposed operation would be sought from the Government’s
                           development partners (particularly AusAID and ADB) and the national budget.

                            D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                           The program would cover all of the estimated 965 rural municipalities in the country that have a poverty incidence above the current national
                           average of 32 percent.

                            E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

                           Overall, DSWD is considered a high-capacity agency with significant experience managing World Bank operations, and which has satisfactorily
                           implemented the KALAHI-CIDSS program since 2003. Moreover, the department received generally positive outcomes on a recent Integrity
                           Development Review and routinely ranks as the cleanest agency in corruption perception surveys. In terms of capacity to implement safeguards
                           requirements, DSWD will be using the same safeguards team of the KALAHI-CIDSS project in this new project. They have one person each, in
                           charge of environmental safeguards and social safeguards. These persons have been trained in the implementation of the KALAHI-CIDSS project
                           and in several safeguards forum organized by the local Manila office.

                            F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

                           Roberto B. Tordecilla (EASPS)
                           Gerardo F. Parco (EASPS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

                            Safeguard Policies                               Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01              Yes               This CDD project is expected to finance community infrastructure sub-projects
                                                                                              such as health centers, classrooms, day care centers etc. The potential impact
                                                                                              of any subproject will depend on the nature, location and specific characteristics
                                                                                              of the investment. In most cases, adverse environmental impacts of such
                                                                                              projects are expected to be temporary, site-specific, reversible and limited to the
                                                                                              construction phase. They include typical construction related impacts such as,
                                                                        noise and dust during construction, small-scale vegetation loss, and temporary
                                                                        and intermittent elevated noise levels. Potential adverse impacts would be
                                                                        easily mitigated through a combination of a negative list of inappropriate types or
                                                                        locations of sub-projects, sub-project specific Environmental Management Plan
                                                                        (EMP) and technical guidance on appropriate construction designs and
                                                                        practices. The EIA Guidelines currently used in the KALAHI-CIDDS project,
                                                                        which has been recently revised and updated by the DSWD, would be applied
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        under the NCDDP and would serve to identify potential negative impacts and
                                                                        relevant mitigating measures. For sub-projects that involve the construction/
                                                                        rehabilitation of health care facilities, the subproject safeguard instruments will
                                                                        include procedures and measures for proper handling of solid and liquid medical
                                                                        waste.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04              No      Because of the small scale nature of the community infrastructure done under
                                                                        this project, there would likely be no impact on natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                       No      Because of the small scale nature of the community infrastructure done under
                                                                        this project, there would likely be no impact on forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09                  TBD     The policy may be triggered in case of sub-projects that involve the
                                                                        rehabilitation/expansion of irrigation facilities (50 such small-scale sub-projects
                                                                        were executed under KALAHI-CIDSS) and in turn induce an increase in
                                                                        pesticides use. If this is the case, simple Pest Management Plan(s) (PMPs) will
                                                                        be prepared for irrigation sub-projects by building upon the existing national
                                                                        agricultural guidelines/regulations. The PMP(s) could be prepared for all
                                                                        irrigation sub-projects, or for those which are in the same geographical region if
                                                                        the domestic regulations related with pesticide use vary across the country.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   No     Since the construction of some community infrastructure such as school
                                                                        buildings or day care centers would require excavation for foundations, a
                                                                        “Chance Find Procedure? will be included as part of all works contracts.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            Yes     An enhanced Indigenous Peoples Policy Framework (IPPF) will be prepared
                                                                        based on the existing IPPF for KALAHI-CIDDS prior to appraisal. The
                                                                        preparation of the enhanced IPPF will be informed by a Social Assessment (SA)
                                                                        that is carried out by following the guidelines in OP4.10. Specifically, the SA will
                                                                        include (a) an assessment of the experiences and lessons learned with
                                                                        implementing the IPPF for KALAHI-CIDDS, and (b) documentation of
                                                                        consultations with local communities and IP organizations that have been
                                                                        involved with, or observed, the implementation of the KALAHI-CIDSS project.
                                                                        Both the SA and the draft IPPF will be disclosed to relevant IP organizations and
                                                                        the National Commission on Indigenous Peoples (NCIP). The IPPF will include
                                                                        requirements on the mechanisms for participation and representation of IPs in all
                                                                        phases of the community-driven development program; documentation/
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        preparation and implementation of sub-projects, social analysis, and free, prior
                                                                        and informed consultations leading to broad community support that are
                                                                        proportional to the scale of potential impacts on IP communities. For any sub-
                                                                        projects that are in areas with IP communities, an Indigenous Peoples Plan
                                                                        (IPP) will need to be prepared following the guidance of the IPPF. In addition,
                                                                        the incorporation of considerations for IP communities in project design (as
                                                                        proposed in PCN) by providing special windows will also be informed by the SA
                                                                        and consultations with key stakeholders.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      Yes     Based on the experiences in KALAHI-CIDSS implementation, no involuntary
                                                                        physical relocation is anticipated under the project. However, some sub-projects
                                                                        may require the acquisition of land, although it is not yet known if this will be
                                                                        through voluntary means, open market sale, or involuntary taking of land. Only
                                                                        in the case of involuntary taking of land would the policy be triggered. To comply
                                                                        with the requirements for an RPF as per OP4.12, an enhanced “Land
                                                                        Acquisition, Resettlement Policy (LARP) Framework? will be prepared based on
                                                                        the existing LARP framework for the KALAHI-CIDDS project. The preparation of
                                                                        this enhanced LARP Framework for the project will be informed by an
                                                                        assessment of the experiences and lessons learned through the implementation
                                                                        of the existing LARP framework for KALAHI-CIDSS, as well as through public
                                                                        disclosure and consultations with local communities and civil society
                                                                        organizations that have been involved in the implementation of the KALAHI-
                                                                        CIDSS project. For cases where involuntary land acquisition may be necessary,
                                                                        the subproject would need to develop a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) or
                                                                        Abbreviated RAP based on the LARP Framework. For any other cases where
                                                                        land is required but done through voluntary means, a procedure and form for
                                                                        documenting the process of donation or voluntary transfer of the land, including
                                                                        full community and owner consent, needs to be prepared and included in the
                                                                        operations manual for this project as provided for in the enhanced LARP
                                                                        Framework.
                                Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                          No                     The project will not be financing any large dams.

                                Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                          No                     Not applicable
                                7.50
                                Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                              No                     Not applicable
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Dec-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
                                  should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                    January 2013.

                         IV. APPROVALS
                                Task Team Leader:                                Name: Sean Bradley
                                Approved By:
                                Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                 Name: John R. Butler (RSA)                                                                            Date: 24-Apr-2012
                                Sector Manager:                                  Name: Mark C. Woodward (SM)                                                                           Date: 13-Feb-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
