                                                                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                            CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSC45
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Sep-2011

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                       Nicaragua                               Project ID:                      P126357
                              Project Name:                  Support to the Education Sector Project II PASEN 2 (P126357)
                              Task Team Leader:              Michael Drabble
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 11-Oct-2011                                  Estimated Board Date:            13-Dec-2011
                              Managing Unit:                 LCSHE                                   Lending Instrument:              Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                        Primary education (100%)
                              Theme:                         Education for all (100%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                      Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                        0.00
                                   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                              15.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                    15.00
                              Environmental Category:        B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              B. Project Objectives

                              The Project Development Objective is to increase primary education completion in selected municipalities and Atlantic autonomous regions, and
                              strengthen MINED's capacity for education management, including measuring of student learning achievements in primary education.

                              C. Project Description

                              1. The core concept for this Project is to target interventions where primary education completion rates are lowest and poverty levels are
Public Disclosure Copy




                              highest. By focusing on the worst municipalities the Project aims to raise overall completion rates in the most cost-effective manner. The Project
                              will focus on approximately 30 municipalities to be finalized during Project preparation. The proposed four-year Project will have three
                              components: (i) the first component will finance primary education infrastructure; student learning materials; and education supplies for the
                              neediest children in the targeted municipalities; (ii) the second component will finance activities to improve teacher effectiveness through
                              professional development and teacher deployment; and, (iii) the third component will support institutional strengthening to improve education
                              management, particularly the measuring of student learning achievements in primary education.

                              2. Component 1. Improvement of primary school completion rates through infrastructure; provision of learning materials and demand-driven
                              incentives. (Estimated total cost: US$ 9 million). Because the cost and insufficient provision of schooling are cited by households as reasons for
                              not attending primary education, this component will expand coverage of the second cycle of primary education to ensure provision of all six
                              grades in selected municipalities and Atlantic Autonomous regions. The Project will also contemplate the need to accommodate students returning
                              to primary schools whose family will receive a cash transfer from the Social Protection Project. During preparation, the team will explore the
                              feasibility and advisability of financing rehabilitation/ new construction of classrooms (primarily for 4th, 5th and 6th grades) where legal ownership
                              of land is established, in order to address the issue of #incomplete# schools# While it is expected that the European Union grant will also focus on
                              school infrastructure, Project preparation will determine the extent to which resources would complement EU activities. The Project will also
                              finance the refurbishing of schools, particularly desks, chairs, blackboards, and shelving systems for small classroom libraries. The Project will
                              engage communities through a community-based construction approach # identifying local expertise at a much lower cost than national rates. The
                              total number of schools, type of works, cost of interventions and localities will be identified during Project preparation.

                              3. Under this component, the Project will also finance the distribution of pedagogical materials for primary schools, including textbooks, learning
                              resources and small school libraries with specific collections to help improve reading, writing and mathematics to those municipalities targeted
                              under this Project and Atlantic Autonomous regions. The total number of textbooks, learning resources and libraries will be defined and agreed
                              with MINED during Project preparation.

                              4. On the demand side, the Project will finance the provision of Paquetes Solidarios (provision of backpacks, uniforms, shoes, notebooks, school
                              materials) for the neediest children in rural communities. At the beginning of each school year, leaders from the community along with the school
                              director identify children from the poorest households who are at risk of not enrolling in primary schools and/or who have dropped out of schools
                              the year before for economic reasons. These children will receive a full set of the Paquete Solidario. This intervention has proven to greatly
                              enhance early enrollment and retention of children.

                              5. Component 2. Improvement of teacher effectiveness and deployment of teachers in the selected municipalities and Atlantic Autonomous
                              regions. (Estimated total cost: US$ 4 million). This component will finance teacher professional development activities and the cost associated
                         with the training of new cohorts of multigrade primary school teachers that MINED will recruit and deploy in the selected municipalities and Atlantic
                         Autonomous regions.

                         6. In Nicaragua, two of the most important factors associated with improving students performance in standardized tests have been teaching
                         techniques and in-service teacher training. With the support of PASEN I, over the past three years, MINED has successfully implemented a new
                         modality of in-service training (TEPCEs - Talleres de Evaluaci, Programaci y Capacitaci Educativa) based on peer to peer learning with groups of
                         40 teachers gathered one day a month in a hub school (escuela nucleo). Around 7,000 teachers participate in TEPCEs on a yearly basis.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Evaluations have shown a high level of teacher satisfaction for thi s program. This Project will finance the expansion of TEPCES to those districts
                         and municipalities selected under the Project. I addition, the Project will strengthen the program's pedagogical content to focus on those areas of
                         mathematics and language in whichstudents and teachers have experienced difficulties (including multi-grade and teaching in mother tongue).

                         7. In order to cope with the challenges associated with the high number of multi-grade schools and the scarcity of certified teachers willing to be
                         deployed in rural areas, MINED launched last year an accelerated pre-service teacher training program for lower-secondary education graduates.
                         In 2010, 1,600 young graduates were initially trained in Normal Schools during four months to specifically become fifth and sixth multi-grade
                         teachers. These young teachers were selected from the same communities to which they were deployed. They were also given the opportunity to
                         pursue additional training to acquire a full certification by returning to Normal Schools four days a month. The Project will finance the expansion of
                         at least two additional cohorts of young teachers (approximately 3,000) to support multi-grade schools in those municipalities targeted under the
                         Project. The objective is that an equal number of teachers be trained and deployed in the localities where new service provision was added with
                         the reconstruction and/or improvement of classrooms financed under the Project first component. These community-based teachers will also
                         receive training in remedial education (both diagnosis and interventions), so that students most at risk of dropout because of academic failure are
                         identified early and given the help they need. The Project will support their training, the logistics of the program and all materials associated with
                         their professional development, while MINED will finance salaries and other forms of compensation.

                         8. As part of an on-going quality control process, the Project will finance the revision, alignment and contextualization of all pedagogical
                         materials already developed by MINED in the past years. The objective is to align existing content with the new curriculum, strengthen focus on
                         pedagogical techniques, and enhance activities and resources to improve students# learning outcomes in language and mathematics. Under this
                         component, the Project will also finance training activities to disseminate to teachers the results of learning outcome measurements financed under
                         the Project third component.

                         9. Finally, the Project will provide technical assistance to MINED in order to develop the following programs to be implemented on a pilot basis in
                         the targeted municipalities: (i) the remedial teaching program for students in the first three grades of primary education with learning disability and/
                         or children falling behind; (ii) the expansion to rural areas of the primary education accelerated program; or, (iii) the flexible grade promotion
                         program for primary multi-grade schools.

                         10. Component 3. Strengthen institutional capacity of MINED for better quality of education. (Estimated total cost: US$ 2 million). This
                         component will continue strengthening the educational, operational and administrative capacity of MINED, particularly critical functions such as
                         planning, statistics, learning assessment, monitoring and evaluation # both at central and regional levels. This component will finance the
                         strengthening of MINED#s General Directorate of Planning, which includes the Division of Planning, Statistics, Projects and Programs, and
                         Monitoring and Evaluation. The strengthening of this department will initially focus on modernizing the educational statistics system and
                         integrating data sources, statistical analysis and reporting into a single integrated information platform to be used by different MINED units at the
                         central and local levels. It also includes strengthening the human resources, training, equipment, and connectivity in MINED.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         11. The Project will also provide technical assistance to develop a national monitoring and evaluation system that provides the necessary
                         processes, tools and analysis to track a growing number of educational interventions being developed at national and regional levels. With the
                         support of PASEN I, MINED has developed capacity to carry out national student assessments and evaluations, as well as early reading and math
                         assessment in primary education. This Project will continue supporting those efforts and integrating the results into a more comprehensive
                         curriculum policy that aligns planning, teacher training, textbooks and materials and student evaluations (which, are activities that the Project will
                         support under Components 1 and 2). Concretely, the Project will continue to finance (i) national student assessments and evaluation every two
                         years; (ii) expansion of early grade reading and math assessments every two years; (iii) dissemination efforts of the evaluation results with
                         teachers and parents at national and local level.

                         12. Likewise, the Project will support the financial management, procurement and control activities associated with the management and
                         operation of this Project, including staff, training, financial audits and administrative costs. The scope of each activity will be developed and agreed
                         with the Government during Project preparation.

                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         13.   The Project will focus on the poorest municipalities in Nicaragua in particular in the Atlantic coast and Atlantic autonomous regions.


                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

                         14. Capacity at the Ministry of Education is weak and requires strengthening for planning and implementation. This weakness would include
                         capacity to make operational World Bank social safeguards. Within the Ministry of Education, the Coordination Office with the Autonomous
                         Regions Educational System (Oficina de Enlace con el Sistema Educativo de las Regiones Autonomas-SEAR) will be in charge of coordinating
                         and implementing all the activities related to the social safeguards, including the Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPDP) and the Involuntarily
                         Resettlement Framework (IRF). The capacity of these institutions will be strengthened to ensure that the implementation of the above mentioned
                         Plan and the Framework is in accordance with the Bank#s standards and that the Project is in compliance.

                         15. The General Directorate of Education Infrastructure (Direcci General de Infraestructura Escolar) will be in charge of the implementation of the
                         infrastructure plan of the MINED which will include environmental safeguards. The capacity of the Directorate will also need to be strengthened to
                         ensure that environmental safeguards are taken into consideration and respective activities are in compliance with the Bank#s policies. As part of
                         component 3 focused on institutional strengthening, the capacity of MINED staff within both Directorates will benefit from the Project#s capacity
                         building.
                           16. The Environmental Assessment safeguard (OP 4.01) will be triggered and either an Environmental and Social Management Framework
                           (ESMF) or an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) will be prepared for the Project based on progress in identifying target
                           municipalities and schools during preparation. The framework or plan would include the appropriate environmental measures for mitigating
                           impacts of small-scale construction including worker health and safety (consistent with World Bank Group Environment Health, and Safety
                           Guidelines (2007)), management of debris, noise management, dust control, and student safety during construction, among other pertinent
                           aspects. The instrument would also include topics such as construction site eligibility and screening criteria. The site screening procedures would
                           include criteria to identify any adverse impacts on natural habitats, forested areas, physical cultural resources, and/or any need for land
Public Disclosure Copy




                           conversion.

                           17. Given that this Project will focus on the Atlantic autonomous regions, and the fact the indigenous populations are inherently linked as
                           potential beneficiaries and affected peoples from the proposed activities under this strategy, the Indigenous Peoples safeguard policy (OP 4.10)
                           would be triggered. A Social Assessment and Indigenous Peoples Plan will be prepared and implemented, in consultation with Indigenous Peoples
                           at community and organizational levels, to ensure appropriate indigenous peoples participation. The Project will place special emphasis in
                           supporting Intercultural bilingual education (IBE) or bilingual intercultural education (BIE) particularly in the Atlantic Caribbean Coast (RAAN, RAAS
                           and RJ). This is an intercultural and bilingual model of education designed for contexts with two (or more) cultures and languages. The Project will
                           aim at strengthening this model to improve the education levels of the indigenous and afro-descendants communities, which rank among the
                           poorest and most vulnerable groups in the country. The Project will also seek to promote the access of women of all ethnic groups to education.

                           18. In addition, the Project ESMF/ESMP would screen out any new construction that could require involuntary land acquisition, displacement or
                           restriction of access to resources per OP 4.12. The Involuntarily Resettlement Framework and the Operational Manual will provide the necessary
                           guidelines to apply the Operational Policy 4.12.

                           19. Construction and rehabilitation of primary schools that could eventually trigger the Environmental Safeguards including the Natural Habitats
                           (OP 4.04), Forests (OP 4.36), Pest Management (OP 4.09) and Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11) will not be financed and/or supported by
                           this Project.

                            F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

                           Glenn S. Morgan (LCSDE)
                           Chingboon Lee (LCSHE)
                           Sajitha Bashir (LCSHD)
                           Mary Lisbeth Gonzalez (LCSSO)
                           Gunars H. Platais (LCSEN)
                           Michael Drabble (LCSHE)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

                            Safeguard Policies Triggered                     Yes        No        TBD                                 Explanation
                            Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                ✖                          The Environmental Assessment safeguard (OP 4.01) will be
                                                                                                          triggered
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                  ✖
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                                           ✖
                            Pest Management OP 4.09                                      ✖
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                       ✖
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                      ✖                          Given that this Project will focus on the Atlantic autonomous regions,
                                                                                                          and the fact the indigenous populations are inherently linked as
                                                                                                          potential beneficiaries and affected peoples from the proposed
                                                                                                          activities under this strategy, the Indigenous Peoples safeguard
                                                                                                          policy (OP 4.10) would be triggered.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                                    ✖      The Project ESMF/ESMP would screen out any new construction
                                                                                                          that could require involuntary land acquisition, displacement or
                                                                                                          restriction of access to resources per OP 4.12. The Involuntarily
                                                                                                          Resettlement Framework and the Operational Manual will provide
                                                                                                          the necessary guidelines to apply the Operational Policy 4.12.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                    ✖
                            Projects on International Waters OP/BP 7.50                  ✖
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                        ✖
                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                           A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 06-Oct-2011
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
Public Disclosure Copy




                              should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                A.       Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS would be prepared:
                                10/06/2011

                                B.            For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS: N/A

                                C.    Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing
                                should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.

                         IV. APPROVALS
                            Signed and submitted by:
                            Task Team Leader:                                Name: Maria Elena Paz Gutzalenko                                                                      Date: 14-Sep-2011
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                 Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                                                                           Date: 19-Sep-2011
                            Comments:
                            Sector Manager:                                  Name: Chingboon Lee (SM)                                                                              Date: 15-Sep-2011
                            Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                             form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
