                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                         APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                   Report No.: ISDSA3705
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Jun-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-Jun-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Burkina Faso                        Project ID:     P128768
                            Project Name:       Burkina Faso Electricity Sector Support Project (P128768)
                            Task Team           Fatouma Toure Ibrahima Wa
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           28-May-2013                         Estimated   30-Jul-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                         Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      AFTG2                               Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                    Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Thermal Power Generation (31%), Transmission and Distribution of Electricity
                                              (46%), Energy efficiency in Heat and Power (13%), Gener al energy sector
                                              (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (50%), Infrastructure services for private sector
                                              development (25%), Other urban development (25%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      52.79           Total Bank Financing:                        50.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                       Financing Gap:                                0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                                   Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                    2.79
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                          50.00
                              Total                                                                                                52.79
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objectives are to: (i) increase access to electricity, (ii) improve the
                           reliability of electricity supply, and (iii) improve the efficient use of energy in targeted areas.



                                                                          Page 1 of 7
                          3. Project Description
                         Component 1: Improve the availability of energy supply. This component comprises: (i) the
                         construction of two turnkey 7.5 MW (15MW) diesel power stations convertible to heavy fuel oil in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         two regional growth poles; and (ii) services for construction supervision.

                         Component 2: Improve electricity access in selected areas. This component comprises grid
                         expansion and connections in 41 communities, through existing and new 33kV transmission lines.
                         Those lines include the existing Bobo-Ouaga line which provides 33 kV on its shield wire (cable de
                         garde), and the 33 kV transmission lines under construction from Pa and Kaya.

                         Component 3: Improve energy efficiency in public buildings and other sectors. This component
                         comprises: (a) strengthening the institutional, legal and regulatory framework to support demand-side
                         management and energy efficiency initiatives (including the acquisition of testing and certification
                         equipment, the recruitment of consultant to support legal review and capacity building initiatives
                         such as experience sharing and south-south collaboration, consumer and distributors awareness
                         campaigns); (b) investing in energy efficient equipment (including the installation of energy saving
                         lamps in selected households and public lighting); and (c) promoting the efficient and rationale use
                         of electricity through the dissemination of information and training. To complement these activities,
                         a set of Lighting Africa interventions will be implemented. They will include the deployment of
                         approximately 25,000 lanterns in selected public schools targeting persons in off-grid communities.

                         Component 4: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Development. This component includes four
                         subcomponents aimed at financing (a) institutional strengthening of public sector energy agencies to
                         support scaling up of energy service expansion; (b) capacity development of energy service
                         providers; (c) outreach and partnership, initiatives; and (d) specific studies to improve the energy mix
                         (notably in renewable energy) in the medium term, and a communication strategy for the sector.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis (if known)
                         The two new power plants under component 1 will be constructed in existing power generating
                         facilities on land owned by the national electricity company (SONABEL) in the cities of Ouahigouya
                         and Fada N’Gourma. The sites are located in-town, surrounded by residential and administrative
                         settlements, and totally fenced. Apart from some trees on the Fada N’Gourma site, no other natural
                         feature is remarkable in the project locations. Both the borrow pit sites and the location of the
                         activities supported under component 2 are not yet identified.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Alexandra C. Bezeredi (AFTSG)
                         Fatouma Toure Ibrahima Wane (AFTG2)
                         Maman-Sani Issa (AFTN2)
                         Meike van Ginneken (AFTG2)
                         Paivi Koskinen-Lewis (AFTCS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes               The implementation of the project activities will
                          BP 4.01                                              have both positive and negative environmental
                                                                               and social impacts. The negative impacts which


                                                                       Page 2 of 7
                                                                         need specific attention will occur during the
                                                                         operation of the power plants are related to
                                                                         pollution from wastes mismanagement, noises,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         occupational risks and safety at work, socio-
                                                                         economic damages in the occurrence of
                                                                         accidental fire in the facilities. An Environmental
                                                                         and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) for each
                                                                         power plant and an Environmental and Social
                                                                         Framework (ESMF) have been prepared and
                                                                         consulted upon; they include appropriate
                                                                         technical and institutional measures. These
                                                                         documents have been disclosed at the InfoShop
                                                                         and in-country prior to appraisal.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No              The project activities will not be implemented in
                                                                         areas hosting natural habitat.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No              The project will not support activities related t
                                                                         forest exploitation or management.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No              The project will not finance pesticides and none
                                                                         of the supported activities will indirectly induce
                                                                         use of pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes             The exploitation of quarries and borrow pits
                         BP 4.11                                         may impact uncovered wealth, while the
                                                                         delineation and clearing of the right-off-way of
                                                                         the transmission lines may affect sacred sites. A
                                                                         “chance finds? procedure will be integrated in the
                                                                         contract of the enterprises and monitored.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No              There are no indigenous people in the project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         intervention areas.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes             The power plants in component 1 will be built
                         4.12                                            on lands owned by SONABEL and therefore no
                                                                         land acquisition is required. However, for
                                                                         component 2, since the selected communities are
                                                                         not yet known and it is not known whether
                                                                         involuntary land-take or restriction of access to
                                                                         sources of livelihood or to resources is required, a
                                                                         Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) is being
                                                                         finalized to provide guidance for the preparation,
                                                                         approval and execution of RAPs, if necessary,
                                                                         during the implementation. The RPF has been
                                                                         consulted upon and disclosed at InfoShop and in-
                                                                         country prior to appraisal. The potential RAP will
                                                                         also be consulted upon, and disclosed at InfoShop
                                                                         and in-country prior to any construction.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No              The project does not involve any dams.




                                                                 Page 3 of 7
                            Projects on International        No                   No activity of the project is being implemented
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 in an international waterway.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                   The project is not being implemented in a
                            7.60                                                 disputed area.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The project is classified category B, as its environmental and social impacts are moderate and
                              site-specific. Three Bank safeguard policies triggered: OP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment; OP
                              4.11 on Physical Cultural Resources; and OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement.

                              The environmental analysis has concluded that the overall environmental and social impact of the
                              project is positive, though there will be some adverse impacts during the construction and eventual
                              operation of the infrastructure. These negative but manageable impacts are: loss of trees on the
                              power station sites and vegetation on the right-off-way of the grid lines; dust-induced air pollution
                              in the project sites and vicinities during the construction, including risks of temporary increase in
                              allergies; involuntary destruction of cultural assets (uncovered wealth, sacred woods, sacred site,
                              etc.) in exploiting quarries and material pits; socio-economic losses and damages in case of
                              explosion and fire during the exploitation; indirect pollution of the receiving environments by the
                              operation phase wastes (solid and used oil) if not properly handled; occupational health, security
                              and safety for the staff. Potential social impacts include loss of land, assets and/or resources. No
                              large and irreversible adverse impact during the project cycle was identified.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                The mishandling of used oil and hazardous solid wastes resulting from the functioning of the
                              power stations may induce diffuse pollution of the surrounding environment, especially if the
                              wastes were disposed in areas close to water sources or in uncontrolled discharges accessible to
                              children and other vulnerable people.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                                N/A
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                                The government completed its due diligence in compliance with the Bank policies and its own
                              legislation. The following environmental and social safeguard instruments have been disclosed in-
                              country and at the InfoShop prior to appraisal: (i) the Environmental and Social Management
                              Framework (ESMF) for the mitigation of the risks associated to the expansion of electricity
                              infrastructures in the 41 communities to be selected during the implementation phase; (ii) the
                              Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) of the Ouahigouya power station; (iii) the
                              Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) of the Fada N’Gourma power station; and
                              (iv) the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) for the management of the compensation/
                              resettlement issues that may arise during the expansion of the power grid in the 41 communities.



                                                                         Page 4 of 7
                           The implementation mechanism is approved through the above-mentioned document and consists
                           in a set of technical, institutional and capacity building measures. For the power generator in
                           component 1, the construction phase measures will be incorporated in the bidding documents,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           carried out by the enterprises and monitored during the execution of the civil works by the DGE in
                           collaboration with the National EIA agency (BUNEE). In the case of component 2, as soon as
                           identified, all subprojects will be processed through the screening procedure set forth in the ESMF
                           and environmental and social measures, including the preparation of a RAP, identified and duly
                           applied.

                           The borrower’s institutional capacity in managing environmental and social safeguard measures at
                           appropriate international standards is weak and needs to be strengthened. This conclusion came
                           out of the assessment of the two bank-funded energy projects currently under completion. A
                           safeguard expert has being recruited and appointed within the PIU of the PASE. This expert will
                           continue working with the new coordination unit (DGE). Further, capacity building will be
                           provided to: (i) ensuring that the Department of Quality, Safety and Environment (DQSE) of
                           SONABEL is effective and fully functional with adequate structural resources; (ii) the Directorate
                           General of Energy (DGE) staff for the integration of environmental measures in the workplans,
                           and the monitoring of environment related issues in energy activities. To support that, a total
                           budget amounting US$ 3.4 million is earmarked to support the implementation of the safeguards
                           measures and recommendations.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The local communities in rural areas, households of Ouahigouya and Fada N’Gourma, small size
                           entrepreneurs and private sector, local authorities are interested parties of the project.
                           Representatives of these groups were consulted in a series of consultations during the preparation
                           of the safeguard instruments from October 2012 to February 2013. The draft reports of the power
                           plant ESIAs were also extensively shared with the stakeholders in February 2013. In general,
                           specific consultations were organized in the localities of Bobo Dioulasso, Fada N’Gourma,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Ouahigouya, Dédougou, Gaoua, Poura and Kampti. For the ESMF, stakeholders’ consultations
                           have been held in five out of the 12 regions covered by the project intervention; subsequent
                           consultations will take place once sites and works are finalized. The approved version of the
                           safeguard instruments have been disclosed in-country and made accessible in public area for
                           permanent consultation. During the implementation of the component, the identification of the
                           sites for the expansion of the grid will be processed participatory under the leadership of the local
                           authorities in collaboration with the DGE.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         07-May-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      24-May-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Burkina Faso                                                        23-May-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process



                                                                      Page 5 of 7
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      23-Apr-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   24-May-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Burkina Faso                                                     23-May-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?




                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Fatouma Toure Ibrahima Wa
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                  Date: 03-Jun-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Meike van Ginneken (SM)                      Date: 03-Jun-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 7 of 7
