                                                                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                            CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                            Report No.: AC6437
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Aug-2011

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                       Azerbaijan                               Project ID:                      P122812
                              Project Name:                  THIRD AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT AND CREDIT PROJECT (P122812)
                              Task Team Leader:              Rufiz Vakhid Chirag-Zade
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 30-Jan-2012                                   Estimated Board Date:            10-Jul-2012
                              Managing Unit:                 ECSS1                                    Lending Instrument:              Adaptable Program Loan
                              Sector:                        Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (60%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%), Agricultural
                                                             extension and resear ch (20%)
                              Theme:                         Rural markets (30%), Rural non-farm income generation (30%), Climate change (20%), Rural services and
                                                             infrastructure (20%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                       Amount
                                   Borrower                                                                                                                  15.00
                                   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                                     35.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                     50.00
                              Environmental Category:        F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              B. Project Objectives

                              The Project Development Objective (PDO) would be to support the development of commercial agriculture activities by enhancing key value
Public Disclosure Copy




                              chains and improving access to financial resources, extension and veterinary services and product quality.

                              C. Project Description

                              The project components comprise: (i) food safety and animal health; (ii) agri-food value chain development and support services; (iii) access to
                              credit; and (iv) project management.
                              Component 1: Food safety and animal health. This component would support the enhancement of food quality and safety systems. The existing
                              legal and regulatory framework for the system is inadequate and the roles and responsibilities are distributed amongst eight agencies in a
                              fragmented manner. The project would support: (i) review the current food safety legal and regulatory framework and advising on reforms for
                              improvement of the system and (ii) upgrading plant protection services and veterinary services. The component would finance the following
                              activities:

                              A.          TA to complete the review of the current legal and regulatory framework to identify gaps and working out options for regulatory and
                              institutional reforms. This would include the review of the current roles and responsibilities of various ministries and agencies involved in food
                              safety and working out the proposals for improving the institutional set up to rationalize the administration of the existing network of registration,
                              licensing, inspection and food safety certification. The project would work on developing appropriate food safety standards which would be
                              adapted from existing international public and private standards for various levels of the agrifood value chain. An interministerial working group
                              would be established to work closely with the TA team on reviewing the legislation. The group will be comprised of the key agencies responsible
                              for various elements of the food safety and would provide a forum for joint consultations amongst the institutions and arrive at a consensus on the
                              division of roles and responsibilities to avoid redundancy and ensure optimal efficiency.

                              B.           Upgrading the plant protection and veterinary services based on the strategic plans to be developed in collaboration with the IPPC for
                              plant health and the OIE for animal health. These agencies would undertake sectoral assessments and develop the strategic plans for upgrading
                              the state phyto-sanitary services and the state veterinary services. These assessments would identify investments required for the system-wide
                              modernization including information systems, lab diagnostics, surveillance activities, TA and training. The project would support implementation of
                              priority activities set forth in the strategic plans and which relate specifically to the selected value chain products for specific plant health and
                              animal disease control programs . This would, ultimately, demonstrate a multi-sectoral approach to systemic improvements and their impact on
                              the specific value chains.

                              C. The successful private veterinary support program under ADCP-2 would be expanded country-wide. The development of an active network of
                              private veterinarians, which would undertake some public good services, is critical to success of the livestock value chains. The project would
                              support TA, training and basic start-up packages of equipment and medications. The project would also support establishment of an accreditation
                              program for private veterinarians which could evolve into a veterinary chamber, if deemed appropriate.

                              Component 2: Agri-food value chain development and support services. This component would support improved on-farm production, post-harvest
                           technologies, processing and marketing of selected crop and livestock products in response to specific market demands. This would be achieved
                           through (i) facilitating the development of selected value chains, (ii) introduction of new seed varieties, improved animal genetics and related
                           inputs, (iii) provision of support services to farmers and agri-businesses. Specific activities will include:

                           A. Identification of high value agri-food chains. First, a comprehensive analysis of the value chains, including an assessment of production and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           market potential, will be conducted. The next step would be identification of 2-3 initial high value chains for the first stage of the project. Project
                           interventions on facilitating the first group of value chains will be analyzed and the results be reflected in the project design. This would allow for
                           learning and experimentation and to demonstrate the approach and opportunities.

                           B. Introduction of new seed varieties, improved animal genetics and related services to improve yields, productivity and competitiveness. The
                           process would be demand-driven and would require rapid identification of market needs and introduction of new seed and cultivars to address
                           these demands. Most of the activities would be implemented through the private sector, but would also require public sector research and
                           development programs. The component would facilitate the procurement of new seeds, testing and demonstration of new varieties, support
                           multiplication and distribution of new seed varieties and cultivars to producers through management improvement and technical support forseed
                           farms. Some targeted R&D activities linked to the selected commodity value chains would be required to promote optimal crop yields, to ensure
                           sustainability and accelerate the introduction of improved seed varieties and animal genetics. This would be informed by the baseline value chain
                           analysis and demand for specific commodities and produce directed by the private sector.

                           C. Support to farmers and agribusinesses. The existing Regional Advisory Centers (RACs) or other service providers would be contracted to act as
                           facilitators in developing supply chains between farmers and processors/wholesalers and to provide a comprehensive package of advisory
                           services to help farmers meet buyers' needs. This would include assistance to prepare simple product specific development plans and support to
                           implement those plans including: (i) sourcing of improved quality seed and inputs; (ii) demonstration of improved technologies; (iii) planning of
                           investments to improve post -harvest storage and handling and (iv) support in establishing contractual arrangements with traders and the market.
                           The package of support would be defined in cooperation with target agribusinesses purchasing from farmers. Support to agro-processors would
                           include TA and training in technol ogical development, investment planning (including investments which could be financed under the credit line)
                           and upgrading food safety. Possible support for strengthening of rural advisory services will also be considered.

                           Component 3: Access to Credit. Investment lending through banks would be continued with a particular focus on investments in value chain,
                           processing modernization and quality and safety. In addition, the project would possibly introduce innovative structured finance products, such as
                           transaction finance and supply chain financing, to help agribusinesses borrow to deliver under signed contracts, and develop relationships with
                           farmers, agro-processors, wholesalers, retailers, etc. TA and training will be provided to the banks and the borrowers to help them assess the
                           suitability and effectiveness of these products and mitigate the related risks. The possibility to promote development of the agricultural insurance
                           will be explored. Currently, agricultural insurance is almost non-existent in Azerbaijan, and there is low awareness of its opportunities and
                           constraints. The project would build the capacity of the local insurance sector in risk assessment and product development, and explore
                           opportunities for introduction of selected suitable crop and/or livestock insurance products.

                           Component 4: Project Management. This component will finance the administrative and operational project implementation and management
                           costs (FM, procurement, safeguards compliance, M&E), including overheads of Project Management Unit (PMU) professional staff as well as
                           support staff.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                           The project coverage is country-wide. The activities under Component 1 would cover, inter alia, the network of plant and animal health
                           laboratories. The activities to be supported under Component 3 will be implemented in all rural areas of Azerbaijan, depending on demand for
                           agricultural credits.

                            E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

                           The PMU in Baku has been established within the State Agency on Agricultural Credits (SAAC) under the Ministry of Agriculture, with responsibility
                           for the implementation of ADCP 1 and 2. The dedicated Environmental Specialist was hired under ADCP 2 before the Mid-Term Review, with
                           specific responsibilities to improve project environmental management, to ensure environmental compliance of project activities, to build capacity
                           of the PMU, participating banks (PFIs), Competitive Grants Secretariat (CGS), and to raise awareness among potential beneficiaries. The
                           Environmental Specialist has been involved in all stages of sub-projects' identification, preparation and implementation. This included regular
                           advice to credit applicants on environmental eligibility of proposed activities, assistance with preparation of credit environmental documentation,
                           support to PMU, PFIs and CGS during evaluation of sub-project proposals, regular monitoring of selected on-going projects and reporting to the
                           PMU on the status of environmental performance. The Environmental Specialist also contributed to the revisions of project manuals, as it was
                           recommended by the MTR mission, delivered a series of trainings to the PMU, PFIs, CGG and potential applicants, and prepared, as reference
                           materials, user friendly sample EMPs for typical sub-projects. This resulted in improved environmental management capacity of the implementing
                           institutions, helped in early identification and addressing of environmental issues. The ADCP 3 will have similar approach and will recruit an
                           Environmental Specialist with respective responsibilities. The Bank team will ensure that the IPM aspects of extension services receive adequate
                           coverage by project supervision.

                            F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

                           Gulana Enar Hajiyeva (ECSS3)
                           Martin Henry Lenihan (ECSS4)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                         Safeguard Policies Triggered                                                         Yes            No          TBD                                    Explanation
                         Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                                                    ✖                                    Certain activities under Component 1 (laboratory
                                                                                                                                                     upgrade) and Component 3 (agricultural credits) can
                                                                                                                                                     directly cause environmental impacts. The project is
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                                     classified as FI because Component 3 (provision of
                                                                                                                                                     agricultural credits through designated banks) is the
                                                                                                                                                     largest component. The environmental issues to be
                                                                                                                                                     dealt with, may include collection and disposal of
                                                                                                                                                     animal waste and waste water, construction related
                                                                                                                                                     issues (in case of small scale construction of rural
                                                                                                                                                     facilities), impacts related to agro-processing, and
                                                                                                                                                     impacts related to environmental management
                                                                                                                                                     practices in laboratories to be upgraded under the
                                                                                                                                                     project. These impacts are anticipated to be
                                                                                                                                                     temporary, reversible and can be avoided, minimized
                                                                                                                                                     or duly mitigated if managed appropriately.
                                                                                                                                                     Component 1 will include support for upgrading of
                                                                                                                                                     laboratories, including minor works and equipment
                                                                                                                                                     among other aspects.

                                                                                                                                                     Component 2 will support introduction of new seed
                                                                                                                                                     varieties and improved animal genetics. Although this
                                                                                                                                                     activity will be market driven and implemented in
                                                                                                                                                     selected locations only, it might be associated with a
                                                                                                                                                     risk of loss of important genetic diversity due to total
                                                                                                                                                     substitution of original varieties and species with the
                                                                                                                                                     ones to be introduced. Also, TA to be delivered under
                                                                                                                                                     Component 2 may have environmental implications
                                                                                                                                                     (for example, lead to increased use of pesticides). An
                                                                                                                                                     Environmental Management Plan will be prepared to
                                                                                                                                                     consider and address the environmental impacts and
                                                                                                                                                     risks associated with the implementation of project
                                                                                                                                                     components, as described above, and to identify
                                                                                                                                                     relevant mitigation measures to be implemented. The
                                                                                                                                                     EMP will duly incorporate project related
                                                                                                                                                     recommendations of the Pest Management Plan (see
                                                                                                                                                     below OP 4.09).
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                                     For Component 3, the EMP will serve as the
                                                                                                                                                     framework document, providing a menu of eligible
                                                                                                                                                     activities to be supported and procedures to be
                                                                                                                                                     followed to ensure their consistency with national and
                                                                                                                                                     WB environmental requirements. The EMP will also
                                                                                                                                                     define implementation arrangements and institutional
                                                                                                                                                     responsibilities as well as any activities required to
                                                                                                                                                     support/improve environmental management capacity
                                                                                                                                                     of the implementing institutions. Once prepared the
                                                                                                                                                     EMP will be disclosed by the PMU and discussed at
                                                                                                                                                     the public consultation meetings to be held in selected
                                                                                                                                                     locations of the project area.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                                                          ✖
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                                                   ✖                      No activities which may potentially impact forests will
                                                                                                                                                     be allowed under the project.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09                                                                ✖                                    This policy is triggered because, while not financing
                                                                                                                                                     directly the purchase of pesticides, the project may
                                                                                                                                                     lead to the increased use of pesticides. This will be
                                                                                                                                                     mitigated through the capacity building (trainings),
                                                                                                                                                     extension services, and specific measures provided in
                                                                                                                                                     the framework document and specific EMPs, to
                                                                                                                                                     ensure that sustainable agricultural practices are
                                                                                                                                                     introduced by credit beneficiaries.
                                                                                                                                                     The Pest Management Plan will be prepared, with a
                                                                                                                                                     dual purpose to (i) indicate how safe pesticide
                                                                                                                                                     handling and integrated pest management practices
                                                                                                                                                     will be promoted under the project, and (ii) suggest
                                                                                                                                                     strategic approach for promoting integrated pest
                                                                                                                                                     management in the country. The project related
                                                                                                                                                     recommendations of the PMP will be duly
                                                                                                                                                     incorporated into the project EMP.


                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                            Safeguard Policies Triggered                                                         Yes            No          TBD                                    Explanation
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                                                               ✖
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                                                        ✖
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                                                                  ✖                      The project activities will not require any resettlement
                                                                                                                                                        and will not be implemented in the locations which will
                                                                                                                                                        require change of land use or ownership
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                                                            ✖
                            Projects on International Waters OP/BP 7.50                                                          ✖                      The project will exclude any activities on international
                                                                                                                                                        waters
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                                                                ✖

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                           A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 13-Jan-2012
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
                              should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                The EMP will be prepared and disclosed in-country and in the Infoshop prior to project appraisal currently scheduled for January 30, 2012. As
                                noted above, the E                                MP will include aspects of pest management relevant to the project. The broader
                                draft Pest Management Plan will be prepared by project effectiveness.

                         IV. APPROVALS
                            Signed and submitted by:
                            Task Team Leader:                                Name: Rufiz Vakhid Chirag-Zade                                                                        Date: 29-Jul-2011
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                 Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                                                                             Date: 29-Jul-2011
                            Comments:
                            Sector Manager:                                  Name: Dina Umali-Deininger (SM)                                                                       Date: 02-Aug-2011
                            Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                             form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
