                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA5446
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Aug-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 25-Aug-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Indonesia                          Project ID:    P127813
                            Project Name:     Coral Reef Rehabilitation and Management Program- Coral Triangle Initiative
                                              (COREMAP-CTI) (P127813)
                            Task Team         Marea Eleni Hatziolos
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       29-Jul-2013                          Estimated   19-Nov-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: EASIS                                 Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            GEF Focal         Biodiversity
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%), Public administration-
                                              Agriculture, fishing and forestry (25%), Sub-national government administration
                                              (25%)
                            Theme(s):         Biodiversity (60%), Climate change (20%), Micro, Small and Medium
Public Disclosure Copy




                                              Enterprise support (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      66.00           Total Bank Financing:                50.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                       Financing Gap:                        0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        6.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                    50.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                        10.00
                              Total                                                                                    66.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?


                                                                      Page 1 of 16
                         2. Project Development Objective(s) / Global Environmental Objective(s)
                             A. Project Development Objective(s)
Public Disclosure Copy




                             The PDO of the overall COREMAP Adaptable Program Loan is to establish a viable,
                             decentralized management system for coral reef conservation and sustainable use in priority coral
                             reef sites in Indonesia. The PDO of this third and final phase of COREMAP (COREMAP-CTI) is
                             the same as the Global Environmental Objectve: to manage coral reef resources, associated
                             ecosystems and biodiversity in a sustainable manner for the welfare of coastal communities.
                             B. Global Environmental Objective(s)


                          3. Project Description
                         The PDO will be achieved through a three-pronged approach: (a) reinforcing the capacity of
                         communities and local government to co-manage marine resources; (b) improving the management
                         effectiveness of government in achieving biodiversity and sustainable-use objectives in the
                         administration of National Marine Parks and Marine Conservation Areas through Marine Spatial
                         Planning and co-management with Local Government; and (c) increasing incomes of project
                         beneficiaries through development of sustainable marine-based enterprises in partnerships between
                         communities, with Local Government and the private sector.. COREMAP- CTI will also contribute
                         significantly to implementation of Indonesia’s National Plan of Action for the CTI. These approaches
                         are embedded in the following four components:

                         Component 1 Institutional Strengthening for Decentralized Coral Reef Management

                         The objective of this component will institutionalize best practices, interventions, and approaches
                         developed under the two previous COREMAP Programs, and embed COREMAP institutions into
                         Village administration with support from Local Government. A screening process, based on a
                         combination of factors related to community ownership, performance, potential and geographic
Public Disclosure Copy




                         location will be used to determine which of the 357 COREMAP II Villages will participate in
                         activities under this component. This component will finance the following four sub-components
                         and associated activities:

                         •       Sub-component 1.1: Strengthening and expansion of the COREMAP approach
                         •       Sub-component 1.2: Robust ecological and socio-economic monitoring
                         •       Sub-component 1.3: Strengthening surveillance of coastal ecosystems
                         •       Sub-component 1.4: Human Resources Development (HRD)

                         Component 2 Development of Ecosystem Based Resources Management

                         The aim of this component is to bring about better management of MPAs (Marine Protected Area)
                         and create enabling conditions for sustainable use of the surrounding production seascape through
                         support for District level marine spatial planning (MSP) and zoning. It will be achieved by
                         introducing: (i) ecosystem-based management of coral reef resources using best practices in
                         Integrated Coastal Zone Management (ICZM) and MSP and Zoning as major tools for conservation
                         and sustainable use; and (ii) MMAF (Ministry of Marine and Fisheries)’s MPA Management
                         Effectiveness (ME) Tool Kit to assess progress against a pre-determined baseline. The idea is to
                         introduce a systems approach by combining MSPs with the ME tool kit in the planning and
                         implementation processes. This would have synergy -- while MSP would provide a seascape


                                                                     Page 2 of 16
                         framework for enhancing sustainability of marine-based economic development, the ME tool kit
                         would trigger constant actions for ME improvements. MSPs can be used to create opportunities for
                         compatible, sustainable use of coastal resources, thus helping to achieve conservation as well as local
Public Disclosure Copy




                         economic development objectives. This approach will be integrated into managing small-scale
                         fisheries and community rights-based approaches for capture fisheries activities.
                         This component will finance the following four sub-components and associated activities:

                         •     Sub-component 2.1: Support for Marine Spatial Planning
                         •     Sub-component 2.2: The Application of Integrated Coastal Zone Management (ICZM)
                         •     Sub-component 2.3: Management Effectiveness of MPAs and Threatened Species
                         •     Sub-component 2.4: Piloting Community Rights-Based Approach to Coastal Resources
                         Management
                         •     Sub-component 2.5: Ecosystem Approaches to Managing Small-Scale Fisheries

                         Component 3 Development of Sustainable Marine-based Economy

                         This component aims to support the development of sustainable, ecosystem-based marine enterprises
                         that reinforce links between healthy marine ecosystems and economic benefits to communities, to
                         create the economic incentives to sustain COREMAP local institutions. The focus will be on
                         developing opportunities for sustainable use of the ecosystem capture of resource rents, as
                         alternatives to unsustainable destructive- and over-fishing. This will require private sector
                         investments in the development of economic opportunities. A key aspect of this involves putting in
                         place the basic infrastructure to attract private sector investments. Equally important will be the
                         provision of production software including training and mentoring of community groups to develop
                         Sustainable Enterprise Alliances (SEA) between private sector investors and communities. The first
                         activity under this component would start with the review of provincial and district economic
                         development plans to identify potential SEAs. As a part of the activity, the project would support
                         workshops with private sector companies, districts, and villages as well as feasibility studies to form
                         SEAs. The district counterparts will be the District Agency of MMAF (Dinas KP) with support from
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the District Economic Development Boards under District Planning and Development Agency
                         (BAPPEDA). For community enterprises within MPAs this will include the MPA Management
                         Boards.

                         •       Sub-component 3.1: Development of Basic Infrastructure
                         •       Sub-component 3.2: Development of Sustainable Enterprise Alliances (SEA)

                         The basic infrastructure and capital assets to be financed under this component are all expected to be
                         classified as Category B type investments. The Project will not finance any Category A type civil
                         works.

                         Component 4: Project Management, Coordination and Learning

                         The project will support all implementing agencies in administration and financial aspects to meet
                         the World Bank’s requirements and Indonesian government regulations. The project will emphasize
                         the coordination of program implementation with the Asian Development Bank, LIPI (Lembaga Ilmu
                         Pengetahuan Indonesia/the Indonesian Institute of Sciences), and the Sea Partnership Program as co-
                         executing partners of COREMAP-CTI, and other sources of technical assistance, such as the CCRES
                         (Capturing Coral Reef and related Ecosystem Services) Project—a GEF financed WB regional
                         knowledge project under the International Waters (IW) Strategic Program Framework for Scaling Up

                                                                      Page 3 of 16
                         Investment Partnerships in the Large Marine Ecosystems of East Asia. To mainstream the
                         COREMAP approach, the project will promote learning networks to disseminate innovation and
                         lessons learned across COREMAP sites as well as through CCRES and the GEF IW: Learn websites.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         As shown in Tables 1 and 2 below, the project’s geographical coverage would include five provinces
                         and seven districts as well as seven Marine Protected Areas (MPAs). As COREMAP-II experiences
                         show, destructive and unsustainable fishing are carried out not only by local villagers, but also by
                         fishers outside of the target villages. Awareness raising activities would target general public and
                         small-mid size reef fishermen in key strategic ports as well as middle-men and aggregators in the live
                         coral reef fish trade.
                         Table 1. Project Target Marine Protected Areas
                         No       Conservation Centre       Marine Protected Areas
                         1        National Marine Conservation Center (BKKPN) Kupang TWP Padaido (Biak)
                         2                 SAP Raja Ampat
                         3                 SAP Waigeo - Raja Ampat (West)
                         4                 TWP Kapoposang, (Lesser Sunda Is)
                         5                 TNP Sawu Sea
                         6                 SAP Aru - southeastern part
                         7                 TWP Banda (Moluccas)


                         Table 2. Project Target Districts and Marine Conservation Areas
                         No      Province                  District                      MCA
                         1         South Sulawesi               Pangkep District Kapoposang
                         2                Selayar District
                         3         Southeast Sulawesi       Buton District
                         4                     Wakatobi District
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5        East Nusa Tengarra        Sikka District
                         6        Papua                    Biak Numfor District
                         7        West Papua               Raja Ampat District

                         Initial screening of the participating districts using the WB’s IP distribution mapping (2010) and also
                         experience of COREMPAP II have shown that there are a number of indigenous groups in
                         COREMAP-CTI districts, particularly in Kabupaten Buton and Wakatobi (see Table 3 below on the
                         Distribution of IP in COREMAP-CTI Project Locations). In both these 2 districts Bajo people reside.
                         The Bajo are an ethnic minority who live on the sea (as itinerant seafarers) or in coastal areas right
                         on the water, and are, thus, highly dependent on the sea for their livelihoods and food. In Kabupaten
                         Sikka, Biak and Raja Ampat, there are also indigenous groups. Based on the IP mapping, all the
                         indigenous groups in Kabupaten Sikka and Biak live in highland areas, while in Kabupaten Raja
                         Ampat, the groups reside in the coastal area. During project implementation, the PMO/project
                         implementer will conduct further screening in the defined project area for the presence of indigenous
                         peoples/ethnic minority and their vulnerability.

                         Table 3. Distribution of IP in the COREMAP-CTI Project Locations (Source: WB IP mapping
                         (2010))

                         Table 3. Distribution of IP in the COREMAP-CTI Project Locations (Source: WB IP mapping


                                                                      Page 4 of 16
                         (2010))

                         No.        District (Province) Sub-district             Village       Name of IP
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1.         Pangkep (South Sulawesi)        Pangkep            No IP (or data no available)
                         2.        Selayar (South Sulawesi)          Selayar         No IP (or data no available)

                         3.           Sikka (East Nusa Tenggara)               Kec. Paga             Ranggarasi
                         Lio (highland)
                                                                         Kec. Mego                Wolodhesa           No name
                         (highland)
                                                   Liakutu                   No name (highland)
                                                        Parabubu          Lio Mego (inland)
                                                 Kec. Lela        Sikka No name (highland)
                                                  -         Wukur                           No name (highland)
                                           Kec. Bola       Hale           No name (highland)
                                                   Egon Gahar                No name (highland)
                                           Kec Talibura Natarmage                       No name (highland)
                                                   Pruda             No name (highland)
                                                   Werang                      No name (highland)
                                                   Talibura       No name (highland)
                                                   Darat Gunung             No name (highland)
                                                   Hikong No name (highland)
                                            Kec. Waigete Watudiran       No name (highland)
                                                             Runut       No name (highland)
                                             Kec. Maumere            Samparong     No name (highland)

                         4. Buton (Southeast Sulawesi) Kec. Lasalimu          Bonelalo                    No name
                         (coastal)
                                       Kec. South Lasalimu        Metanauwe        No name (coastal)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                    Kumbewaha
                                                     Umalaoge          Malaoge (inland)
                                                  Lasalimu                       No name (coastal)
                                                 Kec. Pasar Wajo       Holimombo        No name (coastal)
                                               Wakaokili       Kaliwuliwu (inland)
                                       Kec. Kapontori Todanga            Buton (inland)
                                       Kec. Lakudo                Lolibu           Malimpano (inla nd)
                                                      Kec. Telaga Raya             Kokoe          No name (coastal)

                         5.        Wakatobi (Southeast Sulawesi) Kec. Binongko              Waloindi No name (coastal)
                                                 Wali No name (coastal)
                                                 Kec Tomia              Lamanggau                            No name (coastal)

                         6.      Raja Ampat (West Papua)     Kec. Misool    Waigama                                   Biak
                         (coastal)
                                              Kec. Samate         Samate        Biak (coastal)
                                                     Yesawai           Biak (coastal)

                                           Kec. Waigeo Barat        Gag                     Biak (coastal)
                                           Kec. Waigeo Utara          Andey                Biak (coastal)

                                                                       Page 5 of 16
                         7.     Biak (Papua)     Kec. Biak Utara              Wonabraidi Biak (highland)
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Juan Martinez (EASIS)
                         Ninin K. Dewi (EASIS)
                         Cary Anne Cadman (AFTSG)
                         Dennie Stenly Mamonto (EASIS)

                         6. Safeguard Policies            Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/     Yes                The environmental impact of the project is not
                         BP 4.01                                           expected to be significant, as the overall objective
                                                                           of the project is to enhance biodiversity
                                                                           (including coral reef and associated ecosystems)
                                                                           and the welfare of communities through better
                                                                           management. The Project aims to achieve this
                                                                           through a community-based approach, which by
                                                                           its nature involves communities in both planning
                                                                           and implementation of activities.
                                                                           Any impacts associated directly with the
                                                                           proposed activities are judged to be minor to
                                                                           moderate, reversible, and site-specific. Mitigation
                                                                           measures are achieved through community
                                                                           participation and community-based subproject
                                                                           management. It was noted that the project team is
                                                                           updating the project operations manual, reflecting
                                                                           the most recent lessons of experience, in
                                                                           particular those relating to both environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                           and social safeguards.

                                                                           However, to minimize the likelihood and scope of
                                                                           any minor environmental impacts that may result
                                                                           from the proposed activities, the project provides
                                                                           a negative list and environmental checklist as
                                                                           mitigation tools.

                                                                           If the screening process suggests that a negative
                                                                           environmental impact might result, the project
                                                                           will follow the guidance in the ESSF and project
                                                                           operation manual to prepare the relevant
                                                                           safeguards instruments. These include, for
                                                                           example, an environmental management/
                                                                           monitoring plan (EMP) or Statement Letter of
                                                                           Ability in Environmental Management and
                                                                           Monitoring.




                                                                   Page 6 of 16
                                                                     Further improvements to mitigate minor impacts
                                                                     include better site management for any civil
                                                                     works and continuous environmental awareness
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     programs for communities.

                                                                     An important precautionary measure is to ensure
                                                                     the implementation of high quality, basic civil
                                                                     engineering procedures. Mitigation measures for
                                                                     this potential impact include training modules and
                                                                     procedures, the dissemination of environmental
                                                                     codes of practice and the development of criteria
                                                                     for design evaluation based on basic civil
                                                                     engineering standard and construction practices.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes            COREMAP-CTI project activities will include
                                                                     support for enhancing management effectiveness
                                                                     of seven existing Marine Protected Areas (MPAs)
                                                                     to protect critical habitat, as well as for seven
                                                                     district level Marine Conservation Areas which
                                                                     have already been demarcated in Eastern
                                                                     Indonesia. The overall impacts on Natural
                                                                     Habitats as a result of Project interventions are
                                                                     expected be highly positive. Combining a
                                                                     community-based approach with capacity
                                                                     building for management and protection of coral
                                                                     reefs and associated ecosystems at all levels of
                                                                     government—from national to village level--the
                                                                     conservation interventions are expected to be
                                                                     sustained.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     The project will not finance sub-projects to be
                                                                     undertaken in prohibited, critical natural habitats,
                                                                     nor will it result in the significant conversion of
                                                                     natural habitats. The main activities in no-take
                                                                     zones and sensitive habitats, would be patrolling
                                                                     and maintenance activities. No extractive
                                                                     activities would be allowed. This is already
                                                                     clearly defined in the negative list of the project.
                                                                     The project operation manual will also provide
                                                                     specifications on the management of small
                                                                     construction works to avoid any potential
                                                                     degradation or conversion of natural habitats on a
                                                                     small scale.

                                                                     The impacts of access restriction to natural
                                                                     habitats will be mitigated in the Land Acquisition
                                                                     and Resettlement Policy Framework (LARPF),
                                                                     which also includes process framework for the
                                                                     access restriction.



                                                             Page 7 of 16
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No              The project will not finance activities that would
                                                                         involve significant conversion or degradation of
                                                                         critical forest areas or related critical natural
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         habitats as defined under the policy. No net loss
                                                                         of mangroves would occur as a result of project
                                                                         activities, to the contrary, the project would
                                                                         support management interventions to protect the
                                                                         ecological integrity of these systems and allow
                                                                         communities to benefit from the ecosystem
                                                                         services they provide. Among the alternative
                                                                         livelihood activities to be explored under
                                                                         COREMAP II would be the possibility of
                                                                         developing carbon offsets for protecting or
                                                                         enhancing (through reforestation) carbon stored
                                                                         in mangroves (i.e., Blue Carbon). If successful in
                                                                         generating revenue streams from the sale of
                                                                         Carbon Emissions Reduction Credits, such Blue
                                                                         Carbon markets would create added incentives
                                                                         for communities to invest in protecting these
                                                                         valuable coastal wetlands.
                                                                         The ESSF contains guidance on how to address
                                                                         considerations under this policy should the
                                                                         alternative livelihoods explored lead to
                                                                         reforestation or re-vegetation activities, etc.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No              The project will not procure any pesticides, nor
                                                                         will any use of pesticides result from the project.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No              No activities affecting archeological,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BP 4.11                                         paleontological, historical, religious, or unique
                                                                         natural values as defined under the policy will be
                                                                         eligible for support under the Project. Standard
                                                                         appropriate clauses will be included in all
                                                                         construction contracts regarding the procedures to
                                                                         be followed in the event of “chance finds? of
                                                                         culturally significant artifacts.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes             The project could have an IP/ethnic minority
                                                                         presence in some of the villages selected for
                                                                         project activity, such as inKabupaten Raja
                                                                         Ampat, Buton and Kabupaten Wakatobi. In
                                                                         Kabupaten Buton and Wakatobi, , there are Bajo
                                                                         peoples who live on the sea or in coastal areas
                                                                         and depend highly on the marine resources.
                                                                         Findings from COREMAP II indicate that no
                                                                         adverse impacts on IPs were identified in the
                                                                         course of the Project’s implementation. The
                                                                         Project will need to ensure the involvement of
                                                                         these indigenous groups, particularly in areas



                                                                 Page 8 of 16
                                                                        where the IP groups are a minority. The project
                                                                        will ensure that information reaches these IP
                                                                        groups and they get an equal opportunity to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        benefit from activities initiated by the project.

                                                                        An Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework
                                                                        (IPPF) has been developed to mitigate any
                                                                        adverse impacts and to help ensure that
                                                                        Indigenous Peoples and Ethnic Minorities will
                                                                        actually benefit from the project. Since
                                                                        COREMAP-CTI will strengthen zoning and
                                                                        support needed small scale infrastructure to
                                                                        attract private investment in ecotourism activities,
                                                                        there will be opportunities for Bajo people and
                                                                        other minorities in these locations to take part in
                                                                        alternative livelihood to fishing which would
                                                                        generate more benefits and be more sustainable.

                                                                        The IPPF is embedded in the Environmental and
                                                                        Social Safeguard Framework (ESSF).
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes             The project does not anticipate any significant
                         4.12                                           land acquisition or resettling any people. Any
                                                                        piece of land that is acquired will be done through
                                                                        voluntary donations, such as was the case in
                                                                        COREMAP II.If there is a land acquisition, it will
                                                                        be on a small scale and be acquired on a
                                                                        voluntary basis with willing seller and willing
                                                                        buyer. The project will keep a record of all such
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        transactions and also ensure that no individual
                                                                        will be negatively affected by such land
                                                                        acquisition/land donation. Requirements for
                                                                        small-scale land acquisition as well as land
                                                                        donation are provided in the Land Acquisition
                                                                        and Resettlement Policy Framework (LARPF)

                                                                        Component 2 will support marine spatial
                                                                        planning at the District level, including zoning.
                                                                        This is expected to interface with Village level
                                                                        MPAs established under COREMAP II. Any
                                                                        access restrictions that may result from zoning
                                                                        marine space for specific uses—and thus
                                                                        prohibiting fishing or aquaculture in sensitive
                                                                        areas-- triggers the policy. Similarly, the project
                                                                        will pilot community rights-based approach to
                                                                        fisheries management in two locations. This will
                                                                        involve formalizing traditional use rights of
                                                                        communities to grant them exclusive rights to fish



                                                                Page 9 of 16
                                  in the fishing grounds adjacent to them, thus
                                  closing these areas to outside fishers and allowing
                                  these communities to harvest the “spillover?
Public Disclosure Copy




                                  benefits from the No-Take Zones they have
                                  voluntarily set up.

                                  To offset any lost revenue that might result in the
                                  near term from such restrictions, as well as from
                                  the introduction of good fisheries management
                                  practices, including bringing overall fishing effort
                                  in line with environmental carrying capacity, the
                                  Project will support an alternative livelihoods
                                  program under Component 3. The Project will
                                  facilitate access by affected fishers to such
                                  programs. Other options of compensation will
                                  also be considered upon consultation with the
                                  affected people.

                                  For example, through a participatory process
                                  (participatory framework); community members
                                  will ensure that revenue streams from any access
                                  restrictions are fully and sustainably mitigated in
                                  line with OP 4.12. If communities choose to
                                  engage and endorse access restrictions, it is
                                  anticipated that losses will be compensated by
                                  one or more available alternatives such as sharing
                                  in revenue streams from the marine park, gaining
                                  wages from employment in the marine protected
Public Disclosure Copy




                                  area and related activities, value addition and sale
                                  of non-timber forest products, including
                                  alternative livelihood development activities
                                  identified during the participatory process. These
                                  in line with the OP 4.12 Involuntary
                                  Resettlement, which defines project-affected
                                  persons as anyone who (a) through involuntary
                                  taking of land, is relocated or loses shelter, loses
                                  assets or access to assets, of loses incomes
                                  sources of means of livelihood, or (b) suffers
                                  adverse impacts on livelihood because of
                                  involuntary restriction of access to legally
                                  designated parks and/or protected areas. Such
                                  persons are to be informed about their options
                                  and rights and consulted on and offered choices
                                  among feasible resettlement alternatives. In the
                                  case of access restrictions, the natures of the
                                  restrictions and of the measures to mitigate their
                                  adverse impacts are to be determined with the



                         Page 10 of 16
                                                                               participation of the affected groups

                                                                               A Land Acquisition and Resettlement Policy
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               Framework (LARPF) which also covers the
                                                                               Process Framework to mitigate any impacts due
                                                                               to land acquisition activities as well as the access
                                                                               restriction to natural resources has been prepared
                                                                               by the MMAF. This LARPF is part of the
                                                                               Environmental and Social Safeguard Framework
                                                                               (ESSF) which has been consulted with key
                                                                               stakeholders and been disclosed in the MMAF
                                                                               and LIPI website as well as the InfoShop.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No               The project will not finance construction or
                                                                               rehabilitation of any dams, nor will it rely on the
                                                                               performance of an existing dam or a dam under
                                                                               construction.
                            Projects on International          No               There are no known project components
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                               involving international waterways as defined
                                                                               under the policy. None of the project sites will be
                                                                               in the international water boundaries.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 The project is not located in any known disputed
                            7.60                                               areas as defined under the policy.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Public Disclosure Copy




                               The COREMAP-CTI aims in general to strengthen the capacity of institutions in conserving and
                              managing coral reef ecosystems and its resources, it also aims to empower coastal communities to
                              sustainably manage their coral reefs and associated ecosystems, and through such efforts, enhance
                              the welfare of these communities.

                             This project will not create any large-scale, significant, or irreversible environmental or social
                             impacts, therefore the safeguard issues and impacts associated directly with the proposed project
                             are minor to moderate , reversible, and site-specific. Mitigation measures are carried out through
                             community participation and community-based sub-project management. The Safeguards aspects
                             are contained in the Environmental and Social Safeguards Framework (ESSF), which is an annex
                             to the project operations manual (OM). The ESSF was developed to reflect recent lessons in
                             implementing environmental and social safeguards and the set of environmental code of practice
                             for COREMAP-CTI.

                             Environment side. The experiences from the COREMAP II projects have shown that there are no
                             significant, irreversible negative environmental impacts resulting from activities implemented
                             under the project. Any adverse environmental impacts are typically site specific and small in scale.
                             Typically, such impacts can be managed locally by adopting screening criteria, good engineering
                             designs and construction practices. This will also be the case for COREMAP-CTI, which follows


                                                                      Page 11 of 16
                          the same principles as its predecessors. Nonetheless, because of the national scope of the program
                          and its operation in environmentally and socially sensitive areas, it is essential to ensure that
                          sufficient attention is paid to the application of safeguard guidelines and to ensure adequate
Public Disclosure Copy




                          monitoring and oversight of these safeguards.

                          On the social side, the anticipated impacts are the zoning and associated activities of component 2
                          that may limit access by the community, including indigenous peoples, to areas previously utilized
                          for income generating activities and cultural rites. In the introduction of some alternative
                          livelihood activities, land acquisition may be inevitable. However, it will be small scale, as these
                          are mostly CDD subprojects with small scale infratructure. All these impacts are manageable and
                          will be mitigated with measures provided in the environmental and social safeguard framework
                          that has been prepared. There are no potential significant or irreversible impacts anticipated.

                           The COREMAP-CTI project will retain an Environmental Category B classification
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            No long term adverse impact due to project activities is envisaged.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            N/A.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            The Environmental and Social Safeguard Framework (ESSF) has been prepared to set out
                           procedures required by COREMAP-CTI to minimize adverse environmental and social impacts
                           that may occur due to implementation of this project and any of its subprojects. The Framework
                           provides a negative list as well as specific environmental and social screening procedures for each
                           subproject. The ESSF document covers the Environmental Management Framework, Land
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Acquisition and Resettlement Policy Framework (LARPF)which includes a process framework
                           for access restriction, and an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF).

                          The Land Acquisition and Resettlement Policy Framework (LARPF) establishes principles and
                          procedures to guide project implementers in dealing with land acquisition activities, including
                          access restrictions which may result from activities in Component 2, related to marine spatial
                          planning and zoning. However, given that the area of No Take is typically quite small relative to
                          the overall management area to be zoned and that traditional fishing is typically allowed in areas
                          surrounding a No-Take Zone, it is not anticipated that any major access restrictions will result.
                          Should economic displacement occur as a result of zoning or reduction in fishing effort, alternative
                          livelihood or other compensation options will be available.

                          The LARPF guides the preparation of action plans (LARAP) for any subprojects involving land
                          acquisition/land donation as well as access restriction. The LARAP will provide a mitigation plan
                          to ensure that the affected people, those whose lands are acquired or those who lose access to
                          natural resources (e.g., fishing areas), will not be worse-off due to project activities and that they
                          will be consulted during subproject preparation and implementation.

                          The Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF). Provides general principles and procedures
                          that will be applied during subproject preparation and implementation. The IPPF requires


                                                                     Page 12 of 16
                           subprojects that will adversely affect indigenous peoples/ethnic minority to conduct a social
                           assessment which will become a main input to the formulation of an Indigenous Peoples Plan
                           (IPP) during subproject preparation. If the indigenous peoples or ethnic minority are the main/
Public Disclosure Copy




                           only ethnic group in the subproject area and are the main target beneficiaries, a stand alone IPP
                           may not be required. The process to ensure that the Indigenous Peoples (IP) are included as
                           beneficiaries and participate in any activities will be incorporated in the subproject design.

                           Rapid Social Assessment has been carried out during project preparation to see the potential
                           impact of the COREMAP-CTI to the community. The result of the RSA are that: i) IP exists in
                           several coastal villages of the COREMAP-CTI sites, particularly in 3 districts that are Buton,
                           Wakatobi, and Raja Ampat. ii) Gender participation in COREMAP II improved in many districts
                           where participation of women has increased not only in program activities (mainly in meetings),
                           but also in resource management. However, their capacity to develop alternative sources of
                           income was limited to food production; iii) Social conflicts may also occur during implementation.


                           Borrower capacity
                           To ensure that the safeguard issues are adequately monitored, 2 (two) persons will be assigned as
                           safeguard focal points at MMAF. They will be responsible for ensuring the implementation of
                           ESSF for any subprojects. Each district PIU (Project Implementation Unit) and the BKKPN in
                           Kupang will also assign a safeguard focal point, whose job will be to screen each activity against
                           the safeguard screening checklist as well as prepare the action plans (EMP/LARAP/IPP), as
                           necessary.

                           The capacity of the MMAF to plan and implement the impact mitigation measures as described in
                           the ESSF needs to be strengthened. Although in COREMAP II there was an Environmental and
                           Social Impact Management Framework (ESIMF) to address environmental and social safeguard
                           issues, the Framework was not followed well during project implementation. Specifically, no one
                           in the project implementing unit was assigned primary responsibility for overseeing and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           monitoring safeguards implementation. This has been addressed in COREMAP-CTI with a
                           specific budget allocated to fund Safeguards staff and Safeguards training for staff assigned to
                           monitor safeguards at national and district levels. Training in the implementation of the ESSF will
                           be part of the curriculum.

                           As part of the strengthening of the Borrower’s capacity, during project preparation of COREMAP-
                           CTI, the World Bank’s safeguard specialist has intensively worked with the MMAF and its
                           preparation consultant to prepare the ESSF. The 3 consecutive consultations of this ESSF to the
                           stakeholders has also provided better understanding of the MMAF and the PIUs of participating
                           districts to the environmental and social safeguard issues.

                           Capacity building such as training for the project institutions, i.e PMO, PIU, inc luding village
                           level institution is required during the project preparation or at the early stage of project
                           implementation, whenthe implementers are going to propose subprojects for financing.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The primary stakeholder of the project will be fishers and remote coastal households within the
                           project target districts and villages, which will be the beneficiaries of the project. They will benefit
                           directly from the project’s support in developing local institutions and marine-based natural


                                                                      Page 13 of 16
                           resources management, as well as the project’s investments in developing production partnerships
                           with the private sector and basic production infrastructure. The project will also access people
                           outside of the project target villages through awareness raising and communication to curb
Public Disclosure Copy




                           destructive fishing and other reef degrading practices. The project will also build the capacity of
                           government staff with updated skills and knowledge, including best available practices, in
                           fisheries and coral reef management, integrated coastal zone management and marine spatial
                           planning. This will involve a range of training, from short courses and training of trainers in
                           extension, to postgraduate degree level (Masters and PhD) training and collaborative research.

                           As part of the project preparation, consultation with stakeholders on the ESSF has been conducted
                           in Sorong (July 2 &3), Makassar (July 5 & 6) and in Jakarta (July 23). The consultations were
                           attended by NGOs, district PIUs, community representatives, village institutions (LPSTK)
                           members and consultants of COREMAP 2 and academia. Comments and inputs from the
                           consultations have been incorporated into the draft ESSF.

                           The Framework provides procedures for consultation with the affected people. During project
                           implementation, relevant action plans (e.g., EMP, LARAP, IPP) for each subproject will be
                           prepared and consulted on with affected people, including with Indigenous Peoples as set out in
                           the IPPF.

                           The ESSF document has been disclosed in Bahasa Indonesia on MMAF’s and COREMAP’s
                           website: www.kkji.kp3k.kkp.go.id and www.coremap.or.id The ESSF English version has also
                           been disclosed and is also available through the Bank’s Infoshop.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        24-Jul-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     25-Jul-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Indonesia                                                          26-Jul-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        24-Jul-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     25-Jul-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Indonesia                                                          26-Jul-2013
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        24-Jul-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     25-Jul-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Indonesia                                                          26-Jul-2013
                           Comments:

                                                                    Page 14 of 16
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?


                                                                    Page 15 of 16
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Marea Eleni Hatziolos
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name:                                              Date:
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Nathan M. Belete (SM)                        Date: 25-Aug-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    Page 16 of 16
