                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSC4037

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Aug-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 20-Aug-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Congo, Republic of                Project ID:       P143849
                            Project Name:       Health Sector Project (P143849)
                            Task Team           Hadia Nazem Samaha
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           28-Oct-2013                       Estimated         16-Jan-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      AFTHW                             Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Health (100%)
                            Theme(s):           Child health (25%), Other communicable diseases (25%), Health system
                                                performance (25%), Population and reproductive health (25%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    120.00                       Total Bank Financing:          10.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                                  Financing Gap:                   0.00
                              Financing Source                                                               Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                              100.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                      10.00
                              Health Results-based Financing                                                   10.00
                              Total                                                                           120.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           22.      The project development objective (PDO) of the proposed operation is to increase the
                           utilization and quality of maternal and child health services in targeted rural and urban areas of the
                           Republic of Congo (ROC).
                           C. Project Description
                         The project will test innovations initially in 6 out of the 12 Departments of ROC (the 6 to be
                         identified during pre-appraisal) and will scale up those that are proven successful during the life of
                         the project. The project will comprise the following components.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Improvement of access and quality of health services at health facilities through
                         performance-based financing (PBF)

                         This component would be supported by the Government’s own funds, IDA resources and a grant
                         from the Health Results Innovation Trust Fund (HRITF). It will finance PBF implementation through
                         the contracting of performance-purchasing agencies (PPAs). This support would have the following
                         two dimensions:

                         Subcomponent 1.1: Performance payments to health facilities

                         Building on the ongoing experience with PBF, grants will be paid to health facilities based on the: (i)
                         number of maternal and child health (MCH) services delivered to the targeted population; and (ii) the
                         technical quality of those services. Facility payments will be made quarterly after the volume of
                         services and the quality of care have been verified and certified by an independent performance
                         purchasing agency (PPA).

                         Due to challenges encountered in improving hospital performance, various options to strengthen
                         hospital management will be explored. Such options could include, in addition to PBF, contracting
                         with individual managers or firms, or recruitment of hospital management consultants. For now
                         tertiary hospitals will not be part of this project.

                         More than half of the population of Congo lives in two large urban centers: Brazzaville and Pointe
                         Noire. Assessments in urban areas document the widespread availability of both public and private
                         curative services. Both types of providers are underutilized and the coverage of preventive services
Public Disclosure Copy




                         remains lower than expected. The project will explore various options, including: (i) subsidizing
                         curative and preventive services through PBF (lowering out of pocket costs to clients); (b)
                         contracting with private for profit providers to provide essential services (through PBF); and (c)
                         contracting with non-state actors (Performance-Based Contracting) to increase coverage of
                         preventive and promotive services in specified geographical parts of the cities.

                         Subcomponent 1.2: Support to PBF implementation and supervision

                         Given the technical challenges of PBF implementation and the shortage of technical capacity and
                         human resources within the MOH, the project proposes to identify international NGOs with
                         demonstrated experience with PBF to act as the PPAs. This subcomponent will finance activities
                         related to PBF implementation and supervision. The graph below describes the potential institutional
                         and administrative arrangements that will be put in place for the PBF activities.

                         Component 2: Strengthen Health Care Financing Policies

                         Sub-component 2.1 Introducing fee-waivers for the poor and fee exemptions for selected services

                         Financial barriers to access services are high in ROC. There is evidence that utilization of basic
                         maternal and child health services is low and this may be attributable in part to the pervasive
                         presence of user fees in all public facilities.

                         This sub-component will draw on the experience of the Social Protection Program that is also under
Public Disclosure Copy




                         preparation, to identify households that will benefit from fee waivers. However, alternative
                         definitions of target groups to tackle observed differences in health status and in effective access to
                         health services may be considered. As is shown in Tables 1 and 2, above, access to some key
                         maternal and child health services is bi-modal, with those in the two or three bottom quintiles
                         exhibiting rather similar and lower access to services, and the top two quintiles exhibiting similar but
                         higher access. The sub-component will also promote the adoption of fee exemptions for selected
                         health services with high externalities and which are under-valued by the population. These
                         exemptions will hold for all patients, and not just for the poor. For example, some preventive
                         services for mothers and children and obstetric services may be included in the list of exempted
                         services.


                         Sub-component 2.2 Improving budget allocations

                         A preliminary review of budget allocations by the Ministry of Health (MOH) to the departments
                         suggests that certain inequalities would be overcome if the MOH adopted an explicit budget
                         allocation formula. An allocation formula or criterion could consider the department’s population,
                         the per capita cost of the minimum and complementary benefit packages, the degree of remoteness,
                         poverty, and other variables. The project will support the assessment of resource allocation, carry out
                         fiscal space analysis.

                         This sub-component will also include a debate with government officials and other stakeholders
                         about the appropriateness of the government’s current budget allocation to the health sector, the
                         potential need to expand it, and the sources of any such expansion (the question of fiscal space arises
                         in this context). As part of this sub-component, the preparation stage of the project will support a
                         critical review of the existing primary and complementary benefit packages, help revise their
Public Disclosure Copy




                         contents and cost out these packages. The review and revisions of the primary benefit package will
                         aim at ensuring that the services that are selected include those with the highest potential for
                         accelerating the country’s achievement of MDGs 1, 4, 5 and 6.

                         Sub-Component 2.3: Assessment of health insurance options.

                         The government of ROC has embarked on the path to reach universal coverage through health
                         insurance. A report written by Congolese policy makers who visited Rwanda and Ghana describes
                         health insurance in these countries and makes recommendations about how health insurance should
                         be structured in ROC. A second document takes the recommendations from that report to propose in
                         draft form a law for the establishment of universal health insurance in ROC. This sub-component
                         will provide technical assistance to the government of ROC to further refine the draft law while
                         discussing the feasibility of such a reform, looking at different options, and a timeline for
                         implementation. A health insurance experiment in one department of the country may be considered
                         and will be addressed during appraisal.


                         Component 3: Strengthen the Governance of the national Health System and support the
                         implementation of the project
                         Performance frameworks will be introduced at the health district (Circonscriptions Socio Sanitaire -
                         CSS) level, at the department (Direction Départementale de Santé, DDS) level, and in selected
                         Ministry of Health departments at the central level. Thi s component will also include technical
Public Disclosure Copy




                         assistance to strengthen specific functions such as the Health Management Information System
                         (HMIS) and Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) capacity. Furthermore, this component will also
                         include the creation of a PBF technical unit which will be merged with the project implementation
                         unit at the MOH. Finally, this component contains the third party firm which will carry out surveys
                         and counter-verify PBF performance. An impact evaluation, financed through the HRITF will be
                         used to test the effectiveness of the innovations.


                         Sub-component 3.1: Health Management Information System (HMIS) Strengthening

                         Shortcomings in ROCs health information system do not allow for proper monitoring and evaluation
                         (M&E) of health sector performance. Inaccurate and incomplete HMIS data combined with
                         infrequent household surveys and the absences of health facility survey data to assess quality of care,
                         mean that policy makers do not have the information they need to make evidence based decisions.
                         This sub-component will strengthen the HMIS system, support the conduct of two demographic and
                         health surveys, and finance two rounds of health facility surveys (using the Service Delivery
                         Indicators approach pioneered by the Bank). This will be accomplished by a contract with an
                         External Evaluation Agency (EEA). The EEA will also include (a) monitoring and evaluation of
                         Component 1; (b) strengthening of the recipient's capacity to carry out data collection and analysis;
                         and (c) help carry out the impact evaluation.


                         Sub component 3.2 Capacity Building and Technical Assistance to strengthen health sector

                         This sub-component support the development and implementation of a capacity building program in
                         ROC aimed at high and medium-level policy-makers from the central MOH, other ministries (such
Public Disclosure Copy




                         as Finance, Planning, and Economy), senior staff from the health departments. The training will
                         adopts the form and methods of WBI’s Flagship Program on Health Systems Strengthening, with a
                         thematic emphasis on the most pressing policy issues in the country, such as pharmaceutical policy,
                         human resource policies, PBF, benefit packages, and universal health coverage. Management
                         training for facility managers and senior level technical staff would include training on how to
                         implement PBF (performance frameworks, verification, contract management etc.), human resource
                         policies, financial management, pharmaceuticals management and distribution, and monitoring and
                         evaluation among others. In addition to management training, it will be imperative to train staff at all
                         levels on clinical protocols; this training will include doctors, nurses, auxiliary workers, mid-wives
                         and traditional providers (as necessary). This training would be based on updated protocols.

                         Since PBF is a new approach being utilized in ROC, sufficient attention will be paid to ensuring that
                         health sector staff at all levels are well versed in the topic and that they have the requisite skills to
                         implement this project. This area of capacity building will include training on contract management
                         and verification, performance frameworks, information and communication technology and
                         evaluation among others.

                         Finally, this sub-component will develop activities and interventions that would help address the
                         issue of availability, quality, and costs of drugs in health facilities
                           Sub-component 3.3: Technical and Management Support to the implementation of the project
Public Disclosure Copy




                           At the central level, a national technical PBF unit will guide PBF implementation to draw lessons
                           and policy implications for the health sector. It should be chaired by the Director of Cabinet of the
                           MOH and includes key directorates of the MOH, the Ministry of Planning and Economy, the
                           Ministry of Finance, and representatives from the donor community. The PBF technical unit will
                           oversee the implementation of PBF, document the lessons learned from various initiatives of PBF in
                           the country, provide guidance to the PIU and PPA, and generate policy direction for the
                           institutionalization of PBF in ROC.

                           The National Technical PBF Unit will be in charge of: (i) supporting the regulatory function that the
                           Ministry has to assume in PBF implementation, (ii) monitoring the progress of PBF implementation
                           in the field, and promoting ownership of PBF by the Ministry, and (iii) exploring ways and
                           mechanisms to institutionalizing PBF as a national policy in ROC and to scaling up PBF beyond the
                           6 initial departments. Finally, the PBF unit will also support the coordination, implementation and
                           management of the project.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           No civil works will be undertaken and no adverse environmental or social impacts are expected. The
                           project does not require any land acquisition leading to involuntary resettlement and/or restrictions of
                           access to resources and livelihood. Thus, the project is expected to have a positive impact for all
                           direct and indirect beneficiaries, including vulnerable groups such as children, women and the poor
                           who are the main target beneficiaries of the project.

                           However, this will be a nationwide project and hence part of the population targeted will include
                           Indigenous Peoples (IPs). The expected impacts are positive as the IPs do not have access to quality
                           care and hence the project will ensure that quality free care is provided to them to ensure a better
Public Disclosure Copy




                           health outcome. An Indigenous Peoples Health Needs Assessment has been conducted as part of the
                           current PDSS (P106851) project will be used as a starting point in developing the Indigenous Peoples
                           Plan Framework (IPPF).
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The country has continued to build its capacities on safeguards management during the
                           implementation of several World Bank financed projects. The Ministry of Health will be in charge of
                           implementing the project; the MOH is familiar with World Bank safeguards policies since they have
                           collaborated on several World Bank projects including the current health project, PDSS, which is still
                           active.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Antoine V. Lema (AFTCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The project has minimal environmental impacts
                           BP 4.01                                               that shall be governed by national and local
                                                                                 laws and procedures. However, the increased
                                                                                                                                 use of medical clinics may generate more
                                                                                                                                 medical waste.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 A National Waste Management Plan will be
                                                                                                                                 updated/prepared by appraisal for review by the
                                                                                                                                 Bank and subsequently disclosed.
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No                            The project will not affect natural habitats.

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No                            The project does not involve forests or forestry.

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No                            The project does not involve pest management.

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No                            The project does not involve physical cultural
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         resources.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     Yes                           The project is a national level program that will
                                                                                                                                 involve and affect Indigenous Peoples. An IPPF
                                                                                                                                 will be prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed
                                                                                                                                 before appraisal.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            The project does not involve land acquisition
                                 4.12                                                                                            leading to involuntary resettlement and/or
                                                                                                                                 restrictions of access to resources and
                                                                                                                                 livelihoods.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project does not involve dams.

                                 Projects on International        No                                                             N/A
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             N/A
                                 7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Aug-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The studies will be launched during pre-appraisal mission in June and are expected to be
                                      completed by end of September, 2013.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Hadia Nazem Samaha

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name:                                                                                                                      Date:
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Abdo S. Yazbeck (SM)                                                                                                 Date: 20-Aug-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
