                                                                     INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                              CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC123
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-Oct-2011

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        Togo                                    Project ID:                       P127200
                              Project Name:                   TOGO Community Development and Safety Net Project (PDSplus) (P127200)
                              Task Team Leader:               Maurizia Tovo
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 28-Nov-2011                                   Estimated Board Date:             22-Mar-2012
                              Managing Unit:                  AFTSP                                   Lending Instrument:               Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                         Other social services (70%), Primary education (30%)
                              Theme:                          Other social protection and risk management (40%), Social safety nets (30%), Other social development (30%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                       Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                          0.00
                                   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                                14.00
                                   Financing Gap                                                                                                               6.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                      14.00
                              Environmental Category:         B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? Yes

                              B. Project Objectives

                              The proposed Project Development Objective is to provide poor communities with improved basic socio-economic infrastructures and greater
                              access to social safety nets.

                              C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                              The proposed Community Development and Safety Net Project (PDCplus) will build on the Community Development Project (PDC) and continue
                              most of its activities, as well as contribute to the development of the building blocks for a more comprehensive and scalable safety net. Given the
                              unmet needs of the rural population and the successful track-record of the PDC, the main focus will remain on the provision of basic community
                              infrastructure using a CDD approach whereby beneficiaries themselves select, plan and implement community sub-projects in a participatory way,
                              with the help of local NGOs. Collaboration with sectoral ministries and their representation at the regional level ensures consistency with sector
                              policies and discourages investments with recurrent costs that cannot be met. The decentralized implementation set-up (see below) as well as the
                              strong involvement of local authorities contributed to increase local ownership and improve governance. Resources for sub-projects will continue
                              to be targeted using a formula based on poverty rates (new poverty estimates should be available before appraisal) and population size. The main
                              lesson on CDD that can be learned from the ongoing PDC is the need to set objective criteria for the selection of communities that benefit from sub
                              projects. The number of communities that requested AGAIB support was extremely high during the first CDP and AGAIB were able to respond only
                              to about 10% of demands. This requires having objective criteria to prioritize communities.

                              The PDC ($17.2M) benefited from additional financing from two trust funds: the Food Price Crisis Response ($7M) and the Crisis Response
                              Window ($8.7M). This funding made it possible for the Government to test two safety net mechanisms as an initial response to the ongoing food
                              and fuel crisis: (a) a LIPW program, consisting primarily of rehabilitation of degraded lands and reforestation, and (b) a school feeding program.
                              Both programs are still ongoing and will continue until June 2013. It is proposed that the PDCplus continues supporting the LIPW program,
                              possibly with a focus on youth and/or or natural disaster mitigation as well as a slightly modified approach to integrate lessons from the PDC.
                              Urban areas may also be targeted. The main lessons learned from the LIPW implemented during the PDC are: (a) selecting project sites that are
                              not too remote from villages to avoid challenges associated with recruiting labor; (b) selecting activities that can be implemented during the dry
                              season; and (c) revising the payment system and making it more appropriate to rural settings.

                              The school feeding program implemented under the PDC received high marks from WFP, which is planning to adopt the same methodology to
                              launch its own school feeding program in Togo. Given the limited budget available, this sub-component would not be financed under the proposed
                              project (but additional funding for up to $7M could possibly be obtained from the Japan Social Development Fund). On the other hand, the
                              Government is very interested in testing a targeted cash transfer program with a view to developing a more comprehensive safety net system, and
                              a feasibility study has been commissioned to that effect (final findings should be available by end September). This initiative would complement the
                              set of social protection instruments the Government can use to address vulnerability and chronic poverty of the population, in particular by
                              targeting vulnerable children (the age brackets to target and whether to add conditionalities have not yet been determined). A targeted cash
                              transfer program has never been piloted in the country. Various ad hoc and short-term projects are implemented to address the urgent needs of
                              vulnerable children, mainly by providing nutritional or in kind support to poorest children. However long-term responses to increase the capacity of
                              the households to face shocks do not exist and children remain in a situation of extreme vulnerability. According to preliminary findings of feasibility
                              study, a cash transfer program would be appropriate to complement existing interventions by providing regular cash support to households, thus
                           making them capable of increasing their resilience and investing in the wellbeing and human capital of their children. Given the very encouraging
                           results of cash transfers throughout the world, and assuming a positive assessment from the feasibility study, the PDCplus would finance a pilot
                           cash transfer program based on outcomes of discussions with the government during the preparation mission.


                           Tentative budget allocations to project components would be as follows:
                           a) Component 1: community sub-projects (50%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           b) Component 2: social safety nets (38%): (a) LIPW (18%) and (b) cash transfers (20%)
                           c) Component 3: project management and capacity building (12%)

                            D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                           The project will be implemented in five main regions of Togo (Kara, Plateaux, Maritime, Centrale, and Savanes). Under the PDCplus, it is expected
                           that the LIPW will include urban areas as well, in which case existing safeguards instruments will be reviewed and updated. These safeguards
                           instruments will be applied to community sub projects and LIPW. The environmental and social impacts are expected to be minimal, site-specific
                           and manageable at an acceptable level.

                            E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

                           The PDCplus is expected to have similar safeguards requirements as the PDC. In this regards, OP 4.01 (environmental assessment) and OP4.12
                           (involuntary resettlement) are triggered. The LIPW involve reforestation, thus triggering OP 4.36 (Forests). The existing safeguards instruments of
                           PDC. The existing safeguards instruments of PDC that is the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and the Resettlement
                           Policy Framework (RPF) will revised and updated; and disclosed in-country and at the infoshop prior to appraisal.The borrower's performance in
                           enforcing safeguards requirements has been rated satisfactory under the PDC. The Five AGAIBs have benefited from safeguards training at the
                           early stage of project implementation. A capacity building exercise is schedule in November under the PDC. Additionally, a capacity building
                           program, including for safeguards management, has been scheduled for November, 2011 under the PDC and during the preparation mission the
                           client and the task team will identify capacity needs related to the implementation of the Bank safeguards policies in the new cash transfers, and
                           urban areas to be targeted by the LIPW.
                           .

                            F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

                           Africa Eshogba Olojoba (AFTEN)
                           Paivi Koskinen-Lewis (SDV)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

                            Safeguard Policies Triggered                     Yes        No       TBD                                 Explanation
                            Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01               ✖                          The Community sub-projects relating social and economic
                                                                                                         infrastructure such as schools, markets and health centers; and the
                                                                                                         LIPW which will entail rehabilitation of degraded lands and
                                                                                                         reforestation and maybe small and simple community sub-projects
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                         such as rehabilitation of small rural roads has the propensity to
                                                                                                         trigger small scale and site specific environmental impacts that are
                                                                                                         manageable. At this stage of project preparation, the locations of
                                                                                                         these interventions are not known. Thus, the ESMF of PDC will be
                                                                                                         revised and updated.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                 ✖
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                                          ✖                The policy is hereby triggered because of the reforestation activities.
                                                                                                         Local populations and stakeholders in the reforested areas will be
                                                                                                         consulted in a participative manner. The modalities will be spelt out
                                                                                                         in the revised and updated ESMF.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09                                     ✖
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                      ✖
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                               ✖
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12               ✖                          The Community sub-projects relating social and economic
                                                                                                         infrastructure such as schools, markets and health centers; and the
                                                                                                         LIPW which will entail rehabilitation of degraded lands and
                                                                                                         reforestation and maybe small and simple community sub-projects
                                                                                                         such as rehabilitation of small rural roads. These activities could
                                                                                                         lead to restriction of access to assets or sources of livelihood. It
                                                                                                         could also entail land take. At this stage of project preparation, the
                                                                                                         locations of these interventions are not known. Thus, the RPF of
                                                                                                         PDC will be revised and updated. During project implementation, the
                                                                                                         framework could be translated into RAPs and/or ARAPs if and when
                                                                                                         necessary.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   ✖
                            Projects on International Waters OP/BP 7.50                 ✖
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                       ✖
                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                           A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 13-Oct-2011
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
Public Disclosure Copy




                              should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                The ESMF and RPF which were applied in the previous PDC project will be revised and updated to reflect the new PDCplus activities as well
                                as lessons from PDC safeguards implementation. A safeguards implementation assessment during project preparation (including
                                consultations with stakeholders as needed) will determine how and when the safeguards documents will be ready for disclosure in country and
                                in the Bank#s InfoShop. It is anticipated that the safeguards documents will be ready before appraisal.

                         IV. APPROVALS
                            Signed and submitted by:
                            Task Team Leader:                                Name: Josiane M. S. Luchmun                                                                           Date: 06-Oct-2011
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                 Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                     Date: 06-Oct-2011
                            Comments:
                            Sector Manager:                                  Name: Tawhid Nawaz (SM)                                                                               Date: 06-Oct-2011
                            Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                             form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
