                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                  Report No.: ISDSC665

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Aug-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Sierra Leone                     Project ID:       P126180
                            Project Name:       Sierra Leone Energy Access Project - Sierra Leone Infrastructure Development
                                                Fund (P126180)
                            Task Team           Elvira Morella
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       11-Sep-2012                          Estimated         13-Dec-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: AFTG2                                 Lending           Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector:         General energy sector (100%)
                            Theme:          Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                              Amount
                              Borrower                                                                        0.00
                              Sierra Leone Infrastructure Trust Fund                                         19.20
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Total                                                                          19.20
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective is to: (i) improve reliability and quality of electricity supply in
                           Freetown area; and (ii) increase access to electricity in selected rural areas.
                           C. Project Description
                           The Project will consist of four major components:

                           Component I: Improvement of Electricity Supply in Urban Areas. This component provides
                           investment support for improving reliability and quality of electricity supply in the Freetown area as
                           well as improving the technical and financial performance of NPA and includes the following
                           activities: (i) strengthening and rehabilitation of the primary distribution network (33/11kV) in
                           Freetown including overhead lines and substations; (ii) installation of approximately 20,000 pre-
                         payment meters and associated management and vending system to improve metering and revenue
                         management; (iii) installation of statistical metering at key points in the network to enable energy
                         balance and load measuring; and (iv) provision of technical assistance for each activity to ensure
Public Disclosure Copy




                         optimal application of the investment support.

                         Component II: Energy Projects Preparation Support. This component will provide technical support
                         for preparation of new generation projects required in the medium term to alleviate Sierra Leone’s
                         energy supply deficit. In particular, technical assistance will be deployed to strengthen the capacity
                         of the Ministry of Energy and Water Resources (MoWER) in reviewing and evaluating pre-
                         feasibility and feasibility studies on proposed generation projects.

                         Component III: Rural Electrification. Under this component, technical assistance will be deployed to
                         develop a rural electrification master plan and policy framework to be used as a basis for planning
                         future projects and to encourage private sector involvement in rural electrification. Investment
                         support will be provided to a pilot program for the installation of photovoltaic systems in public
                         buildings including schools and clinics in 14 rural villages around the country to demonstrate
                         applicability of the solar technology for larger deployment.

                         Component IV: Project Implementation Management. Given the low implementation capacity of the
                         two implementing agencies, NPA and the MoEWR, this component will provide support to the
                         Program Management Unit (PMU) currently established at the MoEWR for implementing externally
                         funded development programs. The PMU will be reinforced with external expertise as needed, who
                         will be specifically assigned to the proposed Project. In particular, the PMU staff dedicated to the
                         Project will include: (i) procurement specialist and assistant; (ii) financial management specialist and
                         assistant; (iii) environmental and social specialist; (iv) public relations specialist. An overall project
                         coordinator will be appointed as link between the PMU and the GoSL.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the               safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The application of safeguards policies (OP4.01 Environment Assessment and OP4.12 Involuntary
                         Resettlement) primarily concern the areas surrounding the existing distribution line that have been
                         partially rehabilitated by the NPA, as described under Component I (above). This existing
                         33kV/11kV distribution line is located in the Freetown Western Capital Area, between the Blackhall
                         Road substation and the Wellington substation. Reinforcement of the line was initially carried out
                         under the recently completed IDA-financed Power and Water Project (P087203). A Resettlement
                         Action Plan (RAP) was implemented and a RAP Completion Report was disclosed in November 10,
                         2011. The compensation payments for 29 households in the distribution line were finalized in end-
                         October 2011. Additionally, there were five livelihood restoration programs provided for small
                         enterprises, including training workshops for skills and youth employment.

                         However, as part of project preparation, a site investigation of the distribution line right-of-way
                         (RoW) from Blackhall Road to Wellington was undertaken in February, 2012. The Site Investigation
                         findings indicated that: (i) two PAPs who received payments in 2011 for removing structures within
                         the vertical clearance limit (7 m) have returned and constructed new structures, which once again
                         needed to be removed; and (ii) “new encroachers? in the RoW have set up structures despite the
                         demarcation enforced by NPA. Following this site verification, the NPA sent a letter to the Office of
                         National Security (ONS) to assist in removing these structures, and over the longer-term, to assist in
                         monitoring the distribution line.
                           On rural electrification, the locations are not known, although some 14 selected villages will be
                           identified to demonstrate applicability of the solar technology. These solar units will be installed as
                           solar panels on public buildings such as schools and clinics. No land acquisition for these units will
Public Disclosure Copy




                           take place.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The safeguard implementation capacity of the implementing agencies will be evaluated during
                           project appraisal. The recommendation is to further strengthen, possibly through technical assistance,
                           the capacities for implementation of the environmental and social safeguards policy instruments
                           (monitoring and compliance roles). The adequacy of the country’s environmental and social policies,
                           including urban land management programs, has also been reviewed under the completed IDA-
                           financed Power and Water Project and other urban development projects, and found to indicate some
                           positive steps being undertaken by the GoSL.

                           The Project Management Unit (PMU) established at the MoEWR is currently staffed with
                           sufficiently trained environmental and social specialists. A safeguard training program was
                           sponsored by the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development (MoFED) in March 2012 and
                           conducted by the Bank’s Accra-based safeguards team. The training included skills for developing
                           appropriate environmental and social safeguard terms of reference related to aspects of the Project
                           that in the future may require some externally contracted safeguards work. These activities will also
                           concern the rural electrification component of the Project. Although implemented by MoEWR, this
                           will be led by a dedicated Project Coordinator who will ensure that safeguards oversight functions
                           will be coordinated with the PMU. Overall, high level management will be ensured by a Project
                           Oversight Committee including the Director of the PMU established at MoEWR, NPA General
                           Manager and the MoEWR Permanent Secretary.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Maria Concepcion J. Cruz (AFTCS)
                           Moses Yao Duphey (AFTN3)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              An Environment and Social Impact Assessment
                           BP 4.01                                               (ESIA) will be completed during appraisal and
                                                                                 covering the rehabilitation and upgrading of the
                                                                                 existing distribution line and substations and the
                                                                                 proposed sites for installation of solar panels.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No               The distribution line will not pass or even be
                                                                                 close to any protected areas, including those
                                                                                 with any high biodiversity. Also, the substation
                                                                                 to be upgraded under the Project is not close to
                                                                                 any critical habitat, which as a consequence may
                                                                                 be negatively affected by the Project.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No               The distribution line will not pass through any
                                                                                 forested areas hence no impacts on forests are
                                                                                 expected nor the substation to be upgraded is
                                                                                 close to any forest reserve.
                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No                            No herbicides or pesticides will be used in the
                                                                                                                                 maintenance of the right of way of the
                                                                                                                                 distribution line.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No                            There will be no works in this project that affect
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         physical cultural resources.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            A social assessment was completed under the
                                                                                                                                 completed IDA-financed Power and Water
                                                                                                                                 Project. The findings confirmed that there are
                                                                                                                                 no Indigenous Peoples in the project area, which
                                                                                                                                 is located mostly in peri-urban and urban areas.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           A RAP Completion Report was disclosed in
                                 4.12                                                                                            November 2011 for the Blackhall to Wellington
                                                                                                                                 distribution line, which is covered under this
                                                                                                                                 Project for completion of rehabilitation work.
                                                                                                                                 During preparation, the status of the RoW for
                                                                                                                                 this segment of the distribution line was
                                                                                                                                 assessed. The re-survey of the RoW found that
                                                                                                                                 the policy is triggered because of the following:
                                                                                                                                 (i) previously compensated project affected
                                                                                                                                 persons (PAPs) moved back inside the RoW and
                                                                                                                                 constructed new structures that need to be
                                                                                                                                 moved; and (ii) “new encroachers? have since
                                                                                                                                 moved inside the RoW and will have to be
                                                                                                                                 relocated. On the solar systems, there will be
                                                                                                                                 neither land acquisition nor restriction of access
                                                                                                                                 to resources or livelihoods associated with
                                                                                                                                 rehabilitation of the existing substations. Solar
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 panels will be installed in existing public
                                                                                                                                 buildings, like schools, so there will not be any
                                                                                                                                 acquisition of land nor restricted access to
                                                                                                                                 resources or livelihoods.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            N/A

                                 Projects on International        No                                                             N/A
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             N/A
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 18-Jul-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      June 22- June 30, 2012: Scoping and gathering of information for the update of the status of the
                                      RoW post-completion of the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) and the Environmental Impact
                                      Assessment (EIA).




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             June 30 – July 18, 2012: Completion of RAP update and EIA; approval by Government, and
                             disclosure in-country and in the Bank InfoShop.
                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Task Team Leader:     Name: Elvira Morella

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                  Date: 28-Aug-2012
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Varadarajan Atur (SM)                        Date: 26-Jun-2012
Public Disclosure Copy
