                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC818

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Aug-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           West Bank and Gaza               Project ID:      P127163
                            Project Name:      GZ-Municipal Development Program II (P127163)
                            Task Team          Soraya Goga
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          13-Jun-2013                      Estimated        29-Oct-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     MNSUR                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector:            Sub-national government administration (93%), Public administration- Energy
                                               and mining (7%)
                            Theme:             Urban services and housing for the poor (42%), Municipal finance (42%),
                                               Municipal governance and institution building (16%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Special Financing                                                            10.00
                              Total                                                                        10.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The objective of the project is to improve municipal management practices for better service delivery
                           and municipal transparency.
                           C. Project Description
                           The Bank and six other Donors have supported Phase 1 of the Municipal Development Program. The
                           Bank financing is set to close on April 30, 2013 and it is anticipated that Phase 1 of the Program
                           would close shortly thereafter. That phase was designed to test tools for performance improvements,
                           particularly in municipal finance and municipal planning, through the provision of a performance
                           based grant and capacity building packages to municipalities through four Parts or Windows. These
                           included (i) Window 1: Municipal Grants for Capital Investments allocated performance-based
                         grants to municipalities for capital investments or operating expenditures through a transfer formula;
                         (ii) Window 2: Support to Municipal Innovations and Efficiency which facilitates learning and
                         innovation to promote municipal development; (iii) Window 3: Capacity-Building for Municipalities
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and the Municipal Development and Lending Fund (MDLF) supports municipalities to graduate to a
                         higher performance category, and supports the implementing entity to build its capacity; (iv)
                         Window 4: Project Implementation Support and Management Costs which financed project
                         management. Tools for donor harmonization were also tested so that donors synchronized their
                         funding through a commonly accepted performance based grant allocation formula, fiduciary
                         systems and selection criteria for sub-projects.

                         This project would be considered Phase 2 of MDP. It is proposed that this project (i.e. MDP 2) would
                         continue to provide financing through the same four Windows as per the original project. However,
                         in keeping with the progression towards the program level objective of the MDP and the goals of the
                         PNDP, the project would also emphasize mechanisms to improve service delivery, citizen
                         engagement, revenue generation and municipal responsiveness. It is also for this reason that the
                         suggested type of financing is a Sector Improvement Loan rather than Additional Financing.

                         Window 1: Municipal Grants for Capital Investments: Under MDP 1, the component allocated
                         performance-based grants for capital investments or operating expenditures through a transfer
                         formula consisting of performance (40%), population (40%) and need (20%). To determine
                         performance, municipalities were ranked from A through E, based on 12 good governance indicators.
                         Municipalities proposed priority projects, based on a consultative planning process, for the Grant
                         amount and these were then financed and implemented with some assistance from the MDLF. This
                         has proven to be a transparent and successful means of transferring grants to municipalities, and
                         allowing for necessary and prioritized capital investments.

                         Under MDP 2, Window 1 would continue to allocate grants to municipalities for capital investments
                         service provision, per their mandate defined in the Local Councils Law No. 1 of 1997 and for sectors
                         described as eligible in the Operations Manual. Eligible sectors per the Local Councils Law No. 1 of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1997 are as follows: (i) water and waste water services if provided by the municipality for the
                         purposes of ensuring continuous supply; (ii) solid waste management; (iii) roads; (iv) public
                         facilities (v) street lighting and (vi) electricity services not provided by a utility. The preparation
                         mission (June 2012) will finalize whether Gaza municipalities may also use allocated grants for
                         operating expenditures for service provision as per their mandate and within eligible sectors
                         (modalities of this option will be discussed during the next joint mission).

                         The component will finance the costs of goods, works and services. The grants would continue to be
                         allocated using an allocation formula designed to provide incentives for better management practices,
                         as per MDP I. However, it is proposed that the formula be improved by changing the balance of the
                         criteria to increase the emphasis on performance and needs while reducing the weighted criteria
                         based on population: 20% population, 30% needs, and 50% performance. The performance
                         indicators (currently 12) would also be refined and expanded to reflect the additional emphasis on
                         service delivery. The window would also scale up energy efficiency initiatives piloted under in the
                         first project.

                         Window 2: Support to Municipal Innovation: MDP 1 supported Energy Efficiency Innovations,
                         support to One-Stop-Shops (i.e. improved citizen’s service centers) and amalgamated municipalities.
                         Thus far, the Energy Efficiency work has been successfully concluded with initial findings
                         suggesting a payback of close to two and a half years. Consequently, it will be scaled up as part of
                         Window 1 of MDP 2. One Stop Shops are still under implementation; however initial findings
                         suggest an improvement in citizen satisfaction and transparency. Finally, newly amalgamated
                         municipalities have been supported through financing key infrastructure to support the amalgamation
Public Disclosure Copy




                         process.

                         Window 2 will continue to support learning and innovation to promote municipal development,
                         including implementation of Ministry of Local Government (MoLG) policy decisions. Under MDP
                         1, however, the ‘innovation’ was prescribed by the MDP to include Energy Efficiency Innovation
                         (Cycle 1) and support to One-Stop-Shops (improved citizen’s service centers) and amalgamated
                         municipalities (Cycle 2). Project preparation will explore mechanisms to further develop Window 2
                         to respond to demand driven innovations from municipalities, but perhaps within particular themes.
                         Suggested thematic interventions could include amalgamation, youth councils, public-private
                         partnerships. Piloting municipal lending could also be considered based on the findings of a study
                         currently under preparation with financing from AfD.

                         Window 3: Capacity Building for Municipalities and the MDLF: MDP 1 supported municipalities to
                         graduate to higher performance categories in the performance ranking system in which they are
                         currently classified. This was done through capacity building packages including support on
                         implementation of standardised standardized budget guidelines, standardised financial policies and
                         procedures manuals, and strategic development and investment plans. The 68% graduation rate of
                         municipalities to a higher ranking reflects the success of this component.
                         Under MDP 2, the window would continue to support municipalities in improving their performance.
                         However, additional packages focusing on Revenue Generation, improved Social Accountability
                         and Improved Operations and Maintenance will also be explored during project preparation.
                         Institutional Strengthening Support to the MDLF will continue to improve MDLF’s capacity to
                         implement the MDP. Details would be informed by an Institutional Assessment currently underway
                         as well as a study financed by AfD on the future evolution of the MDLF into a lending institution.

                         Window 4: Project Implementation Support and Management Costs: will support Project
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Implementation including MDLF management fee, monitoring and evaluation, outreach and
                         communication, and local technical consultants.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the          safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         134 municipalities in the West bank and Gaza.

                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The Implementing Agency, the MDLF, will implement the project under the Ministry of Local
                         Government (the borrower). The MDLF has extensive experience in complying with the Bank’s
                         safeguards . This became visible through its compliance with Bank safeguard policies under the
                         Municipal Development Project 1: MDLF complied with adhering to the negative list for OP4.12.
                         MDLF also enhanced its capacity to comply with the implementation of EMPs required under OP
                         4.01.
                         F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                         Mario Antonio Zelaya (MNSUR)
                         Hana Salah (MNSSO)
                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes          OP 4.01 is triggered and requires an
                           BP 4.01                                        environmental assessment for activities that
                                                                          involve infrastructure construction. The
                                                                          development and rehabilitation of municipal
                                                                          infrastructure includes roads, water wells, water
                                                                          networks, wastewater and sanitation, parks, and
                                                                          others. Negative environmental impacts,
                                                                          associated with municipal subprojects, are
                                                                          expected to be minor during the construction
                                                                          phase. These impacts will be mitigated by the
                                                                          MDLF through EMP implementation and the
                                                                          project is classified as category "B".
                                                                          Furthermore, the size of funds available to
                                                                          municipalities under this program limit the
                                                                          scope of the subprojects, and hence larger scale
                                                                          subprojects which require a full-fledged EIA
                                                                          (category A) will be excluded (negative list) in
                                                                          the sub-project screening process and will not
                                                                          be feasible due to the ceilings of funds available
                                                                          under the project.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No

                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                           Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes          OP 4.09 is triggered in the event that
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                          municipalities, particularly in Gaza support
                                                                          subprojects which may require financing to
                                                                          purchase of some chemicals for pest control. A
                                                                          pest management plan which is based on lessons
                                                                          learned under the MDP 1 will be updated for the
                                                                          second phase of this project.
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No           The project will contain a “chance find clause?
                           BP 4.11                                        in its bidding documents which will be
                                                                          described in the EMP. Any sub project activity
                                                                          that might trigger cultural heritage operational
                                                                          polices will be excluded.
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No           Any subprojects that could trigger the
                           4.12                                           involuntary resettlement policy (OP 4.12) will
                                                                          be excluded, and a respective negative list is
                                                                          being prepared as part of the Operational
                                                                          manual. The project will thus not fund
                                                                          municipal sub-projects that involves the
                                                                          involuntary taking of land resulting in relocation
                                                                                                                                 of individuals, households. or loss of shelter,
                                                                                                                                 loss of income or other livelihood menas for
                                                                                                                                 individuals or community members, loss of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 assets or access to assets
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 18-Dec-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The EMP, prepared for the Additional Financing for MDP 1, will be updated for MDP 2, given
                                      that project activities are more-or-less similar. The update of the EMP is expected to be start in
                                      June, 2012, covering OP4.01, and OP4.09. No other safeguards related studies will be conducted,
                                      as no other safeguards will be triggered.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Soraya Goga

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (RSA)                                                                                            Date: 20-Aug-2012
                                 Coordinator:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Franck Bousquet (SM)                                                                                                 Date: 20-Aug-2012




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
