                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC905

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Sep-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Pakistan                        Project ID:      P125952
                            Project Name:      Pakistan: Second Sindh Education Sector Project (P125952)
                            Task Team          Dhushyanth Raju
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          04-Oct-2012                     Estimated        11-Dec-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASED                           Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector:         General education sector (60%), Public administration- Education (40%)
                            Theme:          Education for all (60%), Other public sector governance (40%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                         2900.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                 300.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Total                                                                      3200.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to support selected governance,
                           accountability, and system improvement activities in SERP II. The primary objectives of SERP II are
                           to increase child school participation and student achievement at the primary and secondary levels.
                           C. Project Description
                           In FY2007/08, the Sindh government initiated a multifaceted, medium-term sector reform program
                           for primary and secondary education called the Sindh Education Sector Reform Program (SERP).
                           Reflecting an important shift from previous education-development efforts by the government which
                           tended to focus on the levels of expenditures, inputs, and benefits, SERP was designed to focus more
                           on the efficiency and effectiveness of existing expenditures and governance and accountability
                           measures to maximize the use of and the returns to available inputs and benefits. The Bank provided
                         financial support to SERP through the Sindh Education Sector Development Policy Credit in
                         FY2007/08 and the Sindh Education Sector Project (SESP) between FY2008/09–FY2011/12.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Sindh government has embarked on the design and early implementation of the Second Sindh
                         Education Sector Reform Program (SERP II). The proposed project, the Second Sindh Education
                         Sector Project (SESP II) will promote and support selected government initiatives under SERP II.

                         SERP II represents an evolutionary next step by the government, shaped by lessons learned on
                         challenges, constraints, and opportunities drawn from program implementation experience and
                         pertinent knowledge gathered from elsewhere. Under SERP II, the government plans to maximize
                         the reform "dose" felt at the school in order to produce the necessary impetus for a major shift in the
                         quality of service delivery, with growing returns in terms of participation and achievement. For this,
                         first, under SERP II, the government plans to include more reforms and activities that can quickly
                         produce positive impacts at the school level. Second, the government has shown an increasing
                         willingness and eagerness to pursue reforms and activities which are politically difficult but likely
                         necessary for boosting the health and performance of schools. Third, the government plans to
                         explicitly coordinate reforms and activities at the school level. These reforms and activities are to be
                         underpinned by well-defined actions to strengthen program implementation capacity and
                         performance.

                         Proposed reforms and activities under SERP II include:
                         (1)      setting, augmenting, and implementing nonsalary budgets at the school level;
                         (2)      fixing salary budgets and teaching posts at the school level, and deploying the teaching
                         workforce in line with rationalized school-level teaching posts;
                         (3)      consolidating the school system in order to reverse overgrowth;
                         (4)      introducing sanctioned posts for and recruiting headteachers for primary and middle schools;
                         (5)      professionalizing sub-provincial education administration;
                         (6)      continuing test- and needs-based teacher recruitment and introducing performance
                         measurement and management of newly-recruited teachers;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (7)      continuing school infrastructure rehabilitation under district performance grants and
                         incorporating school upgradation (adding secondary grades to primary schools) and whole school
                         infrastructure development; and
                         (8)      continuing support to the private sector to offer quality schooling in underserved rural
                         communities under a strengthened design and accountability regime.
                         Many of the above reforms and activities are governance related in nature. Activities (3), (7), and (8)
                         have environmental management implications.

                         A specific investment credit is proposed to support SERP II over the four-year period FY2011/12–
                         FY2015/16. The proposed project would replicate the general instrument design features of SESP.
                         The proposed project is expected to have two components: (1) a results-based component and (2) a
                         technical assistance component. Under the results-based component, which is expected to constitute
                         at least 95% of the total credit amount, the proposed project will disburse against Disbursement
                         Linked Indicators (DLIs) which are to be predefined implementation progress and performance
                         targets agreed with the government and related to the important reforms and activities under SERP II.
                         The TA component is expected to finance selected, well-defined (1) implementation support and
                         capacity-building activities; (2) efforts to strengthen fiduciary, safeguard, and monitoring and
                         evaluation systems and activities; and (3) independent, rigorous validations, audits, and operational
                         and impact evaluations of selected reforms and activities under SERP II.
                           Conditional on the satisfactory achievement of DLIs, the allocation for the results-based component
                           will be disbursed on a reimbursement basis for expenditures made in Eligible Expenditure Programs
                           (EEPs), which are expected to be selected sizeable and/or meaningful government education sector
Public Disclosure Copy




                           expenditures.

                           Fiduciary arrangements and oversight will cover all EEPs and expenditures under the TA component.
                           The framework for environmental and social management will cover SERP II in its entirety.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the             safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The Government’s SERP II will cover all districts of Sindh. Sindh is located in a region that is prone
                           to natural disasters such as earthquakes, severe floods, and landslides. In some areas the geological
                           conditions are favorable to the contamination of groundwater by arsenic and fluoride, two dangerous
                           pollutants that may cause serious and irreversible health problems. A significant number of
                           government schools in those areas use groundwater for drinking purposes.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared by the Government of
                           Sindh for the Sindh Education Sector Project, and the responsibility for ensuring and monitoring
                           compliance was assigned to the Reform Support Unit (RSU). Over the implementation period of the
                           Sindh Education Sector Project, the RSU has had difficulties in attaining and maintaining adequate
                           institutional capacity for undertaking its responsibilities in this regard. Steps to address capacity
                           issues would be included in the ESMF for the Second Sindh Education Sector Project. The
                           recruitment and placement of an appropriately-qualified environmental management focal point in
                           the RSU would be condition for negotiations of the Second Sindh Education Sector Project.

                           Findings from a field survey of sample schools that received civil works under the government's
                           school rehabilitation subprogram indicate stronger and better-built school structures and classrooms
                           with improved ventilation and natural lighting, and boundary walls. Efforts regarding the full
Public Disclosure Copy




                           completion of toilets and draining systems, and ensuring their functionality tended to fall short. There
                           also needs to be a stronger effort by the government to educate students in healthy personal hygiene
                           habits, and on how to avoid injuries/fatalities during natural disasters. The government plans to feed
                           these findings into the ESMF for the Second Sindh Education Sector Project, and identify concrete
                           implementation steps to build on the accomplishments and address remaining shortcomings. During
                           project preparation, the Bank has hired four local experts using its own resources to undertake an
                           analysis and prepare detailed maps identifying high-risk areas for a range of natural disasters, with
                           the school system overlaid.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Ernesto Sanchez-Triana (LCSEN)
                           Chaohua Zhang (SASDS)
                           Luis C.P Miglino (SASED)
                           Andaleeb Alam (SASED)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                                 Environmental Assessment OP/                                      Yes
                                 BP 4.01
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No
                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Sep-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      June 15 – July 10, 2012. Assessment of compliance. Review of the status of compliance with the
                                      implementation of the environmental and social safeguards measures included in the ESMF of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      Sindh Education Sector Project. The results of this review will inform the preparation of new
                                      ESMF for the Second Sindh Education Sector Project. The review will include field visits to a
                                      sample of government schools covered under the school rehabilitation initiative under the district
                                      Terms of Partnership, a subprogram of the government’s SERP.

                                      July 15 – September 15, 2012. ESMF preparation. Preparation of an ESMF for the Second Sindh
                                      Education Sector Project by the Government of Sindh, which would be similar to the one prepared
                                      for the Sindh Education Sector Project. Revisions/adjustments will be made as needed by the
                                      government based on the findings of the assessment of compliance mentioned above.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Dhushyanth Raju

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Roselind Rajan (RSA)                                                                                                 Date: 19-Sep-2012
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Amit Dar (SM)                                                                                                        Date: 18-Sep-2012




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
