                                                                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                            CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                          Report No.: ISDSC452
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Feb-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                       Lao People's Democratic Republic        Project ID:                      P129182
                              Project Name:                  Lao PDR - Mainstreaming Disaster and Climate Risk Management into Investment Decisions (P129182)
                              Task Team Leader:              Sombath Southivong
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 00-undefined-0000                            Estimated Board Date:            28-Nov-2011
                              Managing Unit:                 EASTS                                   Lending Instrument:              Technical Assistance Loan
                              Sector:                        Irrigation and drainage (50%), General transportation sector (50%)
                              Theme:                         Climate change (100%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                  Financing Source                                                                                                      Amount
                                  Borrower                                                                                                                  0.05
                                  Japan Policy and Human Resources Development Fund                                                                         2.72
                                  Total                                                                                                                     2.77
                              Environmental Category:        B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              B. Project Objectives

                              The proposed program aims to strengthen the institutional authority and implementation capacity of the Government of Lao PDR at national and
                              sub-national levels to mainstreaming disaster risk management and climate change adaptation into public infrastructure investments, thereby
                              potentially decreasing the vulnerability of the population and national economy to climate change and natural hazards. The development
                              objectives are expected to be achieved by :
                              (i) integrating climate and disaster risk management into strategic national and sectoral planning and development policies;
Public Disclosure Copy




                              (ii) improving the consideration of disaster and climate resilience in the implementation of public infrastructure;
                              (iii) enhancing the human and institutional capacity through training at national, provincial, district, and community level in the design and
                              implementation of resilient infrastructure; and
                              (iv) implementing strategic structural and non-structural measures to enhance resilience in key growth sectors in two high-risk provinces.

                              C. Project Description

                              The project has six components as follows:

                              Component 1: Risk Assessment
                              This component will focus on the identification of risks and integration of risk scenarios in the development planning and policies.
                              Component 2: Mainstreaming Disaster and Climate Risk Management into Investments
                              This component will provide assistance to Ministry of Planning and Investment (MPI) , transport, urban planning, and irrigation at all levels to
                              develop guidelines and strategies to mainstream disaster risk management and climate change adaptation into the planning cycle and budgeting
                              processes.
                              Component 3: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building
                              Activities under this component will focus on building capacity of the technical staff members at both central and provincial levels in the areas of
                              undertaking risk assessments, interpretation and application of data, and updating the data through on the job training and workshops.
                              Component 4: Pilot Sub-Projects in two disaster-prone provinces
                              The purpose of the pilot would be to demonstrate the disaster-resilient construction practices developed under Component 2 in two disaster-prone
                              provinces. The assessment of damages and losses due to the recent disasters indicates that Vientiane, Xayabouly and Xiengkhoung provinces
                              are candidate provinces, although the final selection of pilot provinces, as well as exact locations and types of investments, will be determined
                              during implementation. It is anticipated that this component will finance small scale civil works under the road and irrigation sectors such as
                              repairing drainage canals or urban drainage system, slope stabilization, elevation of road embankment, rehabilitation of culverts or weak spots on
                              roads, strengthening of irrigation structures in high risk area, and .repairing irrigation channels damaged by the natural disasters (i.e. Typhoon
                              Haima and Nock Ten).
                              Component 5: Monitoring and Evaluation
                              Monitoring and evaluation of project activities and results indicators will be financed under this component.
                              Component 6: Project Management
                              A professional project management team--serving as the secretariat to a steering committee in overseeing the project implementation--will be
                              established with sufficient qualifications and experience.

                              D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)
                           The proposed program aims to strengthen the institutional authority and implementation capacity of the Government of Lao PDR (GoL) at the
                           national and sub-national levels to mainstream disaster risk management and climate change adaptation into public infrastructure investments,
                           thereby potentially decreasing the vulnerability of the population and national economy to climate change and natural hazards. The project will
                           finance some minor civil works under the pilot activities of the Component 4 which will focus on repairing or strengthening existing roads and
                           irrigation schemes damaged by the previous natural disasters (Typhoon Haima and Knock-Ten ). It is anticipated that the piloted activities will not
                           result in any major adverse environmental and social impacts. The pilot activities are likely to enhance positive environmental impacts through
                           taking into consideration of climate variability and extreme events into the engineering designs in order to mitigate the disaster and other
Public Disclosure Copy




                           associated environmental risks such as landslides and poor water quality due to high sedimentation settlement.

                            E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

                           The Department of Roads (DoR) under the Ministry of Public Works and Transport (MPWT) and the Department of Irrigation of the Ministry of
                           Agriculture and Forestry (MAF) will implement the small scale civil works under the Component 4. MPWT has been implementing the
                           Environmental and Social Operational Manual (ESOM) under the Lao Road Sector Project (LRSP) and has some experience in Bank safeguard
                           policies. MAF have implemented Environmental and Social Safeguard Management Framework (ESMF) for small scale civil works under the KDP
                           Additional Financing. With minor adjustment, the existing safeguard instruments under the KDP Additional Financing will be applicable to ensure
                           that investments financed under the project would be implemented in compliance with Bank’s safeguard policies. Under LRSP project, MPWT
                           established two divisions which are in charge of environmental and social safeguards: (i) Technical and Environmental Division (TED) under DoR,
                           and (ii) Environmental and Social Division (ESD) under Public Works and Transport Institute. The on-going LRSP is strengthening their capacity.
                           The capacity of provincial staff of MAF will still have to be developed so they are able to implement environmental safeguard instruments properly.

                            F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

                           Satoshi Ishihara (EASTS)
                           Bunlong Leng (EASTS)
                           Thalavanh Vongsonephet (EACLF)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

                            Safeguard Policies Triggered                     Yes        No       TBD                                  Explanation
                            Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01               ✖                           The component 4 will finance small scale civil works such as slope
                                                                                                          stabilization and road embankment. Only minimal and temporary
                                                                                                          environmental impacts are anticipated from such the civil works
                                                                                                          which will be manageable through the good engineering
                                                                                                          management techniques such as ECOP. Other components (1, 2, 3,
                                                                                                          5 and 6) are related to technical studies and capacity building at
                                                                                                          national and sub-national levels in order to mainstream disaster
                                                                                                          risks management and climate change adaptation into public
                                                                                                          infrastructure investments.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                  ✖                Civil works under this project will be limited to within the existing
                                                                                                          road and irrigation alignments. No impacts on Natural Habitats are
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                          anticipated.
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                                           ✖                The Project will not cause any direct or indirect impact on Forests.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09                                      ✖                No pesticides will be financed or used under this project
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                       ✖                The PCR policy is not applied since the civil works supported under
                                                                                                          the project will be within the existing alignments and no impact on
                                                                                                          existing physical and cultural resources is anticipated. However the
                                                                                                          TT will ensure that a “PCR chance find” clause will be incorporated
                                                                                                          in the EMF guidelines prepared by the project. .
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                     ✖                           The Lao PDR is ethnically heterogeneous country where a large
                                                                                                          number of ethnic minorities live. The grant may be implemented in
                                                                                                          areas where ethnic minorities live. Therefore, the Ethnic Group
                                                                                                          Policy Framework (EGPF) prepared for the existing World Bank’s
                                                                                                          financed projects has been modified with necessary revisions and
                                                                                                          will be applied. The Ethnic Minority Development Plans will be
                                                                                                          developed if and where ethnic minorities live in project areas.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12               ✖                           Works under this project will be small in scale and will largely be
                                                                                                          limited within the existing road or irrigation alignments. The pilot
                                                                                                          activities under this project will not likely cause any physical
                                                                                                          relocation of villagers and loss of their assets. However, since
                                                                                                          specific investments will only be identified during implementation,
                                                                                                          Compensation and Resettlement Policy Framework has been
                                                                                                          prepared based on the existing frameworks developed under Bank
                                                                                                          financed projects, in order to ensure all investments supported
                                                                                                          under the project would be implemented in line with OP 4.12.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                    ✖                The project will not involve or link to any dam as defined under the
                                                                                                          policy
                            Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                    ✖                There are no known project components involving international
                            7.50                                                                          waterways as defined under the policy
                            Safeguard Policies Triggered                                      Yes           No           TBD                                             Explanation
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                                            ✖                      None of the project activities will be located within disputed areas as
                                                                                                                                    defined under the policy.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                           A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 04-Jan-2012
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
                              should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                The resettlement and Ethnic Group policy frameworks , and ECOP will be prepared and completed by January, 2012.

                         IV. APPROVALS
                            Signed and submitted by:
                            Task Team Leader:                                Name: Sombath Southivong                                                                              Date: 26-Jan-2012
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                 Name: John R. Butler (RSA)                                                                            Date: 01-Feb-2012
                            Comments:
                            Sector Manager:                                  Name: Julia M. Fraser (SM)                                                                            Date: 30-Jan-2012
                            Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                             form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
