                                                                     INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                              CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC479
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Feb-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                          Zambia                                 Project ID:                     P127254
                              Project Name:                     Zambia Strengthening Climate Resilience (PPCR Phase II) (P127254)
                              Task Team Leader:                 Sofia U. Bettencourt
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 00-undefined-0000                              Estimated Board Date:           29-Mar-2013
                              Managing Unit:                    AFTEN                                  Lending Instrument:             Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                           General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%), General transportation sector (20%), General information and
                                                                communications sector (20%), General public administration sector (20%), Flood protection (20%)
                              Theme:                            Climate change (40%), Natural disaster management (40%), Other social protection and risk management (20%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                    Financing Source                                                                                                     Amount
                                    Borrower                                                                                                                  0.00
                                    Strategic Climate Fund Credit                                                                                             5.00
                                    Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                                                                            28.00
                                    Total                                                                                                                   33.00
                              Environmental Category:           B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              B. Project Objectives

                              15.       The development objective of the project is to strengthen the institutional framework for climate resilience in Zambia and improve the
                              adaptive capacity of vulnerable rural communities in the Barotse sub-basin.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              16.         Considering Zambia’s long-term institutional strengthening needs, the project would be implemented over a six year period, from 2013 to
                              2019, with subsequent programmatic phases expected. The estimated costs would be US$33 million (including US$28 million in grant, and US$5
                              million in credit) from the Pilot Programme for Climate Resilience Trust Fund. This is expected to leverage an estimated US$105 million in parallel
                              financing. A Project Preparation Grant (PPG) of US$1 million is being processed.

                              C. Project Description

                              18.           The project would include three related components:

                              19.       Component 1: Strategic Program Support (estimated cost US$12 million grant). This component would be national in scope, and build
                              upon the institutional strengthening started under PPCR Phase I. It would include the following sub-components:

                              (a)        Institutional Support to Zambia’s Climate Change Program (US$6 million grant), providing direct and flexible support to the Program,
                              through (i) Management of External Resources and Climate Risk Financing, to improve the coordination and allocation of climate financing
                              sources, and support the establishment of climate/disaster risk financing and transfer mechanisms; (ii) Capacity Building and Knowledge Sharing,
                              funding training and mentorships for national climate change champions, fiduciary management, and exchange of lessons learned; (iii)
                              Mainstreaming Climate Resilience into key policies, regulations, strategies and sectoral plans; and (iv) Incremental Operating Costs for the project,
                              as well as to the National Climate Change and Development Council and its Secretariat for a limited initial period. In particular, this sub-component
                              would help Zambia optimize its climate change resources as it transitions to a Middle Income Country, and build its capacity to potentially access
                              and manage global climate funds directly (e.g. the Green Climate Fund).

                              (b)        Strengthened Climate Information (US$6 million grant), providing more reliable and timely early warning and climate information to
                              users. It would involve (i) A strengthened early warning system integrating indigenous and scientific knowledge, particularly through the
                              application of crowdsourcing (e.g. FrontlineSMS) and rapid communication systems between line agencies and community mobilizers; (ii)
                              Strengthen institutional and operational framework for data sharing, including agreement on Open Data platforms; and (iii) Applied Studies with
                              direct relevance to climate resilience.

                              20.       Component 2: Participatory Adaptation (estimated costs US$10 million grant). This component would help strengthen the adaptive
                              capacity of vulnerable rural communities in the Barotse sub-basin, through:

                              (a)      Support to Community-based Adaptation (estimated costs US$2 million grant), funding experienced facilitation NGOs, as well as the
                              involvement of the technical coordinating platforms in reviewing and monitoring climate resilient plans (see para. 8).
                         (b)       Community-based Adaptation (estimated costs US$8 million grant), funding climate resilient Integrated Development Plans and Local
                         Area Plans in the 8 districts of Barotse. The project would provide progressively higher funding to local community Area Development
                         Committees and Districts Councils that completed agreed benchmarks (e.g. mainstreaming of climate resilience into their plans; preparedness
                         committees operational, etc.). Eligible adaptation activities would meet the Bank’s acceptable definition of adaptation co-benefits, be demand-
                         driven and multi-sectoral, depending on the pilot communities’ adaptation needs (see Zambia SPCR submission for the proposed eligible criteria).
                         Funding would follow successful community-driven development procedures adapted from a past social fund, ZAMSIF.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         21.        Component 3: Climate Resilient Infrastructure (estimated cost US$11 million, of which US$6 million in grant and US$5 million in credit)
                         would support strengthened management and rehabilitation of traditional canals in the Barotse sub-basin, to optimize their use in climate resilience
                         (particularly in the management of floods and droughts). These canals - earth-lined and of average width 1-5 m – are vital to the socio-economic
                         fabric of the Lozi and thus of highest priority to traditional authorities. Since they involve multiple wards and districts, they require a more sectoral
                         and technical approach from that adopted under Component 2. The component would include:

                         (a)        Strengthened Management of Traditional Canals (estimated cost US$2.5 million), providing the necessary policy, technical and
                         institutional support to canal management, including: (i) piloting innovative ways to ensure sustainability – such as introduction of performance
                         based contracts and dedicated operation and maintenance (O&M) funds to address the structural weaknesses caused by weak canal
                         maintenance; (ii) facilitating agreement between traditional water users; and (iii) better organization of communities in O&M.

                         (b)        Canal Rehabilitation (estimated cost US$8.5 million), including embankment stabilization (with earthworks and vegetative approaches),
                         selected dredging, and erosion-control measures, with a view to restore the canals as much as possible to their traditional design, while optimizing
                         their use in climate resilience. With the exception of specialized interventions (such as dredging), all works are expected to be community-based
                         and benefit the poorest. The works design would be done in close collaboration with traditional and provincial authorities, the communities, and the
                         National Heritage Conservation Commission, with a view of facilitating the proposed submission of Barotse as a World Heritage Site. It would be
                         subject to a detailed technical assessment and social and environmental impact analysis prior to appraisal.

                         22.       The estimated costs will be refined and if necessary adjusted during preparation.

                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         The project will be implemented (a) at the national level for Component 1, and (b) in the Barotse sub-basin of the Zambezi for Components 2 and
                         3.

                         The Barotse sub-basin is home to 1.1 million people and one of the most vulnerable areas in Zambia. A designated Ramsar site and Zambia’s
                         second largest wetland, it is currently proposed as a World Heritage Site. This vast flood plain is critical for livelihoods and culture of the Lozi
                         people, who developed intricate systems of traditional resource management under their King (Litunga) and the Barotse Royal Establishment
                         (BRE). Having learned to live with floods for centuries, the Lozi rely on a complex system of traditional earth lined canals for transport, drainage,
                         irrigation, fisheries, and cultural ceremonies. In recent times, livelihoods have been increasingly disrupted by unpredictable floods and periods of
                         drought and intense rainfall, as well as changing socio-economic patterns. Parts of the traditional canals built in the late 1880s have become
                         silted, affecting agriculture and fisheries production. These impacts are affecting the livelihoods and water resources of the Lozi – for example,
                         Muoyowamo canal, where the traditional Kuomboko ceremony is performed (marking the migration of the Lozi king and his people by boat to
                         higher lands at the end of the rainy season), has had to relocate parts of the trajectory due to increased erosion. Addressing these challenges
Public Disclosure Copy




                         effectively is the focus of the proposed project. Project preparation has been endorsed by BRE and the authorities of Western Province, and has
                         involved close partnerships with local experts, including Red Cross Zambia, the National Heritage Conservation Commission, the Zambia Civil
                         Society Network, and youth champions.

                         Component 2 (Participatory Adaptation) is expected to be implemented in all 8 districts of the Barotse sub- Basin of the Zambezi, of which seven in
                         Western Province (Kalabo, Kaoma, Lukulu, Mongu, Senanga, Sesheke and Shangambo) and one in Southern Province (Kazungula); and

                         Component 3 (Climate Resilient Infrastructure) is expected to involve five traditional canals prioritized by the traditional authorities:

                         •         Muoyowamo canal (24 km)
                         •         Lubitamei canal (87 km)
                         •         Ngombala canal (15 km)
                         •         Musiamo canal (114 km)
                         •         Fisheries canal (18 km)

                         A map of these canals is available upon request.

                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

                         The Environmental Council of Zambia (ECZ) requires Strategic Environmental Assessments, Environmental Impact Analysis, public disclosures
                         and mitigation measures before projects start. However, ECZ procedures are slightly different from the Bank’s and capacity for effective safeguard
                         oversight remains limited. The Bank safeguard policies are in general not widely known amongst implementing agencies.

                         The executing agency, Ministry of Finance and National Planning, is establishing a multi-stakeholder National Climate Change Secretariat, which
                         will constitute the basis from which PPCR program partners will work. Starting from the first quarter of 2012, the Zambia Civil Society Network is
                         expected to associate with the Zambian Red Cross and Green EnviroWatch (a youth civil society advocacy group) to facilitate community
                         sensitization and consultation in the pilot districts. They will be working closely with experts on agriculture and natural resources, environment,
                         climate information, and under the guidance of traditional chiefs (indunas) and the BRE.

                         During preparation of the safeguard studies, the Bank safeguards team will hold regular consultations with ECZ to ensure that the Terms of
                         Reference and actual studies comply with both policies. During implementation, a safeguards specialist would be appointed by the Secretariat and
                         be responsible for in-country processing and monitoring in compliance with Bank policies and Zambian law.
                            F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

                           Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (AFTCS)
                           Lungiswa Thandiwe Gxaba (AFTEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Safeguard Policies                         Triggered?     Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01        Yes              The Barotse sub-basin is a sensitive area because it is a major floodplain, a
                                                                                      Ramsar site, and proposed as a World Heritage site. In addition, it is the home
                                                                                      of the Lozi people, who have preserved strong traditional management systems
                                                                                      under the guidance of the Barotse Royal Establishment (BRE). BRE appoints
                                                                                      traditional chiefs (indunas) who are responsible for resource management and
                                                                                      traditional governance systems. As such, any project intervention will need to
                                                                                      be designed with careful consideration of social and environmental conditions
                                                                                      and with the full endorsement of traditional and local representatives.

                                                                                      Component 1 (Strategic Program Support) is expected to have mostly positive
                                                                                      environmental impacts. Nevertheless, the potential social and environmental
                                                                                      issues involved in mainstreaming climate resilience into national economic
                                                                                      planning will be assessed through a Strategic Environmental and Social
                                                                                      Assessments (SESA) which is ongoing and - together with the results of the
                                                                                      Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement
                                                                                      Policy Framework (RPF, see below) would help inform the project.

                                                                                      Component 2 (Participatory Adaptation) will involve a community-driven
                                                                                      development approach, and as such, the precise sub-projects are not known
                                                                                      upfront. They may include activities such as: community preparedness and
                                                                                      early warning systems; vulnerability mapping; delineation of safety and escape
                                                                                      routes (for floods); construction, upgrading or retrofitting social infrastructure (e.
                                                                                      g. schools, markets); control of vector-borne diseases susceptible to climate
                                                                                      change; water harvesting and improved drainage; support to agriculture
                                                                                      diversification and promotion of climate-resistant varieties; sustainable land
                                                                                      management; and improved community-based afforestation and fisheries
                                                                                      management. Since the precise impact is not known up front, the project would
                                                                                      prepare an Environmental Management Framework and a Resettlement Policy
                                                                                      Framework according to Bank and Government of Zambia procedures, outlining
                                                                                      the expected impacts and proposed mitigation measures. The project would
                                                                                      also use standard screening procedures adapted from the Zambia Social
                                                                                      Investment Fund (ZAMSIF) to screen out sub-projects likely to have significant
                                                                                      social or environmental impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                      Component 3 (Climate Resilient Infrastructure) involves the rehabilitation and
                                                                                      improved management of selected traditional canals. These are earth-lined
                                                                                      shallow canals, some of which quite long, and generally narrow (1-5 m), which
                                                                                      were built and maintained since the 1880s by the Lozi for their multiple use -
                                                                                      they play key roles in cultural ceremonies, transportation across the plain, water
                                                                                      resources, drainage, irrigation, and fisheries. Since some of the canals have
                                                                                      been clogged for several years, and drainage patterns may have adjusted back
                                                                                      to their natural state, there could be a risk that the rehabilitation of the canals
                                                                                      introduce localized changes to the hydrological and flood drainage patterns.
                                                                                      The actual risk will be carefully assessed by a detailed technical, environmental
                                                                                      and social analysis, which is being procured. Any project interventions would
                                                                                      only proceed if the study concluded that their potential impacts would not be
                                                                                      significant, irreversible, and could be adequately mitigated - for example, by
                                                                                      avoiding opening of new irrigation canals in sensitive habitat areas; by proper
                                                                                      disposal of any dredged or excavated materials; by designing the works so as to
                                                                                      optimize their role in flood and drought control, while avoiding significant
                                                                                      changes in established seasonal drainage patterns; and by fully involving local
                                                                                      communities and traditional authorities in the design, implementation and
                                                                                      operation of the canals.

                                                                                      Given that the project is not expected to have major and irreversible
                                                                                      environmental a nd social impacts, it is classified as an Environmental Category
                                                                                      B. This classification could be reconsidered if the results of the Environmental
                                                                                      and Social Impact Assessment (due by September 2012) indicate that impacts
                                                                                      are likely to be significant.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                Yes             The policy on Natural Habitats would be triggered since Barotse is a
                                                                                      designated Ramsar site. The impact on the wetlands would be carefully
                                                                                      assessed by the project’s safeguard studies and would influence the final choice
                                                                                                                        of canal and sub-project interventions.The ESMF would include measures
                                                                                                                        addressing the major considerations of the policy.
                                Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                 TBD                    This policy is unlikely to be triggered by the project because it is not designed
                                                                                                                        to support forestry or plantation management. The secondary forest in the area
                                                                                                                        is not envisaged to be disturbed as a result of canal rehabilitation. However
                                                                                                                        there is a chance that communities or districts may elect to introduce agro-
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        forestry or sustainable land management (including climate-resistant tree
                                                                                                                        varieties) as part of their participatory adaptation (CDD options). This risk would
                                                                                                                        be assessed by the ESMF and a determination as to whether the policy would
                                                                                                                        be triggered should be known by August 2012. In this case, the ESMF would
                                                                                                                        include the appropriate mitigation measures.
                                Pest Management OP 4.09                                            TBD                   This policy is unlikely to be triggered by the project. However, the floodplain is
                                                                                                                        a traditional rice cultivation area, and there is a chance that, should the
                                                                                                                        communities elect to introduce climate-resistant varieties, or expand their culture
                                                                                                                        as a result of canal rehabilitation, pesticide use may increase. This risk will be
                                                                                                                        assessed by the ESMF around August 2012. In case the policy is found to
                                                                                                                        apply, the ESMF would reflect the appropriate mitigation measures.
                                Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                             Yes                    This policy will be triggered as the floodplain has several important cultural
                                                                                                                        sites (including burial sites, and palaces). During the detailed social and
                                                                                                                        environmental analysis, the project will expand upon the existing mapping of
                                                                                                                        cultural sites already compiled by the National Heritage Commission (as part of
                                                                                                                        the submission to UNESCO). As interventions would be designed in close
                                                                                                                        consultation with BRE, the risk of unforeseen impacts on physical and cultural
                                                                                                                        resources is not perceived as major. The ESMF and/or ESIA will outline the
                                                                                                                        appropriate guidance for known physical cultural resources and propose
                                                                                                                        procedures for cultural resources that may be further found during
                                                                                                                        implementation.
                                Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                      No                     Even though the floodplain is the home of the Lozi people, with distinct cultural
                                                                                                                        and social traditions, they are not considered indigenous people and the policy
                                                                                                                        would not apply. Nevertheless, the project would be designed in close
                                                                                                                        consultation with BRE and community representatives. Community sensitization
                                                                                                                        and consultation – led by the Zambian Civil Society Network, in collaboration
                                                                                                                        with the Red Cross, Green EnviroWatch and project experts – is expected to
                                                                                                                        start during the first quarter of 2012.
                                                                                                                        As part of the proposed preparatory studies, consultations will also be held with
                                                                                                                        beneficiary communities with a view to determine the best approach for the
                                                                                                                        design of the CDD component and rehabilitation and improved management of
                                                                                                                        the canals. Implementation of canal rehabilitation works will not start until
                                                                                                                        agreement has been reached amongst water users on the proposed design and
                                                                                                                        arrangements for sustainable operation and maintenance.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                                Yes                    Involuntary resettlement would be avoided or minimized to the maximum extent
                                                                                                                        possible. The Lozi benefit from strong traditional land tenure and resource
                                                                                                                        management systems, mediated through the highly respected indunas.
                                                                                                                        Rehabilitation of existing canals is not expected to involve land acquisition, as
                                                                                                                        land immediately adjacent to the canals is traditionally communal and kept free
                                                                                                                        of any structures.
                                                                                                                        Nonetheless, as some project activities will not be known up front, a
                                                                                                                        Resettlement Policy Framework will be prepared prior to appraisal, outlining the
                                                                                                                        recommended procedures when any sub-projects are found to require private
                                                                                                                        land (e.g. community mediation and/or intra-community compensation), or in the
                                                                                                                        unlikely case that rehabilitation of the canals may lead to loss of land. Should
                                                                                                                        involuntary resettlement be found to be necessary during implementation, an
                                                                                                                        Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (ARAP) or a Resettlement Action Plan
                                                                                                                        (RAP, for cases when more than 200 people would be affected) would be
                                                                                                                        prepared in accordance with the policy.
                                Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                          No                     No dams are expected to be supported under the project.

                                Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                          Yes                   Since the Barotse floodplain is a sub-basin of the Zambezi, and international
                                7.50                                                                                    waterway, the Policy on International Waterways would be triggered and
                                                                                                                        concerned riparians would have to be notified.
                                Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                              No                    The project will not be implemented in a disputed area as defined by OP/BP
                                                                                                                        7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Oct-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
                                  should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:

                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                              The safeguard studies that will be undertaken as part of the project include:

                              1. A Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) to screen the likely environmental and social effects of the mainstreaming of
                              climate change into the Sixth National Development Plan (2011-2015) and related programs – April to August 2012.

                              2. An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) for the entire project (but with
                              particular focus on the Participatory Adaptation component) – March to August 2012.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              3. A detailed Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) for the Climate Resilient Infrastructure component – April to September
                              2012.

                              Other studies will include a detailed assessment and scoping study for the Climate Resilient Infrastructure component, preparation of
                              operational procedures for the Participatory Adaptation component, and a baseline and monitoring study.

                              The project would not be transferred to the Sector Management Unit for effects of safeguards.

                         IV. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:                   Name: Sofia U. Bettencourt
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Name: Cary Anne Cadman (RSA)                                               Date: 28-Feb-2012
                            Sector Manager:                     Name: Idah Z. Pswarayi-Riddihough (SM)                                     Date: 28-Feb-2012
Public Disclosure Copy
