                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC928

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Jun-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Philippines                     Project ID:      P131622
                            Project Name:      Gearing Rural Organizations for Wealth Creation (P131622)
                            Task Team          Fabrizio Bresciani
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          20-Feb-2013                     Estimated        27-Dec-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASPS                           Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector:            General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (30%), Irrigation and drainage
                                               (20%), Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (20% ), Agro-industry,
                                               marketing, and trade (30%)
                            Theme:             Rural markets (30%), Rural non-farm income generation (20%), Rural services
                                               and infrastructure (30%), Micro, Small and Medium Enterp rise support (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Borrower                                                                     29.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        95.00
                              Total                                                                       124.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project aims to reduce rural poverty by enhancing the competitiveness, sustainability, and
                           inclusiveness of commodity value chains in targeted Agrarian Reform Community (ARC) clusters.
                           Its Project Development Objective is to raise the farm productivity andhousehold income of targeted
                           Agrarian Reform Beneficiaries (ARBs) and smallholder farmers by empowering the beneficiaries
                           and their organizations; facilitating and scaling-up the development of livelihood and agribusiness
                           opportunities; and improving access to critical infrastructure and key support services.
                           C. Project Description
                           Farmer organizations in ARC clusters will be developing productive partnerships with the
                           government and private sector through agribusiness development activities and competitive matching
                           grants. The main implementing agency of the project is the Department of Agrarian Reform (DAR).
                           The project will target 14 pre-identified clusters of ARCs located in 56 municipalities. About 55% of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the 290,000 direct project beneficiaries will be ARB smallholders. The project consists of five
                           components: (a) Participatory Development and Capability Building - will build the capacity of
                           beneficiary smallholders and their organizations to plan and undertake more profitable, competitive
                           and sustainable enterprises; (b) Productivity Improvement and Extension Systems - will support
                           access by farmers’ organizations to advisory services and extension systems, develop linkages with
                           research institutions to adopt and adapt appropriate technologies, and access business development
                           services to develop agro-enterprises development plans and improve business and marketing skills;
                           (c) Agribusiness and Rural Enterprise Development - will support productive agribusiness
                           partnerships between farmers’ organizations and the private commercial sector through a system of
                           competitive matching grants and support the creation of Local Agribusiness Forums involving value
                           chain stakeholders; (d) Rural Infrastructure and Agribusiness Investment Climate Support - will
                           provide key productive and market access infrastructure and establish mechanisms to lower the
                           transaction costs faced by perspective agribusiness investors; and (e) Project Management and
                           Facilitation - will cover the overall project coordination, supervision and monitoring and evaluation
                           activities. The project has an estimated cost of US$124 million, including an IBRD loan of about US
                           $95 million.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the            safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project will operate within 14 pre-identified clusters of ARCs located in 56 municipalities, with
                           approximately 20,000 farm households per cluster. Out of the 290,000 direct project beneficiaries,
                           about 55% are ARBs. Within the identified clusters the exact location of the sub-projects is not
                           known at this time, given the demand-driven nature of the project.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The DAR, through its Foreign Assisted Projects Office (FAPsO), will be the lead implementing
Public Disclosure Copy




                           agency for the project. It will implement and coordinate all project components and activities in
                           collaboration with partner implementing agencies including the DA and its attached agencies (e.g.,
                           National Irrigation Administration (NIA), Bureau of Soils and Water Management, Sugar Regulatory
                           Administration, Philippine Coconut Authority), DTI, DPWH, Land Bank of the Philippines (LBP),
                           other government line agencies, LGUs, Non-Government Organizations (NGOs), state universities
                           and colleges (SUCs), and People’s Organizations (POs). The same with the previous Bank-funded
                           projects’ arrangements, the DAR will enter into Memorandum of Agreements (MOA) with partner
                           implementing agencies and organizations that will be providing technical assistance to LGUs and
                           ARCs. During previous projects (ARCDP1 and ARCDP2) the implementing agency, DAR, has
                           demonstrated knowledge and skills in managing mitigation activities to address these and sufficient
                           capacity for safeguards policies.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Maya Gabriela Q. Villaluz (EASPS)
                           Victoria Florian S. Lazaro (EASPS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes   This project will finance demand-driven, small
                         BP 4.01                              scale investments that will be implemented by
                                                              productive partnerships between smallholder
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              organizations and private commercial sector that
                                                              will contribute to raising farm productivity and
                                                              household income of beneficiaries. The
                                                              project’s rural infrastructure and agribusiness
                                                              investment climate support component includes
                                                              physical investments carried out by national
                                                              government agencies and/or local governments.
                                                              Most of these investments are limited to farm to
                                                              market roads, communal irrigation systems,
                                                              bridges, and communal-based rural
                                                              infrastructure such as potable water systems and
                                                              post-harvest facilities. With regard to farm to
                                                              market roads and irrigation systems, most of
                                                              these will be in the form of restoration or
                                                              rehabilitation, although in some very limited
                                                              instances construction will be required. The
                                                              environmental impacts are expected to be
                                                              temporary, site-specific and manageable which
                                                              include the clearing of natural vegetation, noise
                                                              and dust due to construction activities, scraping
                                                              of topsoil due to excavation and road grading,
                                                              crowding of public places by construction
                                                              workers. The use of planting inputs and
                                                              cropping practices will be assessed to ensure
                                                              protection of the environment, human health
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              and safety and will follow an integrated pest
                                                              management approach. The project is
                                                              categorized as a "B" consistent with the nature
                                                              of these impacts and the requirements of
                                                              OP4.01. Since the sub-projects and their
                                                              locations will still have to be determined, an
                                                              Environmental and Social Management
                                                              Framework (ESMF) will be prepared. It will
                                                              contain procedures to guide the proponents in
                                                              identifying and addressing sub-project specific
                                                              potential environmental impacts, crafting the
                                                              Environmental Management Plan and adopting
                                                              the applicable Environmental Code of Practice.
                                                              Those that are identified to generate manageable
                                                              environmental impacts, the sub-project
                                                              proponent will be require the preparation of an
                                                              Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) and a
                                                              site-specific EMP, otherwise those identified
                                                              with no impacts will not be required to conduct
                                                              an environmental assessment. When necessary,
                                                              the sub-projects will conduct social assessment
                                                              including consultations with all stakeholder
                                                              groups (potentially affected communities,
                                                              NGOs’, POs’ and farmer groups) will be
                                                              conducted. The ESMF will be disclosed
                                                              nationwide and locally in these communities in
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No    The project would not lead to the loss of a
                                                                 significant share of a country's type of natural
                                                                 habitat. The ESMF and OM will provide
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 provisions that will exclude sub-projects
                                                                 affecting protected areas from support or
                                                                 funding.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    The same rationale as for not triggering OP/BP
                                                                 4.04 applies in this case. The guidelines for the
                                                                 selection of sub-projects to be supported by the
                                                                 project will explicitly exclude those proposed
                                                                 sub-projects affecting forest areas.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes   Pest management issues will need to be
                                                                 addressed since the project will possibly support
                                                                 agribusiness enterprises that involve crop
                                                                 protection, enhancement or intensification.
                                                                 Potential impacts will be determined during the
                                                                 conduct of the IEE and raised during the
                                                                 consultation and disclosure. The project will
                                                                 follow the Pest Management Framework that
                                                                 DAR has adopted for all its projects, including
                                                                 the two World Bank- assisted projects, Agrarian
                                                                 Reform Communities Development Project
                                                                 (ARCDP) 1 and 2. This framework which will
                                                                 be referred to in the ESMF, will be included in
                                                                 the EMP and the OM that considers among
                                                                 others, the potential risk of pest management to
                                                                 human health and safety. In case the need (if
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 any) to procure chemical-cased fertilizers and
                                                                 pesticides arises, the proponent will be guided
                                                                 by Integrated Pest Management (IPM) practices,
                                                                 consistent with the Pest Management
                                                                 Framework, which includes agreeing on a list
                                                                 of environment-friendly pest control products
                                                                 authorized for procurement if necessary.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    OP 4.11 will not be triggered since the sub-
                         BP 4.11                                 projects will only involve the restoration,
                                                                 rehabilitation or, in limited cases, construction
                                                                 of small civil works. In case of chance finds,
                                                                 procedures on how to manage them will be
                                                                 described in the ESMF. A chance finds clause
                                                                 will be included in all works contracts.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   Several of the target ARC clusters are located in
                                                                 provinces known to have Indigenous Peoples
                                                                 and ancestral domains. But the project is
                                                                 demand-driven so it is difficult at this stage to
                                                                 identify whether Indigenous Peoples and their
                                                                                                                                 ancestral domains will be affected by the
                                                                                                                                 project. This will be determined more properly
                                                                                                                                 during project preparation. The project will
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 nevertheless ensure that an IP Policy
                                                                                                                                 Framework will be formulated within the ESMF
                                                                                                                                 to ensure that IP participation is not undermined
                                                                                                                                 and that the design of capacity building of
                                                                                                                                 farmer organizations also makes provision for
                                                                                                                                 assistance to organizations of which IPs are
                                                                                                                                 members.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           The Rural Infrastructure Support (RIS) involves
                                 4.12                                                                                            the construction/ rehabilitation and
                                                                                                                                 improvement of critical infrastructure to
                                                                                                                                 improve access to markets and improvement of
                                                                                                                                 goods and services. This includes small scale
                                                                                                                                 irrigation systems, farm to market roads, solar
                                                                                                                                 dryers and water potable systems. While most
                                                                                                                                 of the expected subprojects are for rehabilitation
                                                                                                                                 of existing projects specially roads and
                                                                                                                                 irrigation systems, the demand driven approach
                                                                                                                                 in project selection may lead to green
                                                                                                                                 investments. This will also be determined more
                                                                                                                                 properly during project preparation. Within the
                                                                                                                                 ESMF, a simple Land Acquisition and
                                                                                                                                 Resettlement Policy Framework with clear
                                                                                                                                 protocol for land donation will be formulated
                                                                                                                                 for the project. The ARCDP2 LARF may also
                                                                                                                                 guide in the formulation of this framework.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Nov-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Fabrizio Bresciani

                                 Approved By:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Regional Safeguards Name: Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan (RSA) Date: 10-Jul-2012
                         Coordinator:
                         Sector Manager:     Name: Mark C. Woodward (SM)                 Date: 26-Jun-2012
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy
