                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA3744
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-May-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-Dec-2012, 01-May-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                              Project ID:    P123323
                            Project Name:      Ningbo Municipal Solid Waste Minimization and Recycling Project (P123323)
                            Task Team          Jian Xie
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          28-Nov-2012                        Estimated   31-May-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASCS                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Solid waste management (85%), Public administration- Water, sanitation and
                                              flood protection (15%)
                            Theme(s):         Pollution management and environmental health (85%), Municipal governance
                                              and institution building (10%), Environmental policies and institutions (5%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     246.16           Total Bank Financing:                    80.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                       Financing Gap:                            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                    166.16
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                        80.00
                              Total                                                                                       246.16
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Proposed Project Development/Global Environmental Objective(s)
                           The Project would aim to enhance the regulatory framework for compliance with new dioxin
                           emissions standards for incineration facilities, demonstrate best available techniques (BAT) and best
                           environmental practices (BEP) in MSW management to lower dioxins and furans emissions from
                           such facilities, and establish favorable conditions for replicating project results more widely across

                                                                        Page 1 of 8
                         China. As such, the Project would support China in meeting its obligations under the Stockholm
                         Convention.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Major outstanding issues in Municipal Solid Waste management in Ningbo City, as identified by the
                         municipal government and the Bank mission, include: (i) lack of source separation and collection;
                         (ii) inadequate waste minimization and utilization of recyclable materials; and (iii) needed
                         institutional reforms. The proposed project aims to address these issues and it includes the following
                         components.

                         Component 1: Municipal Solid Waste Separation, Collection, Sorting and Transportation
                         Provision of waste management facilities in six urban districts (Haishu, Jiangdong, Jiangbei, Beilun,
                         Zhenhai and Yinzhou, including the Hongqiao Hi-Tech Park within Yinzhou District and Dongqian
                         Lake Recreation Area), for:
                         (a) Residential waste separation: through provision of two bins per residence and bags;
                         (b) Public place waste separation: through provision of two sizes of bins for recyclable and non-
                         recyclable waste, and one recyclable material collection structure per community;
                         (c) Waste storage, transfer and sorting: through: i) construction of three medium-large size and two
                         small-size transfer stations; ii) renovation or rebuilding of two existing small transfer stations for
                         separated wastes; and (iii) conversion of the remaining 22 smaller transfer stations for parking
                         spacing for smaller vehicles, rest areas for sanitation workers staff, or temporary storage space for
                         compression equipment and bulk municipal wastes; and
                         (d) Waste Collection and Transportation: through provision of collection and transportation vehicles
                         for produce market and household kitchen waste, and bulk waste transfer trucks.

                         Component 2. Kitchen Waste Treatment.
                         Construction of one treatment plant of 400 tons/d capacity, with two 200 tons/d process lines, for
                         treatment of waste from households and markets, using the anaerobic digestion (AD) process.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 3. Project Implementation Support. Introduction of:
                         (a) Citywide program for public and community mobilization, education, and awareness-raising to
                         encourage waste separation throughout the project period;
                         (b) Output-based incentive payments to Neighborhood Residents Committees (NRCs) to encourage
                         waste separation;
                         (c) Output-based subsidies for restaurants that install and operate oil-waste separators;
                         (d) Rules and regulations for solid waste separation;
                         (e) Municipal solid waste pricing policy;
                         (f) Assessment of bio-chemical characteristics of domestic solid waste and new treatment
                         technologies;
                         (g) solid waste management information management system; and
                         (h) External monitoring and evaluation of performance in waste separation.

                         Component 4. Capacity Building and Project Management Support. Consultant services for:
                         (a) design review, advisory services, construction supervision, project management and monitoring;
                         and
                         (b) training in waste minimization and municipal solid waste management for staff at four levels, e.g.
                         neighborhood or community, sub-district, district, and PMOs.




                                                                      Page 2 of 8
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Ningbo Municipality is an important port city on the southeastern coast of China, about 300 km
Public Disclosure Copy




                         south of Shanghai. It comprises six central urban districts (Haishu, Jiangdong, Jiangbei, Yinzhou,
                         Beilun, and Zhenhai Districts) which form Ningbo City and is the proposed project area, three
                         county-level cities (Cixi, Yuyao and Fenghua) and two counties (Xiangshan and Ninghai). In 2009,
                         Ningbo City had an urban population of approximately 2.23 million, and a rural population of
                         approximately 1.43 million. For the last five years, Ningbos GDP has grown at an annual rate of
                         14%. In 2009, the municipalitys GDP was over RMB 65,000 per capita (about US$10,000), much
                         higher than the national average of $3,670.

                         Ningbo City produced 1.19 million tons of total MSW in 2009. So far there are 2 incineration
                         facilities in operation with designed processing capacity of 1,600 tons per day and 2 sanitary landfill
                         facilities with design capacity of 1,300 tons per day, serving Ningbo Municipality. The city has
                         placed a special emphasis on the collection and treatment of industrial, food, and medical waste, and
                         could be considered advanced in China in this regard. There are a dedicated incinerator specialized
                         for medical wastes with daily treatment capacity of 24 tons, a waste treatment center specialized for
                         industrial waste and hazardous waste, and a bio-fuel facility for food waste from restaurants. The
                         treatment rate of collected domestic waste from the urban areas of six urban districts is 100%. In
                         2008, the rate of restaurant waste collected and transported had reached 81%. According to the
                         information provided, the landfill operation has been evaluated by the Ministry of Housing and
                         Urban and Rural Development as Class I because of good performance. The proposed project will
                         not invest in the existing landfill and incineration facilities but minimizing the wastes transported to
                         some of those facilities through waste separation and recycling at source and at specialized facilities.

                         With the steady growth of Ningbo MSW, insufficiency of processing capacity is becoming a severe
                         problem. Facilities for daily garbage disposal can only satisfy the basic domestic waste disposal
                         demand. Landfill operation is overloaded and the two waste incineration plants are also approaching
Public Disclosure Copy




                         their design capacity. According to the forecast from “Ningbo 12th Five-Year Waste Disposal
                         Facility Construction Plan?, the central city area will generate 1.443 million tons of waste by 2015,
                         with an expected shortage of processing capacity of 1000 ton/day. Although the rapid increase in
                         waste generation as projected under the business-as-usual scenario in the Five Year Plan may be
                         questionable, the important point of a capacity shortfall is made. The new Five-Year Plan puts an
                         emphasis on waste separation and minimization through community participation, material recycling
                         as well as environmental management of recyclable material processing. These practices will be the
                         key to the city’s endeavor of minimizing solid waste disposal, reducing raw material exploitation,
                         and protecting public health and natural environment.

                         Instead of investing in landfill and incineration facilities, the proposed project will establish a
                         comprehensive MSW management system for waste separation and recycling while improving the
                         regulatory framework and implementation capacity in Ningbo.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Chongwu Sun (EASCS)
                         Chaogang Wang (MNSSO)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)



                                                                       Page 3 of 8
                         Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes            Based on the environmental screening
                         BP 4.01                                         conducted during project preparation, a Category
                                                                         B was proposed for the project and endorsed by
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         the EAP Regional Safeguards Secretariat.

                                                                         - EA instrument prepared for the project were an
                                                                         EIA and an EMP in accordance with China’s
                                                                         Environmental Impact Assessment Law and other
                                                                         relevant national policies/regulations and the
                                                                         Bank’s
                                                                         safeguard policies/requirements. The EA process
                                                                         followed following steps during EA process
                                                                         including environmental screening, risk
                                                                         assessment, public consultation, and information
                                                                         disclosure, etc.

                                                                         - A due diligence review was carried out for the
                                                                         existing solid waste treatment facilities - two
                                                                         landfill sites, one incinerator, and one existing
                                                                         hazardous waste disposal facility and several
                                                                         facilities, e.g., WWTPs, based upon Chinese
                                                                         requirements and applicable World Bank Group
                                                                         EHS Guidelines
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No              Most facilities are located in well developed
                                                                         urban areas. Based on the information provided in
                                                                         the EIA report, there are no natural habitats found
                                                                         in the proposed project areas. Therefore, it is
                                                                         confirmed that this policy is not triggered.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No              This policy is not triggered. The project will not
                                                                         involve any forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No              The proposed project will not finance
                                                                         procurement of pesticides, so that this policy is
                                                                         not triggered.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No              This policy is not triggered. There is no physical
                         BP 4.11                                         cultural resource to be involved However,
                                                                         chance-find procedures is included in the EMP.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No              There are no ethnic minority communities which
                                                                         possess the characteristics as defined in OP 4.10
                                                                         found within the project areas Therefore the
                                                                         proposed project will not trigger the policy.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes             The project will finance new construction of the
                         4.12                                            four medium-large and two small transfer stations
                                                                         in Jiangdong, Jianbei, Yingzhou and Zhenhai
                                                                         districts (in which the Jiangbei Station also
                                                                         includes a sorting facility for recyclable
                                                                         materials), and construction ofa household


                                                                 Page 4 of 8
                                                                                  kitchen food waste treatment facility in Yinzhou.
                                                                                  The resettlement impacts of the project include
                                                                                  187.1 mu of permanent land acquisition, 42 mu of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                  temporary land use, and demolition of 5360
                                                                                  square meters houses and 55300 square meters of
                                                                                  business buildings. The project will affect 683
                                                                                  persons in total. A resettlement action plan has
                                                                                  been prepared in compliance with relevant
                                                                                  government policies and Bank Policy on
                                                                                  Involuntary Resettlement.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No                 The project will not finance construction or
                                                                                  rehabilitation of any dams as defined under this
                                                                                  policy, so this policy is not triggered.
                            Projects on International        No                     The project does not involve trans-boundary
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                  rivers. The policy is not triggered.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                     The project is not located in any disputed areas.
                            7.60                                                  The policy is not triggered.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               Environmental: The physical activities of the proposed project are mainly under the Component 1
                              and 2. During project construction and operation, there will have some negative environmental,
                              safety and health impacts. Therefore, the OP 4.01 Environment Assessment is triggered. The
                              potential environmental impacts are mainly odor, noise, and health and safety concerns during
Public Disclosure Copy




                              waste collection, separation and transportation and treatment operation. Most potential impacts are
                              site-specific and insignificant, and can be readily avoided, minimized and mitigated with mature
                              design and good construction and operation management. There is no potential large scale,
                              significant and/or irreversible impacts envisaged.

                              Social: The most adverse social impacts will be related to land acquisition and resettlement
                              associated with new construction of six transfer stations (4 medium-large size and 2 small size) in
                              Jiangdong, Jiangbei, Beilun, Zhenhai and Yingzhou districts and a household kitchen food waste
                              treatment facility in Yingzhou District.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                                The proposed project will help improve solid waste collection and separation at household level
                              and transfer stations and other service facilities, thus to improve local people living condition and
                              welfare. The project is in line with the overall master plan of urban solid waste management in
                              Ningbo Municipality.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                                Alternative analysis was carried out during the project feasibility study and safeguards
                              preparation for more technical details, e.g. site selection analysis, technical options, as well as with


                                                                          Page 5 of 8
                            and without project option analysis. Comprehensive comparisons were analyzed with
                         4. consideration  of technical,
                             Describe measures    takeneconomic,  as well to
                                                         by the borrower  as address
                                                                             environmental and social
                                                                                     safeguard  policyfactors.
                                                                                                       issues. Provide an
                            assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Environmental: The EA report, prepared by the client and their EA consultants, thoroughly
                            addressed the potential environmental and social impacts envisaged for the project, and developed
                            adequate measures in the EMP to avoid, minimize, mitigate and compensate the potential adverse
                            impacts. The preparation of EA documents followed the relevant national laws/regulations and
                            guidelines, as well as Bank’s safeguards policies and environmental health and safety (EHS)
                            guidelines.

                           A stand-alone EMP has been prepared based on the findings of the EIA report. The EMP
                           summarized the key environmental impacts and detailed the environmental management and
                           supervision organizations and responsibilities, mitigation measures, training plan, monitoring plan,
                           and budget estimates of EMP implementation. The detailed mitigation measures to be
                           implemented by contractors will be incorporated into bidding documents and contracts to ensure
                           effective implementation.
                           Social: To mitigate the resettlement impacts, a resettlement action plan was prepared in
                           compliance with relevant government policies and Bank Policy on Involuntary Resettlement. A
                           social assessment has been carried out. The findings were incorporated in the project design.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Environmental: EMP implementation will be managed by Ningbo Municipal PMO. The
                           contractors and supervision engineers will be required to assign qualified environmental staff to
                           their team to ensure effective implementation of the EMP.

                           Extensive consultation with local residents has been conducted during the preparation of EIA and
                           the social assessment. The main concern of health and environmental impacts has been fully
                           incorporated into the EIA and EMP. The EIA/EMP documents and other project related
Public Disclosure Copy




                           documents have been disclosed locally in November 2012 through various means (e.g., websites,
                           newspapers, etc.), as required by national and Bank's policies.

                           Social: Consultations have been conducted with various stakeholders in the process of social
                           assessment and will continue in project preparation and implementation. Questionnaire surveys
                           were conducted with households, enterprises and public units in six urban districts where the
                           project activities will be carried out. Consultations were carried out with municipal and
                           community sanitation workers, waste pedlars, local people (including men and women, youths and
                           elders, and vulnerable), and government officials through focused group discussions and
                           individual interviews.

                           The resettlement action plan was prepared in consultation with affected people and disclosed
                           locally in November 2012.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                         10-Nov-2012
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                      19-Nov-2012



                                                                     Page 6 of 8
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           China                                                            05-Nov-2012
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      10-Nov-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   19-Nov-2012
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            05-Nov-2012
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?



                                                                     Page 7 of 8
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Jian Xie
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Mark R. Lundell (SM)                      Date: 01-May-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 8 of 8
