                                                                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                            CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSC357
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Mar-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                       Zimbabwe                                Project ID:                       P124625
                              Project Name:                  Environmental Resources Management and Conservation Project (P124625)
                              Task Team Leader:              Samuel Taffesse
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 12-Sep-2012                                  Estimated Board Date:             28-Mar-2013
                              Managing Unit:                 AFTEN                                   Lending Instrument:               Specific Investment Loan
                              Focal Area:                    Multi-focal area
                              Sector:                        Forestry (45%), General public administration sector (20%), Sub-national government administration (20%), Central
                                                             government adminis tration (15%)
                              Theme:                         Biodiversity (30%), Land administration and management (25%), Climate change (20%), Environmental policies
                                                             and institutions (15%), O ther environment and natural resources management (10%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                      Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                        4.20
                                   Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                                                         6.43
                                   Local Communities                                                                                                         1.50
                                   Total                                                                                                                    12.13
                              Environmental Category:        B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              B. Global Environmental Objective(s)

                              To develop the technical and institutional tools for the sustainable management of HSBC.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              C. Project Description

                              The North Western Zimbabwe landscape's ecological integrity and biodiversity is threatened by a number of factors that include the following: (i)
                              commercial timber and wildlife poaching by communities and other outsiders under various land use categories; (ii) weak law enforcement in park
                              areas largely due to underfunding ($10/ km2 compared to $1,700/ km2 for Kruger National Park); (iii) human wildlife conflicts that affect
                              communities neighboring national parks areas -- this is worsened by agricultural expansion that effectively reduced the wildlife range; (iv) the non-
                              establishment of local environmental committees that would have helped in reversing the decline in revenues reaching communities; (v)
                              accelerated degradation (land, wetlands and forests) -- concentration of wildlife in & around few water points meant plant habitats were destroyed
                              from excess wildlife presence beyond carrying capacity of the areas surrounding water points; (vi) expansion of invasive species; and (vii)
                              dependence on generators that run on diesel to pump groundwater.

                              Climate change is introducing new threats and challenges through its impact on agriculture, water resources, wildlife management, and food
                              security. CBNRM succeeded through an incentive mechanism that increased benefits to the poor communities but with CC impact eroding the
                              benefits, communities may lose the interest to involve in protecting the environment and exert their energy in its sustainable management.

                              At the center of this intervention is therefore ensuring community participation and designing and implementing alternative livelihood subprojects
                              including a revamped CAMPFIRE system. Improving livelihood of the communities living in the buffer zone through CBNRM and PPCPs will be
                              pursued. The tourism sector will be a major player in supporting alternative livelihood initiatives.

                              The project concept also recognizes that institutional strengthening is more effective when coupled with investment. The environment sector,
                              especially PAs are in dire need of infusion of capital to support the management at each site. Such investment, although not expected to
                              compensate fully for the past neglect, it would play a pivotal role in leveraging additional resources from other donors and the private sector.

                              The proposed project will have the following four broad components:

                              Component 1: Improving PA management effectiveness and providing alternative livelihood to communities living within the biological corridor.
                              The aim of this component is to improve biodiversity management and improving the livelihood opportunities of communities involved in
                              stewardship of the natural resources. This component will support: (a) preparation of a management plan for Hwange national park (with an area
                              of 1,465,100ha) and implementation of selected activities of the same; (b) support to alternative livelihood subproject through provision of small
                              grants in the buffer zone.
                           Component 2: Understanding root causes of land degradation. The aim of this component is to develop tools to improve land management across
                           HSBC. Activities to be financed include: (i) studies and mapping of land use patterns within the biological corridor to identify the root-cause of land
                           degradation; (ii) training communities in sustainable land management and environmental rehabilitation and mechanical conservation works; and
                           (iii) support to the rehabilitation of the most affected area in Sanyati - Chireya locality.

                           Component 3: Support to institutional, policy and legal framework: The aim of this component is to improve institutional capacity with focus on
                           climate change impacts on biodiversity and land management. This Component will provide: (i) support to strengthening the climate change unit
Public Disclosure Copy




                           within Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources Management (MENRM) in developing strategy in climate change adaptation and mitigation;
                           (ii) support to strengthen local environmental committees within HSBC; and (i ii) training, national awareness building, outreach activities and a
                           comprehensive communication strategy.

                           Component 4: The government has partnered with WWF for the later to be the executing agency for the pro ject. WWF will be: (i) responsible for
                           all fiduciary aspects of the project including overseeing financial management and procurement including contracting of independent auditors and
                           project reviewer; (ii)responsible for the implementation of safeguard policies; (iii) managing and coordinating the monitoring and evaluation system;
                           (iv) preparing periodic reports as will be agreed in the Project Agreement; (v) supporting the government in the preparation of bankable projects for
                           financing by other donors and multilateral financers; (vi) coordinating communication strategy and undertaking outreach and awareness building;
                           (vii) coordinating and consulting with relevant civic and NGOs representatives; and providing targeted TA and training as needed.

                           The MOENRM will be the overall coordinator. A steering committee composed of MOENRM, Ministry of Tourism, Environment Management
                           Agency, Parks & Wildlife Management Authority, CAMPFIRE, WWF and other agencies will be established to oversee the approval of annual
                           plans and budget, review progress reports, and coordinate donor supported activities. As the executing agency of the project, WWF will act as a
                           Secretariat for the Steering Group but without voting right.

                            D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                           To have a meaningful impact on the ground, and given resource limitations, the project will have a limited geographic coverage. Accordingly, the
                           project will operate in the North western Zimbabwe specifically in the Hwange-Sanyati Biological Corridor (HSBC) which is one of the four hotspots
                           for biodiversity conservation. HSBC is rich in biodiversity and consists of a mosaic of land uses under different tenure arrangements . The region
                           is home to three national parks; two Safari areas; six gazetted forest areas; four communal lands and private and resettled lands. In terms of
                           rehabilitating degraded land the project will focus on Sanyati catchment located at the North-east border of the HSBC.

                            E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

                           While the institutional capacity of the agencies in the environment sector has been eroded in the last ten years, there still exists in-house capacity
                           in the environment institutions that will be involved in the project to guide and implement safeguard policies, albeit mainly on environmental issues.
                           Three of the agencies that will be involved in coordinating activities at local level, the Environment Management Agency, Forestry Commission and
                           Parks & Wildlife Management Authority still are capable agencies for the tasks included under the project. In                                     fact,
                           these activities are also part of their mandate. However, in areas where they lack capacity, WWF will provide the necessary support.

                           WWF will provide overall project coordination including the implementation, monitoring of and reporting on the safeguard policies. An assessment
                           of WWFs capacity to implement Bank safeguard policies will be undertaken and training on World Bank safeguard policies will be provided.

                            F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Moses Yao Duphey (AFTEN)
                           Angela Nyawira Khaminwa (AFTCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

                            Safeguard Policies                               Triggered?        Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01              Yes                 In components 2, the project will finance rehabilitation of the most affected area
                                                                                               in Sanyati (Chireya subcatchment). The aim of this component is to develop
                                                                                               tools to improve land management across HSBC. No major adverse
                                                                                               environmental impacts are expected as a result of this project. The potential
                                                                                               impacts are likely to be small-scale and site specific, typical of category B
                                                                                               projects. To successfully identify and manage potential adverse impacts on the
                                                                                               environment from project funded activities, the borrower will prepare an
                                                                                               Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). This will be
                                                                                               disclosed in-country and at the Banks Info shop prior to project appraisal.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                      Yes                The project will help conserve natural habitats and will ensure that specific
                                                                                               project activities avoid habitat degradation. However, activities falling under
                                                                                               alternative livelihood and rehabilitation of land will be screened for their impact
                                                                                               on natural habitats during preparation. An ESMF will be applied and used to
                                                                                               guide assessment and management plans as required.
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                               Yes                 The main goal of the program is to reduce deforestation and forest
                                                                                               degradation, while contributing to the well-being of forest-dependent
                                                                                               communities. Potential impact of the project on natural forests will be assessed
                                                                                               through the ESMF and site specific ESIAs.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09                          TBD                Whether this OP is triggered will be determined prior to appraisal.
                                Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                             Yes                    The project triggers O.P.4.11 as it proposes to work with communities by
                                                                                                                        training them in sustainable land management and environmental rehabilitation
                                                                                                                        and mechanical conservation works in Chireya sub-catchment area. The ESMF
                                                                                                                        will include chance finds procedures to identify possible impacts on physical
                                                                                                                        cultural resources.
                                Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                      Yes                    A community of San peoples' who have the characteristics of IPs as per the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        Bank policy, live in Tsholotsho District, within the project area. OP 4.10 is
                                                                                                                        therefore triggered and an IP Plan will be prepared prior to appraisal. The social
                                                                                                                        assessment undertaken in preparation of the IP Plan will cover both identified
                                                                                                                        indigenous peoples and local communities as discussed below.

                                                                                                                        The team notes that the project area-the Hwange Sayanti Biological Corridor,
                                                                                                                        HSBC-is dominated by the Ndebele who have been living in Northwestern
                                                                                                                        Zimbabwe since the mid-19th Century. The Ndebele are an ethno-linguistic
                                                                                                                        group and have an attachment to land. While they are not indigenous as per the
                                                                                                                        Bank#s policy, the project design will seek to ensure that they are not adversely
                                                                                                                        impacted by the project or fail to reap the project benefits.

                                                                                                                        Therefore, the Social Assessment which will be undertaken in preparation of the
                                                                                                                        IP Plan will also include an analysis of ethnic groups in the project area, in
                                                                                                                        addition to the San, in an effort to understand the potential impacts of the project
                                                                                                                        on immediate and neighboring communities and recommend mitigation
                                                                                                                        measures.
                                Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                                Yes                   Under Component 1 of the project, activities (implementation of a management
                                                                                                                        plan for Hwange National Park), may result in the involuntary restriction of
                                                                                                                        access to a legally designated park which in turn may result in adverse impacts
                                                                                                                        on the livelihoods of displaced persons. At this stage in project preparation, the
                                                                                                                        details of the activities are unknown, but it is envisioned that impacts may inclu
                                                                                                                        de restrictions of access to those living in the parks. It is not envisioned that
                                                                                                                        new parks or park extensions will result from project activities.

                                                                                                                         The project will not finance any activities that will result in involuntary loss of
                                                                                                                        land or shelter, involuntary resettlment, loss of assets or access to assets, or
                                                                                                                        loss of income sources or means of livelihood (other than those noted above).

                                                                                                                         A Process Framework will be prepared and submitted for Bank review and
                                                                                                                        approval prior to appraisal. The Social Assessment will also cover assessment
                                                                                                                        of local communities and issues under OP 4.12
                                Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                          No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                          No
                                7.50
                                Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                              No



                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 21-May-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
                                  should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                    Social Assessment - March 20, 2012
                                    Indigenous Peoples Plan - May 1, 2012
                                    Process Framework - May 1, 2012
                                    Environmental and Social Management Framework -- May 10, 2012

                         IV. APPROVALS
                                Task Team Leader:                                Name: Samuel Taffesse
                                Approved By:
                                Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                 Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                     Date: 12-Mar-2012
                                Sector Manager:                                  Name: Idah Z. Pswarayi-Riddihough (SM)                                                                Date: 18-Nov-2011




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
