                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSC742

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Jun-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Jamaica                           Project ID:      P129633
                            Project Name:      Improving Climate Data and Information Management (P129633)
                            Task Team          Enos E. Esikuri
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          00-undefined-0000                 Estimated        18-Nov-2011
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     LCSEN                             Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector:            Public administration- Information and communications (100%)
                            Theme:             Climate change (80%), Natural disaster management (15%), Vulnerability
                                               assessment and monitoring (5%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                       0.00
                              Climate Investment Funds                                                       7.10
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Total                                                                          7.10
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective is to improve the quality and use of climate related information
                           for effective planning and action at local and national levels.
                           C. Project Description
                           The Project has components that deal with the supply of climate information and its demand. It
                           draws lessons of development from elsewhere which reveal that the mere supply of data does not
                           automatically induce its use. There is thus a need to both provide information and demonstrate its
                           utility for building climate resilience. On the supply side two components are involved with the
                           generation of data and climate information and on the demand side there are components that deal
                           with the use of this information in priority areas. These are the prerequisites to building climate
                           resilience in the economy.
                         Component 1 ($3.8 million): Upgrading of the data collection, processing and forecasting system of
                         the Meteorological Services
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The current hydro-meteorological system is outdated, obsolete and unsuited to the task of providing
                         timely information of (predictable) weather hazards. This component aims at improving the delivery
                         and quality of climate information. This will be achieved by: (i) replacing the current obsolete
                         RADAR system including the associated hardware, spare parts and software, as well as installation,
                         calibration and training of technicians and engineers; (ii) replacing over 40 manually read rain-
                         gauges with automatic recording systems fitted with satellite interface or data transmission modems
                         capable of transmitting data in real time into newly installed CliData archiving system; (iii)
                         installing/upgrading the hydrological stations; (iv) identifying and supporting innovative ICT-
                         enabled tools including mobile and geo-referenced applications to engage citizens and stakeholders
                         in the production and consumption of climate data and information; (v) review and update the
                         technical expertise of key personnel and formulate strategies for greater sustainability and more
                         effective customer service products that can assist in building climate resilience. This includes better
                         forecasting and early warning systems with advice on preferred precautionary strategies for those at
                         risk.

                         This component will also support the development of climate change scenarios and the development
                         of risk and adaptation profiles. Without accurate scenarios of future risks it is impossible to know
                         what to adapt to and how to plan for climate change. Current scenarios are based on global and
                         regional models which do not accurately reflect Jamaica’s climate conditions and specific
                         vulnerabilities. Downscaling is especially challenging for Jamaica due to its hilly topography and
                         will involve the use of meteorological data collected in Component 1 of this Project. This will be an
                         iterative process that will need constant refinement. This component would support developing: (i)
                         high resolution climate change scenarios at the national and sectoral levels by downscaling regional
                         climate data models; (ii) sector specific methodologies (guideline documents and manuals) for
                         climate resilient planning and design; (iii) the capacity of professionals to apply the scenarios in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         development planning.

                         Component 2 ($1.2 million): Risk Information Platform and Vulnerability Assessment:

                         This component will demonstrate use of the information generated in component 1. It will conduct
                         vulnerability assessments using climate scenarios to analyze the expected consequences of climate
                         change for 3 priority sectors. These assessments will enable the convergence of socio-economic data
                         and climate data to more meaningfully devise adaptations strategies. It will use model information as
                         well as historical trends to assess impacts on two ecosystems of high economic value – the marine
                         ecosystem and agronomic ecosystems in the island hinterlands.

                         Especially vuln erable are the coral reefs that face multiple pressures from rising temperatures, ocean
                         acidification and contamination (sewage and chemicals). There is a need to develop strategies that
                         would address the avoidable problems and help build ecosystem resilience.

                         Over 70 percent of farms in Jamaica are engaged in rainfed agriculture. With the projected increased
                         variability of rainfall there is a need to enhance crop resilience and assist farmers adapt to the
                         inevitable. Information from downscaled models will be used to assess vulnerabilities to agriculture
                         in different parts of the island as a first step in promoting adaptation.
                         Finally, it will also conduct a detailed vulnerability assessment of risks of losses in the health sector
                         with the costed plan of actions necessary to make key health facilities more climate resilient. Low
                         cost but critical actions to enhance resilience in pilot facilities will be implemented.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component will develop a risk information platform, as an accessible information hub about
                         climate change data, knowledge and good practices. The platform will also provide guidance to
                         decision-makers and planners and will be based on intensive assessments of end-user needs and
                         updated climate scenarios. It will allow users access to information and data related to crop
                         suitability projections, adaptation practices and climate change sectoral and spatial impacts on
                         agriculture, water resources, coastal and marine ecosystems. The figure below provides a stylized
                         example of a possible climate information platform.

                         Component 3 ($1.2 million): Climate Change Education and Awareness:

                         There have been some successes but significant gaps remain in mainstreaming climate change issues
                         into planning as well as in helping Jamaicans adapt to the impacts. Capacity and awareness remains
                         limited among critical groups and there is limited sharing of information. The public needs more
                         information on how to identify, cope with and respond to climate risks. Information is of limited
                         utility unless it is used and there is wide awareness and hence this component will focus on
                         developing a national climate change communication strategy. This component would support (i)
                         review of climate/hydro-meteorological information and determining current and future user needs;
                         (ii) carrying out consultations with stakeholders and sectors consuming meteorological, climatic and
                         hydrological information to determine, among others, how best to communicate targeted information
                         to users and how to build and strengthen in-country ownership of hydromet services; and (iii)
                         conducting capacity and institutional strengthening, including training for the staff of the MSJ and
                         associated key agencies to enhance service delivery. It will also develop and implement modules on
                         climate change awareness and education activities which will include the use of demonstration
                         projects, as well as the scaling up of “Voices For Climate Change?, an innovative climate change
                         awareness and education project, which was successfully implemented in selected communities
Public Disclosure Copy




                         across Jamaica. Moreover, during project preparation a social assessment will be prepared by the
                         client in order to inform the design of this component to reflect cultural, gender, and socio-economic
                         realities. This assessment will build upon existing experience and information from ongoing
                         programs.

                         Component 4 ($0.6 million): Project Management
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the                safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project activities will be country-wide, helping to create the enabling conditions for building
                         climate resilience by improving the quality of climate related information throughout Jamaica.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The PIOJ will be responsible for overall execution of the Project. PIOJ is the focal point for the
                         PPCR and has also been formally accredited by the Adaptation Fund of the UNFCCC as the National
                         Implementing Entity. PIOJ has knowledge and experience in applying the social and environmental
                         safeguards policies of the Bank through a number of Bank-financed projects.

                         Day to day coordination will be maintained with the executing agencies through a Project
                         Management Unit (PMU). The PMU would be supported by a Management Committee drawn from
                           the various stakeholders in the area of hydromet (Meteorological Services Jamaica; Climate Studies
                           Group of Physics Department and Computer Sciences Department of University of West Indies;
                           Office of Disaster Preparedness and Emergency Management; Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries
Public Disclosure Copy




                           (MOAF); Ministry of Health; PANOS – an organization dedicated to amplifying the voices of poor
                           and marginalized through the media; Ministry of Housing, Water and Environment (MHEW),
                           National Environment and Planning Agency (NEPA), Caribbean Institute for Media and a number of
                           NGOs, CBOs and Parish Councils).
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Anjali Acharya (LCSEN)
                           Kimberly Vilar (LCSSO)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             The project activities are expected to have
                           BP 4.01                                            largely positive environmental and social
                                                                              impacts as improving weather and climate
                                                                              information and forecasting will contribute to
                                                                              increase productivity, strengthen disaster risk
                                                                              management and reduce vulnerability. However,
                                                                              as there are some works involved (replacement
                                                                              of radar; upgrading monitoring stations), there
                                                                              may be some minor and reversible
                                                                              environmental impacts from construction
                                                                              activities. To ensure that these impacts are
                                                                              adequately assessed and managed an
                                                                              Environmental and Social Management
                                                                              Framework (ESMF) laying out the applicable
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              policies and guidelines will be prepared,
                                                                              discussed in Jamaica and disclosed.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        TBD             Project activities are not expected to affect
                                                                              natural habitats. However, as some
                                                                              meteorological stations may be located in
                                                                              protected areas and the exact locations and
                                                                              potential impact are yet unknown, a screening
                                                                              criterion to avoid negative impacts in Natural
                                                                              Habitats and /or outside of protected areas will
                                                                              be included in the ESMF. The ESMF will
                                                                              exclude the opening of any new, permanent
                                                                              roads inside of protected areas.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No              Projects activities will not include forest
                                                                              management or result in changes to the
                                                                              utilization, or protection of any forested areas.
                                                                              Therefore, this policy is not triggered.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09            No              The project will not support the procurement or
                                                                              use of pesticides or other agricultural chemicals,
                                                                              or lead to the increased use of such chemicals
                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   Yes                           The project includes construction works in
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         unknown locations. The team will thus include
                                                                                                                                 in the ESMF: (a) screening procedures to ensure
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 that construction sites are assessed for the
                                                                                                                                 presence of physical cultural resources and that
                                                                                                                                 no works will affect known cultural sites, and
                                                                                                                                 (b) chance find procedures, consistent with the
                                                                                                                                 requirements of this policy, to be followed
                                                                                                                                 during site preparation and construction.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            Indigenous peoples with the four characteristics
                                                                                                                                 described in the Policy are not present within
                                                                                                                                 the Project area.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    TBD                           This Policy will remain TBD and, during
                                 4.12                                                                                            preparation, it will be defined whether the
                                                                                                                                 proposed investments, especially works related
                                                                                                                                 to installing and upgrading hydrological
                                                                                                                                 stations, will require the taking of land. If
                                                                                                                                 specific or potential impacts are identified,the
                                                                                                                                 appropriate instrument will be prepared and
                                                                                                                                 disclosed by appraisal, in accordance with OP
                                                                                                                                 4.12.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project will not finance the construction of
                                                                                                                                 new, or rehabilitation of existing, dams. No
                                                                                                                                 project investments will rely on the operation of
                                                                                                                                 existing dams
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            The project will not support activities which
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            affect international waterways as defined under
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 the policy. Therefore the policy is not triggered.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project will not be implemented in areas
                                 7.60                                                                                            known to involve disputed areas as defined in
                                                                                                                                 the policy. Therefore the policy is not triggered.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 19-Nov-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The
                                      specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Enos E. Esikuri

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                                                                                             Date: 21-Jun-2012
                                 Coordinator:


                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Sector Manager:   Name: Karin Erika Kemper (SM)   Date: 24-Jun-2012
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy
