                                                                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                             CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC411
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Mar-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        Africa                                   Project ID:                       P126773
                              Project Name:                   West Africa Regional Fisheries Program APL C1 (P126773)
                              Task Team Leader:               John Virdin
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 09-Nov-2012                                    Estimated Board Date:             28-Mar-2013
                              Managing Unit:                  AFTEN                                    Lending Instrument:               Adaptable Program Loan
                              Sector:                         General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%)
                              Theme:                          Other environment and natural resources management (100%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                        Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                           0.00
                                   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                                      30.00
                                   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                                12.00
                                   Global Environment Facility - IBRD as Implementing Agency                                                                    7.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                      49.00
                              Environmental Category:         B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              B. Project Objectives

                              The development objective of the first phase of APL-C of the West Africa Regional Fisheries Program is to strengthen the capacity of Mauritania to
                              govern targeted fisheries, and increase the contribution of these fisheries to the local economy. The targeted fisheries for this first phase include
                              first and foremost the high value export species that have been most heavily overfished, among others: coastal shrimp, octopus, as well as
Public Disclosure Copy




                              demersal fish species (e.g. croakers, groupers, snappers, etc.) and small pelagic species. The Program will support more sustainable
                              contributions from these fisheries to the country’s economic growth via: (i) IDA credits and GEF grants invested in governance reforms to support
                              more sustainability and transparency of supply, and (ii) IBRD enclave loan to support key fish landing infrastructure and public/private partnerships
                              needed to capitalize on bigger fish stocks and more sustainable supply, most notably through more value added to the country’s economy.

                              Background: The West Africa Regional Fisheries Program (WARFP) is a series of 3 overlapping Adaptable Program Loans (APLs), each of which
                              has two phases of five years. As such, the WARFP utilizes the World Bank’s APL instrument: (i) horizontally, on a regional basis to support 9
                              countries through a series of overlapping APLs (i.e. APL-A for Cape Verde, Liberia, Senegal and Sierra Leone; APL-B for Ghana and Guinea-
                              Bissau, APL-C for Mauritania); and (ii) vertically, in that each country can receive support from two phases or installments over the APL Program,
                              in order to deepen and expand the reforms supported in the first phase. The APL instrument is particularly well-suited to support the long-term
                              reforms needed in the management and use of the region’s fisheries, with logical sequencing of events and phasing of activities with agreed
                              milestones, and flexibility needed in execution. The regional organization supporting the implementation of the WARFP is the Sub-Regional
                              Fisheries Commission (CSRP), a regional fisheries body that includes the seven member states of Mauritania through Sierra Leone, with Ghana
                              and Liberia participating as observers.

                              The first of the three overlapping APLs in the series, APL-A, was approved by the Board of Directors on October 20, 2009 for US$55 million in IDA
                              and GEF investments in the four countries of Cape Verde, Liberia, Senegal and Sierra Leone. The second APL in the series, APL-B, was
                              approved by the Board on March 31, 2011 for US$8 million in IDA and GEF investments in Guinea-Bissau. Similarly, the West Africa Regional
                              Fisheries Program in Ghana was approved as a specific investment loan (SIL) on July 14, 2011, for US$53 million in IDA and GEF investments.
                              This concept note describes the third APL proposed in the series, APL-C, for the country of Mauritania. The remaining countries of Guinea and the
                              Gambia could be added via subsequent APLs when ready. Taken together, this series of APLs (i.e., the West Africa Regional Fisheries Program)
                              is expected to span 10 years, at the end of which period it will have covered all nine eligible countries: i.e. the seven member countries of the
                              CSRP (Cape Verde, the Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Mauritania, Senegal and Sierra Leone) plus Liberia and Ghana.

                              The development objective of the series of overlapping APLs, taken together, is to sustainably increase the overall wealth generated by the
                              exploitation of the marine fisheries resources of West Africa, and the proportion of that wealth captured by West African countries. The APLs would
                              achieve this objective by: (i) strengthening the countries’ capacity to sustainably govern and manage their fisheries; (ii) reducing illegal fishing; and
                              (iii) increasing the value and profitability generated by fish resources and the proportion of that value captured by the countries.

                              C. Project Description
                           Component 1. Good Governance and Sustainable Management of the Fisheries
                           This component would provide: (i) technical assistance and training for the development of a detailed action plan to implement the Government's
                           fisheries policy (2008 Strategy); (ii) the introduction of limited and secure rights to the octopus and shrimp fisheries via the implementation of the
                           existing management plans, as well as the potential introduction of rights to the small pelagic fisheries; (iii) development of a functional fishing
                           vessel and license registry, and (iv) establishment of a Fisheries Economic and Policy Planning Unit, which would house a publicly available
                           dashboard. These governance reforms would aim to cap or reduce fishing effort on a number of high-value stocks via the introduction of a fixed
                           number of rights, to sustainably enhance the natural capital base of the fisheries. With a more stable and predictable supply of fish resulting, this
Public Disclosure Copy




                           component would therefore utilize IDA credit and GEF grant as an entry point for an IBRD enclave loan to finance infrastructure for private partners
                           to invest locally in Mauritania fisheries. The country aims to encourage private investment to land more fish locally to increase the value added
                           from the sector, but without a stable and predictable supply of fish, even the best infrastructure would not be a sufficient incentive. Thus this
                           component and these governance reforms would allow the Government and private partners to invest in a local industry based on a healthy
                           natural capital asset.

                           Component 2. Increasing the Contribution of the Marine Fish Resources to the Local Economies
                           This component would mobilize an IBRD enclave investment to support the creation of an environment where the country can capture more of the
                           economic benefits from its marine fish resources, based on the governance and policy reforms introduced in Component 1. This would include an
                           environment where more of the fish caught in the country✇ s waters is handled locally (e.g., landed, processed) to generate more local value
                           added, under better sanitary conditions. More specifically, this component would support a fish landing site cluster at Nouadhibou, which would
                           operate in partnership with the private sector to generate sufficient foreign exchange to provide the needed security for the investment. As
                           mentioned previously, currently a large number of the lower value small pelagic species caught in Mauritania's waters, are taken abroad and
                           processed, and then exported back into a number of markets in West Africa where demand for food fish is high. This investment would provide for
                           a better entry point for these fish products into the regional market, reducing the need for foreign processing in some cases. Projected revenue
                           generation from the landing site cluster at Nouadhibou to secure the IBRD enclave would likely come from one of two (or both) potential sources:
                           (i) a private partner who is given a concession on the port and operates the facility, charging fees to vessels landing fish and using the site; and/or
                           (ii) private investors in storage/processing/transshipping facilities in and around the site.

                           Component 3. Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation and Program Management
                           This component would provide technical assistance and operating costs to the Ministry of Fisheries and Maritime Economy to manage the program
                           of nationally-implemented investments. The Ministry would create a monitoring and implementation unit at the level of the Cabinet, supported by a
                           technical team of experts to be recruited by the project, including a fisheries economist, a specialist in fisheries infrastructure; a fisheries policy and
                           management specialist; and an environment and social safeguard specialist. Working with the various Departments of the Ministry, this team
                           would prepare an annual work program, budget, update of the monitoring and evaluation indicators and procurement plan that would eventually be
                           reviewed with the steering committee and transmitted to the Regional Coordination Unit for the Program, housed at the Sub-Regional Fisheries
                           Commission (CSRP). At this scale, the CSRP would provide technical support to the Ministry in implementation, as it does for all of the countries
                           participating in the WARFP, as well as implementation of regional information-sharing and transparency initiatives.

                            D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                           Mauritania


                            E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Implementation capacity is weak in the Ministry of Fisheries and Marine Resources, and will be supplemented by a technical team embedded in
                           the Ministry’s monitoring and implementation unit, with oversight provided by a multi-stakeholder national steering committee. For this reason, the
                           regional structure mandated with supporting the management of marine fish resources, the Commission Sous-Regionale des Peches (CSRP), will
                           be used to help coordinate and supervise compliance with safeguard policies.

                            F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

                           Maman-Sani Issa (AFTEN)
                           Beatrix Allah-Mensah (AFTCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

                            Safeguard Policies                                Triggered?        Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01               Yes                 Only the fish landing site cluster at Nouadhibou is clearly expected to generate
                                                                                                adverse environmental impacts if adequate management system were not in
                                                                                                place. A stand alone EIA will be prepared to prevent any disturbance though the
                                                                                                infrastructure is currently envisaged as the extension of an existing harbor/wharf,
                                                                                                rather than the construction of an entirely new landing site; this will be confirmed
                                                                                                during preparation.
                                                                                                For the remaining aspects of the project which locations and impacts are not yet
                                                                                                clearly foreseen, the existing ESMF of the previous APL will be update to
                                                                                                capture the associated risks.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                       No

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                                No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09                           No
                                Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                             No

                                Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                      No

                                Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                                TBD                    The application of OP 4.12 will be fully determined in the course of preparation.
                                                                                                                        However, while previous APLs in the series have triggered this safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        because of the construction of small-scale fish landing sites with unknown
                                                                                                                        locations, requiring a Resettlement Policy Framework, this investment would
                                                                                                                        only support infrastructure investment in the port at Nouadhibou, which is not an
                                                                                                                        entirely new landing site, but extension of an existing wharf.

                                                                                                                        Similarly, in terms of a process framework, this investment would strengthen
                                                                                                                        resource management of the fisheries, which are largely utilized by industrial
                                                                                                                        (mostly foreign) operators. A regional Process Framework (PF) and a regional
                                                                                                                        Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) have already been prepared by the
                                                                                                                        WARFP, and the Government of Mauritania will draw upon these as needed
                                                                                                                        during preparation.
                                Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                          No

                                Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                          No
                                7.50
                                Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                              No



                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 16-Jul-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
                                  should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                    The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
                                    The studies will be launched by April 30, 2012, and completed by May 15, 2012.

                         IV. APPROVALS
                                Task Team Leader:                                Name: John Virdin
                                Approved By:
                                Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                 Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                     Date: 19-Mar-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                                Sector Manager:                                  Name: Idah Z. Pswarayi-Riddihough (SM)                                                                Date: 22-Jan-2012




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
