                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA768
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Apr-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Apr-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Ghana                             Project ID:    P129769
                            Project Name:     Natural Resources and Environmental Governance Technical Assistance
                                              (P129769)
                            Task Team         Flavio Chaves
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       19-Apr-2013                         Estimated   30-May-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: AFTN3                                Lending     Technical Assistance Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Forestry (60%), Other Mining and Extractive Industries (40%)
                            Theme(s):         Environmental policies and institutions (40%), Climate change (30%), Other
                                              environment and natural resources management (30%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       5.00           Total Bank Financing:                   5.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                       Financing Gap:                          0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                      Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                      0.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                               5.00
                              Total                                                                                   5.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective of the proposed TA operation improve institutional capacity of
                           key MDAs in NRE sectors in revenue forecasting, benefit-sharing, monitoring and district-level
                           service delivery



                                                                      Page 1 of 7
                          3. Project Description
                         1.      The proposed Technical Assistance is designed to help the Government improve policies,
                         develop technical tools and skills, and solidify institutional capacities needed to sustain Ghana’s
Public Disclosure Copy




                         NREG program in achieving desired policy reforms. The TA will provide the Government with
                         timely and targeted technical support and analysis to support the implementation of its program and
                         improve environmental and natural resource outcomes in key sectors. The TA will also support the
                         NREG Program’s efforts to consult widely with multiple stakeholders involved in the policy reform
                         agenda. Consultation processes will be inclusive and stakeholder engagement will be fostered at key
                         phases of the process: inception, design of studies, results from studies, validation of conclusions
                         and recommendations.
                         2.      The proposed TA activities build on extensive prior analytical work conducted by the Bank
                         and Development Partners, including the European Commission (EC), DFID, the Government of
                         Netherlands and others who continue to support the GoG’s NREG Program. The Bank will finance
                         this TA operation with an IDA Grant of US$5 million and the Government will provide in-kind
                         contributions of staff time and operational costs. The project has three components:

                         •        Component 1- Supporting Policymaking and Knowledge Management (USD 2,620,000):
                         will finance consultancies, services, and operating costs towards the development of studies and
                         related consultations to address key issues on natural resources and environmental governance as
                         identified during the first phase of the NREG Program. The project will finance, inter alia: 1) the
                         development of public consultation guidelines for the NRE sectors; 2) the socio-economic analyses
                         of benefit sharing arrangements in the Forest sector; 3) development of guidelines for local
                         procurement in the mining sector; and 4) development of Climate Change Support & Impact
                         Monitoring Disclosure System (CCSI-MDS).

                         •        Component 2 - Strengthening institutional capacity to support sustainable natural resources
                         and environmental management (USD 1,560,000): will finance consultancies, services, goods and
                         operating costs towards the development of capacity building activities meant to strengthen the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         capacity of responsible agencies to deliver key services. The project will finance, inter: 1) the
                         development of a revenue forecasting model for natural resources; 2) capacity building for forest
                         management and forest planning in district offices;3) strengthening of the Minerals Commission
                         district offices for managing ASM; and 4) training of government of Ghana negotiators and policy
                         makers for Climate Change.

                         •       Component 3- Project Management and Related Capacity Building (USD 820,000): will
                         finance consultancies, services, good and operating costs to ensure planning, management,
                         coordination, reporting, and auditing of activities in line with Bank standards.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed operation will finance consultations, analytical work, and capacity building.

                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Moses Yao Duphey (AFTN3)
                         Angela Nyawira Khaminwa (AFTCS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)


                                                                      Page 2 of 7
                         Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes            The proposed the TA operation will finance
                         BP 4.01                                      consultants, services, goods and operating costs
                                                                      to support analytical activities, consultations and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      strengthen institutional capacity to deliver public
                                                                      services on natural resources and environmental
                                                                      management. The activities financed by this
                                                                      Technical Assistance project are unlikely to have
                                                                      any adverse direct environmental or social
                                                                      impact. Some analytical work that will be
                                                                      conducted under the TA might have indirect
                                                                      environmental and social impacts, most of which
                                                                      are expected to be positive. The Terms of
                                                                      Reference (ToRs) for the analytical work that
                                                                      could have such impact were by reviewed by the
                                                                      Bank to ensure that they are consistent with the
                                                                      Bank's safeguard Policies and that they promote
                                                                      sustainable development benefits. There have
                                                                      been consultations with stakeholders and civil
                                                                      society on the project, including environmental
                                                                      and social issues and key points in the ToRs,
                                                                      which have been disclosed before appraisal.
                                                                      Additional consultations on the ToRs will be
                                                                      carried out before the bidding of consultancy
                                                                      contracts.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    No

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36             Yes             This Technical Assistance operation will not
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      finance any activities that could have adverse
                                                                      direct impact of forests. The proposed the TA
                                                                      operation will finance consultants, services,
                                                                      goods and operating costs to support analytical
                                                                      activities, consultations that aim to bring about
                                                                      changes in the management, protection, or
                                                                      utilization of natural forests and plantations. The
                                                                      proposed changes are considered to benign and
                                                                      aim mostly to improve existing benefit-sharing
                                                                      arrangements and empower forest dependent
                                                                      communities in the planning and management of
                                                                      forest resources. In order to maximize the
                                                                      positive impacts of planned project activities.
                                                                      Terms of Reference (see OP 4.01 above) for the
                                                                      analytical work that could have such impact were
                                                                      by reviewed by the Bank to ensure that they are
                                                                      consistent with the Bank's safeguard Policies and
                                                                      that they promote sustainable development
                                                                      benefits.




                                                              Page 3 of 7
                            Pest Management OP 4.09            No                 N/A
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No                 N/A
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No                 N/A

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     No                 Some analytical work that will be conducted
                            4.12                                                under the TA might have indirect social impacts
                                                                                (i.e. benefit-sharing in forestry, forest
                                                                                management plans). Terms of Reference (see OP
                                                                                4.01 above) for the analytical work that could
                                                                                have such impact were by reviewed by the Bank
                                                                                to ensure that they are consistent with the Bank's
                                                                                safeguard Policies and that they promote
                                                                                sustainable development benefits.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No                 N/A

                            Projects on International        No                   N/A
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                   N/A
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Public Disclosure Copy




                               N/A
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                               The analytical work to be financed may have indirect impacts on land use, land ownership, and
                              access to resources as a result of the implementation of policies and models that emerge from the
                              TA. Specifically: (a) it is envisioned that the benefit sharing study will result in shifts in the
                              benefit-sharing regime. These shifts are expected to be positive – moving from an arrangement in
                              which the state owns trees (and resources accruing from them) to one in which ownership is
                              spread more equitably and includes land owners, tree keepers, and land users, and (b) The review
                              of forest management plans under the capacity building component may result in access
                              restrictions to forest reserves which may result in loss of income (e.g. collection of non timber
                              forest products) or restrictions of access.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                               N/A
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.




                                                                        Page 4 of 7
                            In an effort to enhance the projects contribution to sustainable development and manage the risks
                           of potential downstream impacts the Borrower will undertake the following measures:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The Terms of Reference (TOR) for the Benefit Sharing, Forest Development Plan, and Forest
                           Management Plans have been prepared with significant attention to social issues in an effort to
                           ensure that the subsequent products minimize social impacts. Specifically, each of the activities
                           listed above will be informed by a comprehensive social analysis. The benefit-sharing study will
                           include a review of community-forest dependence and an analysis of the welfare and income
                           impacts of existing benefit-sharing regimes both of which will inform the recommended
                           arrangements and subsequent mainstreaming. The revision of the Forestry Development Master
                           Plan will include an analysis of social impacts including welfare impacts. The preparation of the
                           Forest Management Plans will include, as per best practices, comprehensive social assessments.
                           Additionally, links between the different social analyses are explicitly included in the TORs. The
                           Borrower has worked closely with the World Bank staff to ensure that the activities proposed
                           address relevant social and environmental issues that may result from the financed activities. The
                           World Bank will review and clear all TORs before appraisal. Cleared TORs will be disclosed at
                           the InfoShop and in-country in an effort to provide an opportunity for input from stakeholders.

                           The TA is designed to ensure that the NREG coordination team and the technical teams at the
                           project's implementing agencies consult the various stakeholders in a systematic and standardized
                           manner. The Borrower will develop of consultation guidelines to ensure a standard approach to the
                           different phases and processes in consultation (inter alia: stakeholder engagement and
                           involvement, document sharing, consultation methods, reporting and documentation).

                           The capacity of the client to prepare and implement Terms of Reference with sensitivity to the
                           World Bank's safeguard policies is satisfactory. While the level of familiarity with the Bank's
                           policies varies, there is a minimal understanding of our policies. During implementation the Bank
                           will provide customized capacity support on safeguard policies to ensure that relevant staff are
Public Disclosure Copy




                           aware of relevant aspects of the policy.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The TA is designed to ensure that the NREG coordination team and project implementing
                           agencies adequately consults with various stakeholders involved in the policy reform agenda. In
                           addition, the implementation of the activities under the TA, in particular the analytical work and
                           development of models, is built on an approach that embraces broad and inclusive consultation.
                           There are a wide range of stakeholders involved in the relevant sectors, from national level
                           agencies to grassroots community based organizations and within these groups there are key
                           interest groups such as traditional authorities and women. Consultation will allow for non-state
                           actors to fruitfully contribute to the project activities design and implementation. The finalization
                           of key studies will require the broad agreement of a range of stakeholders which will be confirmed
                           during series of validation meetings. The criteria for determining broad support will be detailed by
                           the Borrower. The cleared TORs will be disclosed in-country prior to appraisal. It is noteworthy
                           that the NREG TA is being undertaken in a context of a strong recent history of participation and
                           consultation between government and non-governmental actors.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                       NA


                                                                      Page 5 of 7
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         04-Apr-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      08-Apr-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ghana                                                               //
                           Comments:
                         Technical Assistance Project
                         For a TA project which will finance the preparation of a specific safeguards instrument, please
                         indicate type of document disclosed, if any.
                         The Borrower has worked closely with the World Bank staff to ensure that the studies and activities
                         proposed under this Technical Assistance address relevant social and environmental issues that may
                         result from their implementation. The World Bank will review and clear all relevant TORs ( Benefit
                         Sharing, Forest Development Plan, and Forest Management Plans) before appraisal. Cleared TORs
                         will be disclosed in-country and at the InfoShop so as to provide an opportunity for input from
                         stakeholders.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?


                                                                    Page 6 of 7
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Flavio Chaves
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name:                                              Date:
                            Coordinator:
                            Sector Manager:     Name:                                              Date:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 7 of 7
