                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA2793
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 30-Apr-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 30-Apr-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Chad                              Project ID:      P132617
                            Project Name:      Chad Education Sector Reform Project Phase 2 (P132617)
                            Task Team          Marie-Helene Cloutier
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          25-Mar-2013                       Estimated   21-Jun-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTEW                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Primary education (80%), Secondary education (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for all (80%), Education for the knowledge economy (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         15.00               Total Bank Financing:        15.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                              Financing Gap:                0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          0.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                                  15.00
                              Total                                                                                      15.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed Project Development Objective is to (i) improve teaching and learning conditions in
                           primary and upper secondary schools in selected areas and (ii) strengthen the system to facilitate
                           evidence-based decision-making in the education sector.
                            3. Project Description
                           Project activities would be structured around three main components.

                                                                       Page 1 of 8
                         Component 1: Supporting teaching and learning conditions in primary schools (Total costs including
                         contingencies: US$9.1 million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component has the following objectives, to: (i) support improvements in the teaching and
                         learning conditions in selected primary schools through the provision of quality infrastructure and
                         furniture, textbooks, and improvements in teacher development and management; (ii) identify
                         possible efficiency gains for the system, through careful monitoring and evaluation; and (iii)
                         strengthen the national strategies in each of these subsectors.

                         Subcomponent 1.1 Quality Infrastructure and School Furniture (Total costs including contingencies:
                         US$3.1 million). This subcomponent will finance, in the four targeted regions, community-led
                         constructions (rehabilitations) of 70 (5) classrooms, 70 latrines blocks, five water wells as well as the
                         provision of furniture for the new classrooms. Furthermore, it will support the establishment school
                         infrastructure framework and guidelines destined to all governmental and non-governmental agencies
                         involved in school building planning, design and construction and promote the emergence of a
                         streamlined approach to managing the many interventions in the subsector. The subcomponent will
                         finance: (i) the construction/rehabilitation of infrastructures in existing schools and provision of
                         school furniture; (ii) consultants’ fees to define norms and standards, framework, and guidelines for
                         school building; (iii) training of eligible communities and APEs on simplified procurement and civil
                         works quality supervision.

                         Subcomponent 1.2 Teaching and Learning Material (Total costs including contingencies: US$2.7
                         million). This subcomponent will strengthen the system for managing the production, distribution,
                         and efficient usage of textbooks and teacher guides in primary schools while increasing the
                         availability of teaching and learning material in project areas. Approximately 405,000 textbooks,
                         10,000 teacher guides, and 10,000 textbook management guides will be printed and distributed
                         across all the primary schools in the targeted regions to bring textbooks per student ratio to 1:2.
                         Furthermore, school principals, teachers, and APEs will be trained in the use and management of the
                         materials and supplied with guides to this effect. Finally, the subcomponent will support the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         development of a national strategy for textbooks which will define a framework aiming at structuring
                         investments to ensure sustainable increases in the availability and efficient use of teaching and
                         learning materials. The subcomponent will finance (i) the printing and distribution of the textbooks,
                         teacher guides, and textbooks management guides; (ii) training cost for teachers, principals and
                         APEs; (iii) consultants’ fees to strengthen the CNC and to support the development of the national
                         textbooks strategy; and (iv) operating costs.

                         Subcomponent 1.3 Teacher Training and Management (Total costs including contingencies: US$2.1
                         million). This subcomponent will assist the Government in refining its strategy with regards to
                         teacher management and living up to its commitment with regards to quality training of CTs. More
                         specifically, it will support (i) targeted improvements in the quality of the in-service training system
                         for CTs through the establishment of an evaluation feedback loop while upgrading of the teaching
                         capacities of 1620 CTs in project areas (complementing previous and ongoing partners’ initiatives in
                         other regions), (ii) a strengthening of the central and decentralized authorities in the supervision and
                         pedagogical guidance of teachers, and (iii) the design of the Government’s future contracting policy
                         and regulatory framework. The subcomponent will finance (i) expenses for in-service training of CTs
                         (participant costs, per diem, equipment, printing, etc.); (ii) consultant’s fees to support the design of a
                         quality assessment and improvement of the training and the development of the teacher policy and
                         regulatory framework; (iii) goods and equipment; and (v) operating costs.



                                                                        Page 2 of 8
                         Subcomponent 1.4: Community Teachers Subsidy Payment Mechanism (Total costs including
                         contingencies: US$1.2 million). The subcomponent will support the implementation, on pilot basis
                         (in five targeted regions, targeting about 4800 teachers), of an innovative payment mechanism of CT
Public Disclosure Copy




                         subsidies through mobile phones which could potentially lessen problems encountered with the
                         current payment mechanism (including long delays, abuse, and weak controls) and consequently lead
                         to improved teacher motivation, reduced absenteeism, and overall greater cost-efficiency of the
                         system. The subcomponent will finance: (i) a share of transfer fees; (ii) Short Message Service
                         (SMS) fees; (iii) rehabilitation of a room to accommodate the payment control center; (iv) goods and
                         equipment; (v) consultants’ fees for the design of a CT database and monitoring procedures; (vi)
                         training costs for beneficiary teachers, principals, and APEs; and (vii) operating costs. The project
                         will not finance teacher salary or CT subsidy.

                         Component 2: Supporting teaching and learning in secondary schools (Total costs including
                         contingencies: US$2.1 million)

                         This component has the following objectives: (i) support improvements in the teaching and learning
                         conditions of selected secondary schools through the provision of teaching and learning material and
                         in-service training of teachers, with a special focus on the scientific disciplines, (ii) assess the cost-
                         effectiveness of the interventions, and (iii) inform the development of a strong subsector strategy.

                         Subcomponent 2.1: In-Service Teacher Training and Subsector Strategy (Total costs including
                         contingencies: US$0.9 million). The subcomponent aims to upgrade the pedagogical and didactic
                         skills of 300 upper secondary school science teachers’ through the design and delivery of an in-
                         service training program and the distribution of science kits. The targeted disciplines will be Math,
                         Physics, Chemistry, and Natural Sciences. A mechanism for rigorously evaluating the impact of the
                         training on teachers’ in-class behaviors and students’ performance will be put in place. The
                         subcomponent will also support the MEFPS in the development a medium-term secondary education
                         strategy, establishing a priority in needs and suggesting cost-effective interventions. The
                         subcomponent will finance: (i) consultants’ fees (including university professors) to design/tests/
Public Disclosure Copy




                         validate the curricula, modules, and materials, and to deliver the in-service training; (ii) goods and
                         equipment (computer, projectors, etc.); (iii) consultants’ fees to develop standardized tests (teachers
                         and students); (v) logistical means for supervision and monitoring; and (iv) operating cost.

                         Subcomponent 2.2: Teaching and learning material (Total costs including contingencies: US$1.2
                         million). The subcomponent aims to enhance teachers' access to a range of documentary resources in
                         order to allow for improvement in teacher’s general and specific knowledge, planning and delivery
                         of lessons and, ultimately, and ultimately students’ performance. This will be achieved through the
                         establishment of documentary resource centers (DRCs) for teachers, placing a special emphasis on
                         scientific disciplines, in 30 upper secondary schools. The DRCs will be two different types: 15
                         conventional ones, endowed with books (paper), and 15 digital ones, endowed with tablets (digital).
                         Significant upstream work will be undertaken to identify relevant books and content and develop
                         original content (digital and paper). Outputs, outcomes, and impacts of the activities will also be
                         rigorously evaluated. The subcomponent will finance: (i) rehabilitation, reorganization and/or
                         cleaning of rooms to serve as DRCs; (ii) goods and equipment (tablets, books, projectors and screens,
                         furniture, storage and power units, and solar panels, etc.); (iii) internet connection; (iv) consultants’
                         fees for the identification and digitization of the content; (v) training costs; and (vi) operating costs.

                         Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (Total costs including contingencies:
                         US$3.8 million)

                                                                        Page 3 of 8
                         Current monitoring and evaluation systems are char acterized by inefficient data collection and a
                         weak or limited control mechanism as well as a missing links across the many departments
Public Disclosure Copy




                         producing and using data. As a consequence, there is a lack of reliable data, delay in producing
                         annual statistics, and underutilization of evidence to evaluate past activities and plan for future ones.
                         This component will support project implementation by funding the Project Coordination Unit (PCU)
                         coordination needs and by strengthening MEFA and MEFPS monitoring, evaluation, and evidence-
                         based management capacities and activities. It will allow for collection of information crucial to the
                         results framework of this project.

                         Subcomponent 3.1: Project management (Total costs including contingencies: US$2.2 million). The
                         component will finance the logistical means and human resources necessary for the proper
                         functioning of the PCU. This will include inter-alia equipment and furniture, technical assistance,
                         training and study tours, repair/acquisition of vehicles, supplies, operating expenses (fuel, insurance,
                         maintenance of vehicles, etc.) and salary of PCU’s staff, with the exception of salaries of civil
                         servants.

                         Subcomponent 3.2: Monitoring and Evaluation (Total costs including contingencies: US$1.6
                         million). The subcomponent will therefore support: (i) the design and implementation of better tools
                         and institutional mechanisms for collecting and using school-level data for human resource
                         management, statistical and overall planning purposes: (ii) improvements and expansion of the
                         responsibilities and activities of inspectors, pedagogical advisers, and planning officers; (iii) the
                         design/upgrade of the central databases of data producing departments including the Human
                         Resource Department (Direction des Ressources Humaines, DRH), the Statistical and School
                         Mapping Direction (Direction de la Statistique et de la Carte Scolaires, DSCS), the Agency for
                         Promoting Community Initiatives in Education (Agence pour la Promotion des Initiatives
                         Communautaires en Education, APICED), the Teacher Training Department (Direction de la
                         Formation des Enseignants, DFE), etc.; (iv) the strengthening of coordination between the above-
                         mentioned departments as well as decentralized structures for data production and usage; and (iv)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         provision of specific hands-on training in M&E (including impact evaluations, surveys, data analysis,
                         etc.) to relevant Ministry staff. The subcomponent will finance: (i) consultancy fees to review/design
                         institutional processes, the administrative and technical procedures manual for collecting and
                         administering school-level data, for impact evaluation design, roll-out, and analysis, and for
                         independent data collection activities (ii) tablets for internal data collection, (iii) training costs, and
                         (iv) operating costs.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Interventions for the whole project will focus on six regions: Mandoul, Mayo Kebbi Est, Mayo
                         Kebbi Ouest, Tandjilé, Hadjer Lamis and N’Djaména. Interventions for subcomponent are limited to
                         the four regions of Mandoul, Mayo Kebbi Est, Mayo Kebbi Ouest, Tandjilé.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Lucienne M. M'Baipor (AFTCS)
                         Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (AFTN1)

                          6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)




                                                                        Page 4 of 8
                            Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes                This policy is triggered due to potential negative
                            BP 4.01                                               impacts that might occur under activities to be
                                                                                  financed in subcomponent 1.1, which will include
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                  the construction of new classrooms in existing
                                                                                  schools, as well as water points and latrines, also
                                                                                  on existing school sites. These impacts are likely
                                                                                  to be small-scale and site specific typical of
                                                                                  category B projects. The Environmental and
                                                                                  Social Management Framework (ESMF) of the
                                                                                  previous Education project has been updated,
                                                                                  reviewed, approved and disclosed (in-country and
                                                                                  at the Bank infoshop prior to appraisal.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No                 The project does not involve forests or forest
                                                                                  management.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09              No                 The project does not involve the use of
                                                                                  pesticides or pest management schemes.
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/      Yes                As the project will carry out excavations for
                            BP 4.11                                               classroom constructions, the project triggers OP
                                                                                  4.11 to ensure that the risk of finding cultural
                                                                                  resources is adequately managed.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No                 There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
                                                                                  area.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       No                 The classrooms will be built in public sites. No
                            4.12                                                  land acquisition will be required and the project
                                                                                  will not finance works which could lead to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                  involuntary resettlement and/or loss of access to
                                                                                  resources and livelihoods. The project will ensure
                                                                                  that all land where classrooms are built are
                                                                                  belonging to the state and have no encroachers.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No                 N/A

                            Projects on International        No                     N/A
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                     N/A
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               Social. The key beneficiaries of this project, are children (girls and boys) in the regions selected
                              for primary and lower secondary education interventions of this project. School children will
                              benefit from an improved physical and pedagogical learning environment, and improvements to


                                                                          Page 5 of 8
                           the quality of education delivered, with the long term potential to increase earnings and positively
                           influence the social conditions for outgoing students and their communities. Improved conditions
                           and higher levels of education for girls will not only contribute to higher future earnings but also
Public Disclosure Copy




                           help protect them from social ills associated with abuse and HIV/AIDS. Educating girls at the
                           primary and higher levels will also contribute to the social welfare conditions of their families. By
                           promoting the latrines and water wells constructions in the school compound, the project will also
                           improve hygiene conditions and will reduce the risk of waterborne diseases. No safeguard policy
                           is triggered with regards to social issues.

                           Environment. The country counts various agro ecological zones (saharian, sahelian, sahelo-
                           sudanian, sudanian). The project triggers the Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) policy and
                           the Physical Cultural Resources Policy (OP 4.11) and has been assigned an Environmental
                           Screening Category of “B?. This policy is triggered due to potential negative impacts that might
                           occur under activities to be financed in subcomponent 1. These impacts are likely to be small-scale
                           and site specific. An updated Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has
                           been prepared prior to appraisal, and will be published in Chad and at Bank’s Infoshop. The
                           ESMF identifies the various potential environmental impact of the project. The potential negative
                           impacts are very limited as the project activity will be limited to construction of classrooms, water
                           wells and latrines in existing schools. The main challenge will be the waste management of
                           construction activities and the avoidance to modify landscape. The classrooms will be built in
                           public sites. No land acquisition will be required and the project will not finance works which
                           could lead to involuntary resettlement and/or loss of access to resources and livelihoods. The
                           project will ensure that all land where classrooms are built are belonging to the state and have no
                           encroachers.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            N/A
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
Public Disclosure Copy




                           impacts.
                            N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            The borrower's institutional capacity for safeguard policies remains weak despite the
                           implementation of PARSET by the Ministry of Education. This project was designed in the same
                           way and prepared an EMP to comply with OP/BP 4.01 and OP/BP 4.11. The level of
                           implementation was weak due mainly to the lack of ownership of the whole chain of the Education
                           sector. The Previous project did not have any large scale negative impact but the capacity was not
                           created.

                           To ensure this ownership and avoid the weaknesses identified during the previous phase, the PCU
                           will hire an engineer in charge of supervising the civil works subcomponent, including compliance
                           with safeguards policies. Furthermore, appropriate training will be organized to create capacity
                           inside the Ministry in charge of Education at all levels and also for the Ministry of Environment
                           and also to ensure that local and national NGOs are fully involved in the project activities.

                           During project implementation, the Bank’s environmental and social specialists on the project
                           team will also provide required support to the PCU and ensure that the ESMF is adequately


                                                                      Page 6 of 8
                           implemented. The World Bank team will ensure that the capacity strengthening measures, as
                           outlined in the project safeguard document and integrated in the project budget, implementation
                           and monitoring plan, are fully implemented.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             During the update process of the ESMF, an extensive consultation was led. A public consultation
                           was organized in Ndjamena to discuss and validate the safeguard documents with the participation
                           of the most involved stakeholders. During the implementation process, the PCU and the WB team
                           will ensure that all stakeholders are informed on the project activities. Project AM will be public.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      29-Apr-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   30-Apr-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Chad                                                             30-Apr-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)         Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector          Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated    Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural         Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the       Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the       Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?




                                                                      Page 7 of 8
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Marie-Helene Cloutier
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                    Date: 30-Apr-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Kaliope Azzi-Huck (SM)                         Date: 30-Apr-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 8 of 8
