                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                  Report No.: ISDSC772

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Jun-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Africa                           Project ID:       P130694
                            Project Name:       Nile Basin Climate Resilient Growth Project (P130694)
                            Task Team           Eileen Rose Burke
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           11-Jul-2012                      Estimated         15-Nov-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      AFTWR                            Lending           Technical Assistance Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector:             General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (80%), Public
                                                administration- Water, sanitation and flood protection (20%)
                            Theme:              Water resource management (50%), Environmental policies and institutions
                                                (40%), Participation and civic engagement (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                              Amount
                              Borrower                                                                        0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Miscellaneous 1                                                                 7.00
                              Nile Basin Initiative Trust Fund                                                8.00
                              Total                                                                          15.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed PDO for the NBCRG project, as well as the envisioned two-phased program, is to
                           improve cooperative climate-resilient water resources management and development in the Nile
                           Basin. The higher level objective is to support NBI in its efforts to achieve its long-term (30+ year)
                           shared vision, “to achieve sustainable socioeconomic development through the equitable utilization
                           of, and benefit from, the common Nile Basin water resources.?
                           C. Project Description
                           1.1     Description. This NBCRG project would be a subset of the Nile Basin Initiative (NBI’s)
                         proposed program for 2013 and beyond (as outlined in the NBI’s consolidated concept note.) The
                         project will likely finance up to USD 15m for technical assistance, including identification and
                         preparation of potential investment opportunities up to pre-feasibility stage. It will be implemented
Public Disclosure Copy




                         over 2 years. Of this total amount, $7 million is expected to come from the Cooperation in
                         International Waters in Africa (CIWA) facility. An extension of the Nile Basin Trust Fund to permit
                         use of its undisbursed residual as of December 31, 2012 is expected to provide the balance of $8
                         million. This project supports the effort to mainstream and consolidate trust fund work in the Africa
                         region.

                         This project is intended to be the first phase of a larger Nile Basin Climate Resilient Growth
                         Program. The second phase would likely be a 5 year project of up to $30 million, depending upon
                         donor interest and NBI achievement of results on this project. Movement from phase one to the next
                         would be contingent on meeting one or more triggers (which would include, amongst other results-
                         based milestones, targets for country contributions as a reflection of country commitment to the
                         NBI). It is envisioned that broad parameters of the program will be outlined in a memo to
                         accompany the PAD for this project.

                         1.2. Project Components. The project will have three technical assistance components, one per NBI
                         center. The sub-components for each center will be organized thematically, with the following set of
                         proposed activities:

                         •        Component 1 - NBI Secretariat (Nile-SEC): The Nile Basin Secretariat will undertake
                         activities to increase country engagement and international support, through the facilitation of
                         stakeholder dialogue around the common water resource, as well as to serve as a Regional Center of
                         Excellence for Analysis on Water Resource Management in the Basin.
                                 oSub-component 1.a.) Facilitating Cooperation. Activities will include policy and
                         administrative services for governance bodies and stakeholders to facilitate inter- and intra-riparian
                         dialogue and cooperation.
                                 oSub-component 1.b.) Water resources management. Activities under this sub-component
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will enhance understanding of the water resources and provide a sound information base for Nile
                         Basin water resources management and development. Activities include development of an
                         integrated knowledge management (KM) system, operation and maintenance of Nile Decision
                         Support System (DSS), design of a basin-wide hydromet network, and reports analyzing
                         management and development alternatives.

                         •        Component 2 – Nile Equatorial Lakes Subsidiary Action Program - Coordination Unit
                         (NELSAP-CU): NELSAP-CU proposes to advance a portfolio of climate resilient transformative
                         investment projects, which support growth, resilience and low carbon development. NELSAP-CU
                         has a portfolio of projects of regional significance at various stages of identification, which it
                         proposes to further advance in the preparation cycle (in early project preparation, up to pre-feasibility
                         stage) through this project.
                          o       Sub Component 2.a.) Promotion of climate resilient catalytic and transformative investment
                         opportunities (early project preparation, up to pre-feasibility stage). This sub component will prepare
                         10 proposals (early stage) for possible new projects, to find potential financiers for eventual
                         preparation of the projects (which would occur outside the scope of this project). This activity
                         proposes to prepare materials to facilitate search for finance for the detailed preparation of potential
                         regional investments that have been already identified and agreed through other NBI projects,
                         including : (i) the NEL Strategic Sectoral and Social Assessment of Power options (incl. regional
                         transmission interconnections), (ii) the comprehensive basin wide study of power options
                         (hydropower generation options) and (iii) the NEL Water Multi Sectoral Investment opportunity
                         strategy (incl. multipurpose WRD opportunities in the Kagera, SMM, Mara, Yala, Gucha, Kyoga,
                         Aswa and Tanzania sub basins).
Public Disclosure Copy




                                o Sub Component 2.b.) Advancing hydropower development. Activities include study,
                         identification and possible preparation of aspects of one or more hydropower projects. NELSAP-
                         CU has proposed study of a site in South Sudan under this sub-component, but other sites in the
                         Basin are also under consideration.
                               o Sub-component 2.c.) Advancing water resource development. Activities will include the
                         study, identification and preparation of possible multipurpose water resources management projects
                         of regional significance, and potentially including irrigation and watershed management
                         development.
                               o Sub-component 2.d.) Facilitating Cooperation. NELSAP will coordinate regional
                         consultations.

                         •        Component 3 – Eastern Nile Technical Regional Office (ENTRO): ENTRO proposes to
                         engage in activities in the Eastern Nile to consolidating the knowledge base for sustainable integrated
                         water resources planning, and to promote responsible water resources development and power trade.
                               o Sub Component 3.a.) Water and Natural Resource Management. This includes the
                         development of a climate-related data portal, and the technical assistance for early stage preparation
                         of watershed management projects (up to pre-feasibility stage), and identification and possible
                         opportunities for activities to increase the resilience of flood impacted communities in the Eastern
                         Nile Basin, through improved forecasting and early warning communications.
                               o Sub Component 3.b.) Environmental and Social considerations in Water Resource
                         Development. ENTRO proposes to conduct training activities for the three governments, to improve
                         national capacity to integrate environmental & social issues, including those associated with climate
                         resiliency. ENTRO also proposes the development of regional dam safety guidelines in conjunction
                         with the Eastern Nile countries.
                               o Sub Component 3.c.) Stakeholder Interaction and Access to information. This includes
                         providing public access to ENTRO’s knowledge base, analytical tools, and knowledge products
Public Disclosure Copy




                         related to the Eastern Nile, with a goal of increasing fact-based decision making and public opinion
                         on the Nile.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the             safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is primarily technical assistance and will be implemented by NBI offices in three
                         countries:
                         •       Uganda, Entebbe – location of NBI Secretariat
                         •       Ethiopia, Addis Ababa – location of ENTRO
                         •       Rwanda, Kigali – location of NELSAP-CU

                         Coordination will be facilitated by the NBI Secretariat. This NBCRG project would be a subset of
                         the NBI’s proposed program for 2013 and beyond (as outlined in the NBI’s consolidated concept
                         note.) The project will likely consist of USD 15m and be implemented over 1.5-2 years. Of this, $7
                         million would come from the Cooperation in International Waters in Africa (CIWA) facility. An
                         extension of the Nile Basin Trust Fund to permit use of its undisbursed residual as of December 31,
                         2012, is expected to provide the balance of $8 million.

                         The project is designed to support NBI operations and assist in the identification of upstream
                         investments. Under the first phase of the project, therefore, no physical investments are included for
                           financing. Instead preparation of some projects up to pre-feasibility stage is envisaged.

                           Anticipating that the above activities would entail reviews of the environmental and social impacts,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the project will apply the current approach embodied in the report entitled A Strategy for Addressing
                           Environmental and Social Safeguards, which was developed under the NBI Institutional
                           Strengthening Project (ISP). This report was disclosed in 2008 by the NBI in all countries and in the
                           Bank’s InfoShop. Moreover, through the NBI Institutional Strengthening Project (ISP) (P110616),
                           another report, the Environmental and Social Management Guidelines for Nile Basin Initiative
                           Projects, is being developed. The process for development of these guidelines is ongoing and
                           includes consultations and disclosure. The project will ensure that the guidelines are consistent with
                           Bank safeguards policies. Once adopted by NBI and the participating countries, the Environmental
                           and Social Management Guidelines will apply to all NBI projects, including this project and to future
                           NBI investment opportunities. These two documents, the strategy and the guidelines, will constitute
                           the environmental and social safeguards framework instruments applicable for this project
                           (specifically covering required guidelines as covered in an ESMF, RPF or Process Framework and
                           other appropriate safeguards instruments).
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Over the past few years the NBI has developed a robust capacity for addressing safeguard policies,
                           particularly in the ENTRO and NELSAP programs. The NBI has successfully prepared SSEAs,
                           EIAs, RAPs and other safeguards documents for many on-going and planned projects under
                           financing from IDA, AfDB, and other bilateral donors. The NBI has both the staff and policies,
                           acceptable to the Bank, in place to manage the necessary safeguard identification and preparation
                           that will be financed through the proposed project.

                           ENTRO and NELSAP currently have, in each of their offices, one full-time environment and one
                           full-time social specialist. These staff have participated in Bank-organized safeguards training
                           clinics and other capacity building activities under previous NBI Bank-assisted projects. Within
                           country, an assessment of capacities for environment and social safeguards management was
Public Disclosure Copy




                           completed under the ISP. Further capacity strengthening occurred during several Bank missions
                           which were held throughout the process of completing the NBI environment and social management
                           strategy and guidelines.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Maria Concepcion J. Cruz (AFTCS)
                           Hocine Chalal (AFTN1)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             The Nile Basin Climate Resilient Growth
                           BP 4.01                                              Project is a technical assistance project, and
                                                                                does not include investments. A ‘Strategy for
                                                                                Addressing Environmental and Social
                                                                                Safeguards’ was developed under the NBI
                                                                                Institutional Strengthening Project, and first
                                                                                disclosed as its safeguards instrument on April
                                                                                11, 2008 in the Eastern Nile, and in the
                                                                 InfoShop on April 23, 2008. This document is
                                                                 applicable to all technical assistance projects
                                                                 that fall under NBI, including this project. Thus
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 the Strategy will be updated and re-disclosed
                                                                 again as the primary safeguards instrument for
                                                                 this project by the Nile Basin Initiative and in
                                                                 the InfoShop.

                                                                 Through the Nile Basin Initiative’s Institutional
                                                                 Strengthening Project (P110616), the NBI is
                                                                 developing Environmental and Social
                                                                 Management Guidelines for Nile Basin
                                                                 Initiative projects. The development of these
                                                                 guidelines is ongoing and will include
                                                                 consultations and disclosure. Once adopted, the
                                                                 Environmental and Social Management
                                                                 Guidelines will apply to all NBI projects,
                                                                 including this project.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes   Although this project is primarily technical
                                                                 assistance for identification and preparation of
                                                                 possible projects, and does not include any
                                                                 investments, OP4.04 is triggered because it is
                                                                 anticipated that most of the investment
                                                                 opportunities may possible overlap with
                                                                 significant natural habitats. The NBI guidelines
                                                                 will cover specific policies and actions needed
                                                                 to ensure compliance with the policy.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    Since the project does not involve actual
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 physical interventions in forests, the policy is
                                                                 not triggered but any potential forest related
                                                                 issue linked to the project will be addressed on a
                                                                 due diligence basis in the OP 4.01 safeguards
                                                                 instruments mentioned above.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    Since the project does not involve actual use of
                                                                 pesticides and agro-chemicals, the policy is not
                                                                 triggered but any potential pest management
                                                                 related issue linked to the project will be
                                                                 addressed on a due diligence basis in the OP
                                                                 4.01 safeguards instruments mentioned above.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   The exact locations of future projects are not
                         BP 4.11                                 known at this stage of the project. Once future
                                                                 project sites are identified and selected for
                                                                 possible investment opportunities, the project
                                                                 will determine, during project appraisal,
                                                                 whether future investments will occur in areas
                                                                 with historically and culturally significant
                                                                physical artifacts that would trigger the policy.
                                                                In this case, an appropriate set of guidelines on
                                                                how to deal with cultural property will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                developed.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    TBD   Since the project will identify possible future
                                                                investments, and their specific locations are not
                                                                known at this stage, the project will need to
                                                                determine if there would be investment
                                                                activities inside Indigenous Peoples territories,
                                                                or activities that may restrict their access to
                                                                natural resources and livelihoods. The locations,
                                                                and impacts on Indigenous Peoples, will be
                                                                determined at appraisal, and appropriate
                                                                instruments (Indigenous Peoples Planning
                                                                Framework or Indigenous Peoples Plan) will be
                                                                developed, as needed.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes   The project will focus on technical assistance
                         4.12                                   and preparatory design for possible future
                                                                investments. As part of this preparation work,
                                                                the first phase will develop area-specific
                                                                guidance in cases, where applicable, some
                                                                relocation or restriction of access to resources
                                                                may occur in any future investment
                                                                opportunities. These will be applicable, in
                                                                particular, to opportunities, for example, under
                                                                NELSAP regional transmission
                                                                interconnections, multipurpose WRD
                                                                activities , possibly in Kagera, SMM, Mara,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                Yala, Gucha, Kyoga, Aswa and Tanzania sub
                                                                basins, hydropower projects (including in South
                                                                Sudan); and in ENTRO, potential watershed
                                                                management projects and activities to increase
                                                                the resilience of flood impacted communities in
                                                                the Eastern Nile Basin. In this case, a
                                                                Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and
                                                                Process Framework (PF) will be included in the
                                                                guidelines for environmental and social
                                                                guidelines being developed by the NBI.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No    The project involves no physical works
                                                                involving the construction of new dams, nor
                                                                does the project rely on the outputs of an
                                                                existing dam. Instead, through the project, the
                                                                client will provide advice to countries to
                                                                strengthen the institutional, legislative, and
                                                                regulatory frame-works for dam safety
                                                                programs. As such, international good practices
                                                                will be promoted, through the use of dam safety
                                                                                                                                 experts and training of key staff on the relevant
                                                                                                                                 aspects of dam safety.
                                 Projects on International                                         Yes                           While OP 7.50 is triggered by the project, it is
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            expected that the project will be exempt from
                                                                                                                                 the notification requirement, as studies proposed
                                                                                                                                 under the project are upstream in nature and do
                                                                                                                                 not involve studies beyond feasibility studies.
                                                                                                                                 However, such studies must include “in the
                                                                                                                                 terms of reference for the activities an
                                                                                                                                 examination of any potential riparian issues".
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Jul-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      As stated above, a ‘Strategy for Addressing Environmental and Social Safeguards’ was developed
                                      under the NBI Institutional Strengthening Project, and first disclosed as its safeguards instrument
                                      on April 11, 2008 in the Eastern Nile, and in the InfoShop on April 23, 2008. This document is
                                      applicable to all technical assistance projects that fall under NBI, including this project. Thus the
                                      Strategy will be updated and re-disclosed again as the primary safeguards instrument for this
                                      project by the Nile Basin Initiative and in the InfoShop.

                                      Through the Nile Basin Initiative’s Institutional Strengthening Project (P110616), the NBI is
                                      developing Environmental and Social Management Guidelines for Nile Basin Initiative projects.
                                      The development of these guidelines is ongoing and will include consultations and disclosure.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      These guidelines/background documents will be completed and disclosed by NBI after conducting
                                      stakeholder consultations and review. Once adopted, the Environmental and Social Management
                                      Guidelines will apply to all NBI projects, including this project.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Eileen Rose Burke

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                                          Date: 03-Jun-2012
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Jonathan S. Kamkwalala (SM)                                                                                          Date: 09-May-2012




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
