                                                                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                            CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC584
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Feb-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                       China                                    Project ID:                      P126611
                              Project Name:                  Liaoning Coastal Zone Sustainable Development Project (P126611)
                              Task Team Leader:              Paul Procee
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 11-Dec-2012                                   Estimated Board Date:            28-Mar-2013
                              Managing Unit:                 EASCS                                    Lending Instrument:              Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                        Urban Transport (60%), General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (40%)
                              Theme:                         City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (100%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                       Amount
                                   Borrower                                                                                                                   0.00
                                   International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                                    150.00
                                   Financing Gap                                                                                                            250.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                    150.00
                              Environmental Category:        B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              B. Project Objectives

                              The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to support priority investments to improve the efficiency of urban transport and address
                              water scarcity issues in selected cities in Liaoning Province. The water scarcity issues will be addressed by (i) improving wastewater treatment and
                              water reclamation to reduce pollution and foster more efficient use of scarce water resources. The urban transport efficiency will be improved
                              through investments in (ii) better public transport services in selected cities and improving pedestrian, bicycle and vehicle flows along rehabilitated
Public Disclosure Copy




                              and new roads.

                              C. Project Description

                              Based on the overall strategy to develop the coastal zone of Liaoning Province, this project will improve the management of wastewater and
                              transport systems in selected cities. The region is already facing challenges with water scarcity and pollution, and further development of the
                              region requires improvements in water treatment and more rational use of water resources, especially for large industrial consumers. Many cities
                              are starting to face problems with traffic congestion and pollution, and good management of urban transport systems is needed to manage the
                              expected growth in population and vehicles. Good alternative transport systems have to be provided and road designs should consider the safety
                              of users and promote the use of low-carbon and clean transport systems.

                              Project Components. The proposed Bank supported project will have the following four components:

                              Component 1: Improving urban transport systems. This component will invest in improving public transport systems and fostering transit oriented
                              development along selected public transport corridors. Some subprojects will also finance improvements of existing urban roads, while ensuring
                              innovative engineering designs to incorporate traffic management and traffic calming features and facilities for pedestrian and bikers. This
                              component includes the following sub-project investments:
                              (i)                   Urban transit oriented development in Chaoyang County, including investment in bus lanes along existing roads, stations,
                              traffic management, pedestrian access, bicycle parking, street furniture, and complementary infrastructure.
                              (ii)       Urban transit oriented development in Donggang County, including investments in bus lanes, stations, traffic management, pedestrian
                              access, bicycle parking, street furniture, and complementary infrastructure.
                              (iii)      Public transport improvement in Panjin County, including investments in buses, bus lane improvements, traffic management, pedestrian
                              access, bicycle parking, street furniture, bus maintenance facilities and complementary infrastructure.
                              (iv)       Urban road rehabilitation in Lingyuan County, including investments in paving, rehabilitation and possible widening of existing roads and
                              investments in one new connection road within the urban area.
                              (v)        Urban road rehabilitation in Kuandian County, including investments in paving and rehabilitation of existing roads and investments in
                              selected roads within the urban area.

                              Component 2: Improving urban wastewater treatment and reclamation. This component will finance investments in wastewater treatment facilities
                              and water reclamation systems, while also separating sewage and drainage networks in selected cities. The main objective is to rationalize the use
                              of scarce water resources, reduce groundwater abstraction, and reduce the pollution loads on surface water resources. Investments include the
                              construction of new and rehabilitation of existing waste water plants, separate sewage and drainage networks, and replacement of groundwater
                           supply systems by water reclamation supply systems. Sub-project investments are:
                           (i)                 Wastewater treatment and reclamation and drainage in Lingyuan County; investments include the rehabilitation of the existing
                           wastewater plant and related wastewater network, the project will also include investment in reclaimed water network and connection to an
                           industrial park.
                           (ii)       Wastewater and drainage in Suizhong County; investments include the improvement of drainage systems and wastewater pipelines to
                           reduce pollution of
                           (iii)      Wastewater treatment and reclamation and drainage in Panjin County; investments include the building of a new wastewater plant,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           associated wastewater pipelines and reclaimed water network and connection to an industrial park.

                           Component 3: Technical assistance, training and advisory services. The preliminary list of studies and assistance considered for financing under
                           this project include: (a) developing flood risk maps and integrated flood risk management plans (combining non-structural and structural
                           investments) for selected cities affected by floods ; (b) preparing a strategic environmental assessment for the development of this region, which
                           could focus on water scarcity issues and cleaner and more efficient transport systems; (c) preparing regional land use and transport integration
                           and demand management plans; (d) improving urban service delivery through detailed analysis of investment , operation and maintenance cost of
                           different facilities and services, and developing better asset management plans. During project preparation, the team will work closely with
                           Provincial and local authorities to identify studies that can increase project impacts in the long-term and benefit the region as a whole. (Note: this
                           component is still being discussed with the client and a detailed budget and activities will be ready by appraisal).

                           Component 4: Project Management and Supervision. This component includes: (i) project management (including M&E); (ii) consultancy services
                           for engineering design review and construction supervision; and (iii) the supervision of the implementation of environmental management and
                           resettlement action plans.

                           Project Costs and Financing. The preliminary cost estimates of the original proposed project components are US$400 million. The funding sources
                           for the project include a World Bank loan of US$ 150 million, with the remaining balance mobilized by the PIU.

                            D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                           The project will be implemented in six small to medium sized cities located in Liaoning Province, northeast of China. The cities are spread along
                           the coastal zone, but most of them are actually located tens of miles inland on flat terrain with a temperate climate and average precipitation
                           ranging from around 700mm to nearly 1000mm per year.

                            E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

                           The Liaoning Project Management Office (LPMO) is currently implementing a World Bank financed project on district heating in a number of cities
                           and, therefore, has experience with the Bank’s safeguard policies and procedures. Panjin, Chaoyang and Lingyuan are already participating in two
                           ongoing WB projects in the province on urban sanitation and urban transport and are also familiar with the Bank's safeguards. The Bank team has
                           provided training on the Bank’s safeguard policies to the clients in project cities during identification and will continue doing so throughout the
                           preparation process to enhance their institutional capacity for environmental management and social safeguards. A major concern is the lack of
                           adequate local financing to compensate affected people, which might delay the resettlement process and, therefore, the timely project
                           implementation of the project. The team is working on making changes to the design and scope of investments to minimize resettlement and land
                           acquisition impacts and reduce this risk.

                            F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Chongwu Sun (EASCS)
                           Zhefu Liu (EASCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

                            Safeguard Policies                               Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01              Yes               Physical investment of the project involves two components: building of
                                                                                              wastewater treatment plant (WWTPs), associated wastewater and drainage
                                                                                              network and pipelines for reclaimed water; construction of new urban roads and
                                                                                              rehabilitation of existing roads with facilities to improve access and quality of
                                                                                              public transport.

                                                                                              As in similar urban projects, adverse environmental impacts are expected mainly
                                                                                              from construction, including noise, dust, spoil disposal, social and traffic
                                                                                              disturbance. These impacts are moderate and mostly of temporary and confined
                                                                                              nature. Well-established measures and engineering designs can minimize and
                                                                                              mitigate these impacts. In addition, major impacts of the WWTPs component
                                                                                              also arise from their operation in terms of discharge of effluent and odor and
                                                                                              disposal of sludge. Since these county level WWTPs are small with capacity
                                                                                              around 20,000 tons/day, their impacts on the environment are expected to be
                                                                                              moderate and overall positive. Consequently, only partial environmental
                                                                                              assessment (not fully EIA) is required by Chinese regulation for WWTP of this
                                                                                              size. Their impacts can be managed with appropriate and well-known measures
                                                                                              and standard operational codes and practices, based on experiences in similar
                                                                                              projects in China and worldwide. Given the overall level of impacts and
                                                                                              safeguard risk, a category B is proposed according to the screening criteria of
                                                                                              OP 4.01.

                                                                                              As per requirements of domestic regulation in China, the client needs to carry
                                                                        out environmental assessment (EA). Given the nature of the project in multiple
                                                                        cities, the following EA approach was planned to accommodate both domestic
                                                                        and the Bank’s requirements. Each city will need to prepare individual EA for
                                                                        domestic approval, based on which a Consolidated EA will be compiled for Bank
                                                                        review.

                                                                        Prior to appraisal, an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) will be prepared
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        based on Safeguards policies. It will also take into account relevant World Bank
                                                                        Group Environment, Health and Safety Guidelines, particularly those for Water
                                                                        and Sanitation and Waste Management Facilities, to assess their applicability to
                                                                        the proposed project. The EMP will be implemented in all the participating (six)
                                                                        cities, and all sub-projects will comply with applicable domestic laws and
                                                                        regulations. The EMP will comprise the following:
                                                                        (a) Environmentally sound design and siting criteria for subprojects;
                                                                        (b) Site screening criteria for different types of sub-projects to determine if the
                                                                        following environmental specifications [see (c) below] are sufficient;
                                                                        (c) Environmental Codes of Practices (ECOPs) (i.e., environmental
                                                                        specifications for contractors) for each type of subprojects identified, including:
                                                                        (i) construction of new urban roads; (ii) construction of new wastewater
                                                                        treatment plants (WWTPs); (iii) construction and extension of municipal
                                                                        drainage, sewage and water reuse networks; (iv) rehabilitation, upgrading or
                                                                        widening of existing urban roads; (v) improvements of public transport facilities
                                                                        (e.g., pedestrian, bus lane, traffic management, buses, and bus depots);
                                                                        (d) Management measures to address broader social impacts that are not
                                                                        directly related with involuntary resettlement;
                                                                        (e) Provisions for the review and approval of, if any needed, analysis and
                                                                        mitigation measures in addition to those covered in the ECOPs during
                                                                        implementation;
                                                                        (f) A mechanism to address any complaints arise from construction-related
                                                                        nuisances during construction; and
                                                                        (g) A summary of public consultation undertook for the EMP.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04              No      The project will be carried out in buildup areas or suburban areas that have
                                                                        already been converted to urban land with long history of human activities.
                                                                        Based on current data and site visits, no natural habitats or protected area exists
                                                                        in the vicinity of any subproject, but the detailed environmental assessment will
                                                                        ensure this is the case.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                       No     Not applicable.

                         Pest Management OP 4.09                  No     Not applicable.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   TBD    Information available so far does not indicate anything of cultural, historical or
                                                                        religious significance. Nonetheless, the EA consultant will conduct a systematic
                                                                        survey of all sensitive receptors to determine if this policy applies. In any case, a
                                                                        chance-find procedure will be included in the EMP for cultural relics uncovered
                                                                        during construction.

                                                                        Further screening will be undertaken during project preparation to determine if
                                                                        any PCRs (including household graves) are likely to be affected by any sub-
                                                                        projects. If there is such case, the policy will be triggered and suitable
                                                                        management measures will be prepared to be included in the Resettlement
                                                                        Action Plans (RAPs) if the impact is directly related with relocation.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            No     The proposed subprojects will be located in the pure Han people centralized
                                                                        area in the 6 cities, Liaoning Province. Based on the task team screening, no
                                                                        any Chinese minority community is present in the proposed project areas. IP
                                                                        policy is not triggered.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      Yes     The proposed projects consist of 8 subprojects in 6 cities, focusing on two main
                                                                        objectives as urban transport improvement and waste water treatment and the
                                                                        collection facilities. The waste water treatment plants and pipelines in Shuizhong
                                                                        and Lingyuan city will require collective land and relocate displaced families in
                                                                        the peri-urban area, the Bank OP 4.12 policy applies to those projects in the
                                                                        cities. The resettlement action plans were requested.

                                                                        The urban transit oriented development and road rehabilitation subprojects in
                                                                        Chaoyang, Donggangn, Panjin, Kuandian and also Lingyaun will be mostly
                                                                        developed within the existing right-of-way and not require demolition of any
                                                                        structure or acquisition of land, but this will be confirmed once detailed designs
                                                                        are finalized. The team will also ensure the design and construction plans by
                                                                        contractors include measures to ensure access of local population and
                                                                        businesses and reduces the economic impacts during the construction phase.
                                                                                                                        Prior to appraisal, Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) will be prepared for sub-
                                                                                                                        projects that require involuntary taking of land, that would result in relocation or
                                                                                                                        loss of shelter, loss of assets or access to assets, or loss of income sources or
                                                                                                                        means of livelihood. Further screening will also be undertaken to identify any
                                                                                                                        linked activities as defined in OP4.12, particularly for those subprojects that
                                                                                                                        locate in new development zones. The resettlement for linked activities, if any,
                                                                                                                        will be included in the RAPs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                          No                     Not applicable.

                                Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                          No                     Not applicable.
                                7.50
                                Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                              No                     Not applicable.



                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 02-Nov-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
                                  should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                    The plan is to launch the environmental and social assessment within the coming month and have these completed by October 2012 latest for
                                    review by the Bank team and finalized by the end of December 2012.

                         IV. APPROVALS
                                Task Team Leader:                                Name: Paul Procee
                                Approved By:
                                Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                 Name: Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan (RSA)                                                           Date: 07-Mar-2012
                                Sector Manager:                                  Name: Paul Kriss (SM)                                                                                 Date: 27-Feb-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
