                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA5403
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Sep-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 05-Sep-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Lesotho                           Project ID:    P144933
                            Project Name:      Second Private Sector Competitiveness and Economic Diversification Prj
                                               (P144933)
                            Task Team          Smita Kuriakose
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       06-Sep-2013                          Estimated   31-Oct-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: AFTFE                                 Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General industry and trade sector (50%), Other industry (40%), SME Finance
                                              (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (50%), Export development and
                                              competitiveness (30%), Other Private Sector Development (20 %)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      15.00           Total Bank Financing:                  13.10
                            Total Cofinancing:                       Financing Gap:                          0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          1.90
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                13.10
                              Total                                                                                      15.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The development objective of the proposed project is to contribute to the development of non-textile
                           sectors resulting in increased private sector investment, firm growth and job creation. This will be
                           achieved by (i) improving business environment; (ii) increasing access to finance; (iii) supporting

                                                                       Page 1 of 9
                         investment promotion in new sectors with increased backward linkages to the local economy and (iv)
                         targeted support to new growth sectors such as horticulture and tourism.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1.       The project will comprise two mutually- reinforcing components: (i) Improving the business
                         environment; and (ii) Increasing economic diversification through targeted support to new growth
                         sectors. In addition, the third component of the project will support project implementation.

                         COMPONENT 1: Improving the Business Environment

                         2.      The objective of this component is to support policy measures intended to facilitate business
                         entry and greater access to finance. The two subcomponents are (i) Business registration, licensing
                         and construction permit reform; and (ii) Improving access to finance.

                         Sub-component 1A: Business Registration, licensing and construction permit reform
                         3.      The objective of this component is to reduce the time and cost for registering a business and
                         obtaining construction permits. This component will support the drafting and implementation of the
                         Business Registration Bill which aims to cover all businesses, including sole proprietors and
                         partnerships. This will enable the benefits of the OBFC system to go beyond company registration
                         and register sole proprietors and partnerships, and also increase formalization of businesses.

                         4.      Inspired by the success of the company registration under the OBFC, the GoL has
                         undertaken steps to modernize its industrial licensing regime. The GoL recognizes that the current
                         licensing system of Lesotho is cumbersome, involving multiple agencies. In order to tackle these
                         shortcomings, GoL was supported by the PSCED Project to draft the 2013 Industrial Licensing Bill
                         which is to replace the outdated 1969 Industrial Licensing Act. The new project will support GoL to
                         implement this new Industrial Licensing Bill. In addition, the introduction of a streamlined risk-
                         based environmental and health inspection procedure during the business registration and licensing
                         procedures can further improve the process of business start-up and operation, and remove
Public Disclosure Copy




                         unnecessary regulatory burden for the private sector, resulting in saving time, cost and increasing
                         numbers of compliant businesses.

                         5.       With the country ranked 145 out of 183 economies globally in the Doing Business Report,
                         one of the worst performing Doing Business indicators for Lesotho is the process of obtaining
                         construction permits. The enforcement of construction permits creates opportunities for widespread
                         discretion and corruption the world over . The lessons from the past indicate that there are three main
                         positive outcomes of construction regulation reform. These include: (i) turning unrecognized assets
                         into productive capital; (ii) help create a level playing field for businesses and (iii) contribute to
                         enforcing increased safety and improved resource management (World Bank, 2013). A negative
                         outcome associated with inefficient and corrupt construction-permit and inspection systems is the
                         loss of opportunity for existing and would be entrepreneurs of a level playing field.

                         6.      While in Lesotho, there are only 11 steps, which is below the average of 15 steps for Sub-
                         Saharan Africa and the 14 steps for OECD countries, it takes an average of 330 days to obtain a
                         construction permit in Lesotho. A major reason for that is the lack of coordination between the
                         Maseru City Council (MCC) and the different departments and agencies, taking an average of 106
                         days and 3 separate procedures for an entrepreneur to obtain a building permit to use the building.
                         The project will help streamline the construction permit system within the MCC, by automating the
                         document workflow, digitizing the back-office functions of MCC and digitizing the archive wherever


                                                                      Page 2 of 9
                         possible in order to create automated, predictable and transparent systems, thus reducing time, cost
                         and regulatory burden for the private sector, and at the same time reducing the transaction costs for
                         the MCC.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sub-component 1B: Improving Access to Finance

                         7.       The objective of this component is to improve the access to finance in Lesotho, by providing
                         a stable and predictable loan market and credit worthiness system (credit bureau), providing a
                         diversified set of the financial services (financial leasing and movable collateral) and extend these
                         new services to the unbanked population. The establishment of a credit bureau will cover the entire
                         population and provide creditors with information for assessing credit worthiness of borrowers, thus
                         ensuring stability and predictability in the market. The introduction of a movable collateral registry
                         will allow borrowers to use movables to secure loans, thus removing the burden from banks to
                         require only immovable security, and include unbanked population. This registry will aim at
                         including information on financial leasing as well. These reforms together help modernize the
                         financial services market, by allowing lenders and borrowers new forms of asset-financing.

                         8.       In addition, the availability and cost of credit are positively correlated with the strength of
                         creditor rights’ protection. The protection of creditor rights includes an effective debt enforcement
                         regime for individual creditors to recover their debt, and a robust and efficient insolvency regime,
                         which regulates collective creditor recovery. The project will provide technical assistance to help
                         modernize the Insolvency Proclamation and ensure coherency with the liquidation provisions.

                         COMPONENT 2: Supporting Economic Diversification

                         Sub-component 2A: Supporting investment promotion and increasing linkages to the local economy

                         9.       This component of the project will aim to provide the GoL with support towards achieving
                         sustainable diversification of the country’s export manufacturing program as well as provide support
                         to strengthen the local SME capacity. This diversification needs to be achieved such that there is
Public Disclosure Copy




                         horizontal diversification – where non-textile industries need to be attracted, combined with
                         increased localization – where local participation in the manufacturing sector increases in terms of
                         providing technical and managerial skills and supplying export-oriented firms.

                         10.      The project will focus on delivering a mixture of strategic and operational outcomes in an
                         integrated, sequential way. There is evidence to show that the existing factory sites do not provide
                         the desirable infrastructure and services to foreign investors due primarily to the very low rents that
                         are paid for these sites. There are likely several options for the commercialization of factory sites,
                         including: i) fully private development, ownership and operation of the industrial estate as a going
                         concern; and, ii) private construction and leasing of individual factory shells on LNDC serviced
                         industrial land. The project would support the technical evaluation of options for the
                         commercialization of a site which can meet unmet demand for factory sites from new investors. The
                         TA provided will support designing a PPP deal that would attract private developers to construct and
                         manage the factory site on a commercial and sustainable basis.

                         11.    The project will also provide technical assistance on implementing targeted programs that
                         would facilitate linkages between these foreign investors and domestic SMEs. Support measures
                         would help facilitate improved information flows and targeted instruments to help increase business
                         opportunities between the two groups while simultaneously also improving capacity of the local
                         SMEs.

                                                                        Page 3 of 9
                         Sub-component 2B: Supporting the Tourism Sector
Public Disclosure Copy




                         12.       Another vital source of growth for Lesotho could be the development of the tourism sector.
                         The Lesotho PSCED Project to date has supported activities targeted to address fundamental tourism
                         sector constraints. Increased competitiveness in the tourism sector mandates efforts that a) better
                         quantify and track sector performance, (b) improve standards, (c) strengthen the country’s unique
                         offerings, and (d) support an enabling institutional framework. This sub-component will support
                         tourism value chain development through targeted activities including development of tourism
                         statistics and continuing the implementation of the star grading system for accommodation.

                         13.      Further, support will also be provided to the handicrafts sector by increasing their capacity to
                         both produce domestically and export. In order to spur tourists and domestic demand and provide a s
                         ustainable retail market outlet, the project will support the development of a privately managed
                         centrally located handcraft marketplace in Maseru. The marketplace will be financially sustainable
                         and include a tourism information hub, attracting the tourist market. The tourism information hub
                         will offer market based services in order to meet the needs of tourists and generate income to cover
                         operational costs.

                         Sub-component 2C: Expanding Commercial Horticulture

                         14.     The pilot farms under the PSCED Project, were created to demonstrate the potential for
                         commercial fruit farming in Lesotho, test various varieties of fruit under Lesotho growing conditions
                         and work in conjunction with Government to ensure that policies and regulations are in place to
                         support sector development. The pilot farms have realized a number of successes, including
                         Lesotho’s first fruit exports and production of the first Grade 1 apples in the country. Also, lessons
                         learned from the horticultural pilot farm project are being applied to a national rollout of larger
                         commercial farms using block farming, starting with a village association in Mahobong (Village
                         Rollout) in March 2013.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         15.      Applying lessons learnt from Phase 1 of the Horticulture Component, the primary
                         development objectives of Phase 2 are as follows:
                         i)       Transform strategic areas in Lesotho into major producers and exporters of early variety tree
                         crops by demonstrating that commercial deciduous fruit production is competitive and sustainable.
                         ii)      Improve livelihoods of rural farmers through the production, export and processing of high
                         value tree crops.
                         iii)     Facilitate shift from reliance on maize as the main source of income to a more diversified
                         cropping structure.
                         iv)      Develop a competitive value chain for tree crops including:
                         •        Sales of fresh produce in local and export markets;
                         •        Juicing, canning and drying facilities for products of Grade 3 and lower quality; and
                         •        Food processing industry based on derivatives from tree crops.

                         16.     The project will help support to expansion of upstream activities, including seedling nursery
                         development, expansion of commercial production of deciduous fruits (35 hectares), and strengthen
                         capacity of local on-farm technical support services; and downstream activities beginning in 2016
                         when the project anticipates increasing volume of marketable crop entering the market from existing
                         and new farms. Of the marketable products, Grade 1 products will be targeted for export markets,
                         Grade 2 products for domestic markets, and Grade 3 and lower for local value added processing. In

                                                                       Page 4 of 9
                         this regard, downstream activities will focus on the development of local supply and value chains for
                         deciduous fruit, farm certification (Global Gap) which will enable Basotho farmers the opportunity to
                         export Grade 1 products to any market in the world and expand marketing options for local products
Public Disclosure Copy




                         both within and outside Lesotho.


                         Sub-component 2D:Lesotho Enterprise Assistance Program

                         17.      The LEAP matching grant scheme was designed to help strengthen business capacity of the
                         private firms, mostly Basotho-owned MSMEs, as well as their representative organizations through
                         provision of financial and technical assistance to buy business development services with the aim to
                         increase their competitiveness. Under LEAP, there has been direct assistance provided to individual
                         firms through mentoring services provided by the LEAP Unit and the provision of cost-sharing
                         grants to firms, for the use of specialized business development services. Further, cost-sharing grant
                         assistance have also been provided to representative business and professional associations and
                         chambers, to build their capacity to better serve their members. The LEAP program will be managed
                         under this component and will be funded using government counterpart funding.

                         Component 3: Project Implementation

                         18.      This component will support the costs of the Project Management Unit. The implementation
                         arrangements used under the PSCED Project will be used in the new proposed Second PSCED
                         Project.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Component 1 activities will be technical assistance provided to the GoL administration in Maseru,
                         while component 2 activities will be implemented in the regions once the sites are identified for the
                         horticulture sub component; and also in Maseru for the construction of the Tourism Handicraft
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Centre.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Paula F. Lytle (AFTCS)
                         Lungiswa Thandiwe Gxaba (AFTA2)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The policy is triggered due to anticipated
                          BP 4.01                                             moderate impacts from activities to be undertaken
                                                                              under the horticulture subcomponent and the
                                                                              proposed tourism handicraft center. Activities
                                                                              may include excessive use of water, tilling of land
                                                                              and minor to moderate use of pesticides for the
                                                                              horticulture sub-component and rehabilitation or
                                                                              construction of buildings for the tourism
                                                                              handicraft center. The project has been rated
                                                                              category B- partial Assessment for Environmental
                                                                              Assessment (EA) and an ESMF for the
                                                                              horticulture component has been drafted with



                                                                      Page 5 of 9
                                                                            public consultation and disclosed in-country and
                                                                            at the Bank’s Infoshop prior to appraisal on
                                                                            August 06, 2013. Since the site for horticulture
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            component will be selected during project
                                                                            implementation the ESMF lays out the
                                                                            framework for a uniform approach for addressing
                                                                            potential negative impacts and incorporates the
                                                                            lessons learnt from the existing pilot sites and the
                                                                            village roll-out under the PSCED Project. The
                                                                            site for the tourism handicrafts center has been
                                                                            identified and an ESMP has been prepared;
                                                                            consulted upon and disclosed both in-country and
                                                                            at the InfoShop prior to appraisal on August 06,
                                                                            2013.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No              The project does not affect natural habitats.

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                No              The projects does not affect forests or forestry.

                            Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes             While the total land under the project is not
                                                                            substantial (only 30-35 hectares) and the risk of
                                                                            pesticides is minor to moderate due to the small
                                                                            amounts of pesticides being used, the ESMF
                                                                            incorporates an integrated pest management plan
                                                                            (IPMP).
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No              While the project will finance a tourism
                            BP 4.11                                         information hub that will provide information on
                                                                            tourism sites, including physical cultural
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            resources, it does not have direct impacts on
                                                                            physical cultural resources.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No              There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
                                                                            area.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No              The tourism information center will be built on
                            4.12                                            an identified site for which the land has already
                                                                            been acquired and does not have any encroachers
                                                                            or squatters. Other components of the project do
                                                                            not require land acquisition, and there are no
                                                                            squatters or encroachers.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No              The project does not involve dams.

                            Projects on International        No               N/A
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No               N/A
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues


                                                                    Page 6 of 9
                         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                           Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                            There are no large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts anticipated from the project since
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the project will mainly be providing technical assistance to the GoL in Maseru, and only sub-
                           components 2B and 2C will support the tourism sector and horticulture, respectively. The minor to
                           moderate potential adverse impacts envisaged would be managed through the provisions of the
                           ESMP and ESMF prepared for the sub-components, respectively.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            There are no potential indirect and/or long term impacts envisaged due to anticipated future
                           activities in the project area.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            In anticipation of potential adverse impacts that could arise from construction of the Tourism
                           Handicraft Centre, an ESMP has been prepared, and for implementation of the horticulture sub-
                           component, an ESMF has been prepared since the sites would only be identified during project
                           implementation.

                            All institutions that will be involved have implemented bank projects previously or are currently
                           involved in implementation of other programs. As such they are familiar with World Bank
                           safeguards and have gained experience in the implementation and oversight of Bank projects.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Public Disclosure Copy




                             The key stakeholders include: (i) the Ministry of Trade and Industry, which will provide
                           guidance to the PMU; (ii) The Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security which will provide
                           support to the Ministry of Trade and Industry; (iii) The Ministry of Forestry, which will provide
                           guidance to the project on matters related to technical on-farm activities; (iv) The Project Steering
                           Committee which will consist of the principal secretaries from the MTICM, MTEC, MAFS,
                           MFLS, the Central Bank, Registrar General and CEOs from LNDC and LTDC; (v) The National
                           Environmental Secretariat (NES), the environmental agency responsible for reviewing and
                           clearing all safeguards documentation for the project; (vi) operators in the handicraft sector in
                           Lesotho who were consulted during the preparation of the ESMP for the Tourism Handicraft
                           Center to be constructed in Maseru; and (vii) the current participating farmers in the horticulture
                           industry who have been consulted during the preparation of PSCEDP II as well as ESMF
                           preparation.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                          06-Aug-2013
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                       06-Aug-2013
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors



                                                                      Page 7 of 9
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Lesotho                                                          06-Aug-2013
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      06-Aug-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   06-Aug-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Lesotho                                                          06-Aug-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a              Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?


                                                                    Page 8 of 9
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Smita Kuriakose
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                  Date: 05-Sep-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Irina Astrakhan (SM)                         Date: 05-Sep-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 9 of 9
