                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC5005

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Jul-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 28-Jul-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Uganda                           Project ID:       P145037
                            Project Name:      Agriculture Cluster Development Project (P145037)
                            Task Team          Rasit Pertev
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          11-Nov-2013                      Estimated         27-Feb-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTA3                            Lending           Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Crops (25%), Irrigation and drainage (25%), Agro-industry, marketing, and
                                               trade (25%), Public administration- Agriculture, fishing a nd forestry (15%),
                                               General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (10%)
                            Theme(s):          Rural policies and institutions (20%), Rural markets (20%), Global food crisis
                                               response (20%), Rural services and infrastructure (20 %), Other rural
                                               development (20%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    150.00                      Total Bank Financing:        150.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                                 Financing Gap:                 0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                             0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                  150.00
                              Total                                                                        150.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The PDO is to raise the quantity and quality of agricultural productivity and production to meet both
                           unmet domestic demand and to expand exports to the EAC and COMESA. This will be achieved
                           through increased productivity, value addition and export rates of selected commodities, namely
                         maize, beans, rice and cassava. This is in line with the government objective of focusing on
                         increasing food exports to East Africa, rather than focusing on exclusively on those commodities
                         which cannot simultaneously contribute to national food security, such as tea and coffee. Selected
Public Disclosure Copy




                         commodities are those that figure highest in Government’s own strategy and are the major
                         internationally traded food crops grown by Uganda. While bananas are one of the most important
                         food crop for Uganda, its consumption is mostly domestic.
                         C. Project Description
                         For the purpose of focusing on required services in the upstream and downstream of production,
                         twelve (12) production clusters will be established for selected strategic commodities/crops (maize,
                         beans, rice and cassava) as growth poles within targeted agro-ecological zones. A commodity cluster
                         is a coherent area comprising of 2-3 districts, where there is already a proven potential for a specific
                         commodity/crop, as well as the presence of value chain actors (e.g., producers, traders, processors
                         and service providers), a multi-stakeholder innovation platform (MSIP) and basic market
                         infrastructure. The cluster approach enhances delivery of essential services, exploitation of
                         economies of scale, development of required infrastructure, bulking of produce, agro-processing and
                         reduction of transaction costs. The project will target maize, beans, rice and cassava as strategic
                         commodities for export to the regional markets.
                         Through a value-chain approach, the project will support access to and utilization of yield enhancing
                         technologies (improved seeds, fertilizers, mechanization and water for agricultural production) as
                         well as infrastructure for marketing and value addition. The capacity of private sector actors,
                         including farmers’ organizations and cooperatives, will be strengthened to improve stakeholders’
                         access to the required inputs, marketing and agro-processing services. Supporting improved input use
                         to complement research and advisory services is a cost-effective response for increased productivity
                         and farm income, but also a means to prevent potential risks from climate change and land
                         degradation. Broader access to adapted varieties and seeds, integrated soil fertility management and
                         timely land preparation will also help farmers to move towards sustainable agriculture and overcome
                         climate risks. Gradual adoption of appropriate mechanization technologies for production and post-
                         harvest operations will not only increase rural labor productivity but also attract young entrepreneurs
Public Disclosure Copy




                         in the sector.

                         The project will comprise of the following components:

                         Component 1: Irrigation and access Roads.
                         The objective of this component is: (i) to expand and develop lowlands gravity irrigation
                         infrastructure/schemes and promote sustainable water management practices for increased
                         productivity of the selected commodities within the clusters (mostly rice), and (ii) to rehabilitate
                         access roads for increased access to farms and markets. The component will expand about 1,000 ha,
                         develop about 5,000 ha of lowlands irrigated agriculture, and rehabilitate 1,700 km of access roads.
                         Performance indicators include the acreage developed/expanded for irrigation, the recovery ratio of
                         operation and maintenance (O&M) costs by Water Users Associations (WUAs), and the length of
                         access roads rehabilitated and maintained. Watershed management aspects will benefit from the
                         World Bank assisted Watershed Management and Development Project (WMDP - P123204) whose
                         implementation has just started. In areas that may not be covered by WMDP, their watershed
                         management needs shall be identified during conduct of ESIAs and technical feasibility studies, and
                         incorporated into the project design for implementation. This is in recognition of the fact that
                         sustainability of the lowlands gravity irrigation schemes will much depend on sound management
                         practices in the watersheds.
                         This component will finance the following sub-components: (i) expansion of existing and
                         development of new low-lands gravity irrigation schemes; (ii) creation and capacity strengthening of
                         WUAs; and (iii) rehabilitation of access roads. WUAs will cover the full O&M costs while districts
                         will maintain the roads.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sub-component 1.1: Expansion and Development of Low-lands Irrigation Schemes
                         The sub-component will prioritize expansion of existing medium schemes and the development of
                         new small and medium scale irrigation schemes that will be identified in the other targeted Districts
                         (for 5,000 ha in total). All the schemes will be irrigated by gravity and will be within the small and
                         medium scales, thus minimizing the environmental impacts. In general, the irrigation infrastructure
                         will be composed of diversion weir from the river, main canal from the weir to the irrigated area,
                         drainage network, internal road, protection dykes (in case of flooding risk), and land leveling. Other
                         amenities/equipment required for the irrigation infrastructure will be part of irrigation infrastructure.
                         Dams are not required because the irrigation schemes will target permanent streams/rivers with
                         enough water for irrigation and downstream use.
                         Under African Development Bank (AfDB), the rehabilitation of four irrigation schemes have been
                         launched, including Doho in Butaleja District, Agoro in Lamwo District, Olwenyi in Lira District,
                         and Mubuku in Kasese District. ACD project is envisaged to finance the following (i) expansion of
                         Mubuku system (100 ha), (ii) expansion of Doho rice irrigation scheme (Bwirya and Lwoba sectors
                         which total 900 ha and currently cultivated by out-growers). For Mubuku, the expansion area is
                         Phase IIB which will be irrigated with existing diversion weir (on Sebwe River) and main canal. The
                         project will cover the costs associated to the secondar y irrigation and drainage network. For Doho
                         scheme (Bwirya and Lwoba sectors), the diversion weir already exist and the project will construct
                         the irrigation and drainage networks and possibly a protection dyke against the flooding from
                         Manafwa River.
                         Irrigation related investments will be demand-driven and will meet essential technical, cost-
                         effectiveness (both in terms of expansion/development and O&M costs), and environmental and
                         social selection criteria. Final selection of new irrigation scheme sites will be made using the
                         following criteria (i) stakeholder interest, (farmers and District Council) determined by the existence
                         of lowland agricultural activities, with or without existing irrigation infrastructure, and a strong
                         demand for improvement. In these cases, the project will complement existing farmer-initiated
Public Disclosure Copy




                         investments by developing complementary irrigation infrastructure. Willingness to contribute to
                         rehabilitation/development costs and pay for O&M costs will be gauged as an additional
                         confirmation of farmer interest. Interest of districts is determined by the willingness of districts to
                         play an active role in providing guidance and leadership to WUAs in the organization of scheme
                         O&M and in enforcing compliance with the WUA’s internal rules and regulations (ii) technical
                         readiness for investment, determined by the availability of detailed feasibility and participatory
                         design studies. The project will initially focus on those schemes where these are available, and where
                         development costs appear reasonable; (iii) proximity to market and district roads, (iv) environmental
                         and social sustainability, and (v) economic rate of return. A team of MAAIF and respective Districts/
                         Local Governments will undertake a reconnaissance mission to select sites for expansion/
                         development following the stated criteria.
                         The irrigation sub-component investment will also include rehabilitation/development of the road
                         network and other amenities/equipment required for the irrigation infrastructure.
                         Sub-component 1.2: Stakeholder mobilization and capacity strengthening.
                         The project will finance costs associated with ensuring sustainability of irrigation investments
                         through stakeholder mobilization and capacity strengthening. This will include (i) support for
                         establishment of WUAs; (ii) capacity strengthening of stakeholders; (iii) operational equipment for
                         stakeholders; and (iv) establishment of participatory M&E. WUAs’ Capacity strengthening will
                         include training in: (a) water management and maintenance; (b) environmental sustainability and
                         catchment management (c) management and administration of the WUA; and (d) legal documents.
                         District staff will be trained and involved in providing active support to WUAs and water users.
                         Sub-component 1.3: Access roads
                         The project will provide investment for rehabilitation of 1,700 km of farm access roads in total, to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         contribute to the strengthening of the competitiveness of targeted commodities, facilitating the input
                         supply of production basins and improving the volume and access to markets. The project will not
                         support opening up of new roads but rather concentrate on improving existing access roads. Access
                         roads are under the responsibility of Local Governments (Decentralized). The priorities for road
                         investment at district level will be based on the size of agricultural production for respective
                         commodities. However, priority will be given to the access roads in irrigation/rice areas/clusters.
                         Access roads will connect villages to village/parish/District and are characterized by temporary
                         circulation periods because of the lower ratio of structures per kilometer; the reference speed is 40
                         km / h. In this regard, works will include reshaping (slight earthworks), provisions for culverts and
                         small bridges and limited lateritic lining to treat critical points as needed. The total width will remain
                         around 5 to 6 m to allow trucks crossing. Roads design could include drainage ditches where
                         longitudinal slopes are accentuated. Before the Project Appraisal Mission, MAAIF will provide
                         support to Districts to identify access road priorities (level 1 and 2) taking into account the needs of
                         linking production basins and markets. Consultants will be hired to undertake preliminary feasibility
                         studies of the selected sites including conducting environmental and social impact assessment,
                         economic justification and investment costing.

                         Component 2: Agricultural inputs (seeds, planting materials and fertilizers).
                         The objective of this component is to increase farmers’ access to and utilization of improved seeds,
                         fertilizers and mechanization services for sustainable growth of productivity and production of the
                         selected commodities in focused districts. These activities will complement knowledge advisory
                         services (NAADS) in support of the intensification of smallholder farming systems. Main challenges
                         to be overcome are: (i) farmers awareness on input use efficiency; (ii) availability of improved inputs
                         adapted to needs of local farming systems; (iii) farmers’ access to quality inputs at the right time,
                         including financial facilities; and (iv) improved management and mitigation of climatic and market
                         risks. The approach is to strengthen input supply systems to respond to enhanced farmers demand for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         technologies supporting productivity and farmer income growth: investments will be focused on
                         selected commodities (maize, rice, beans and cassava) and start in high potential district clusters
                         (growth poles). The project activities will be organized in four subcomponents: (i) strengthen public
                         regulatory services of MAAIF which will involve development of fertilizer & agricultural inputs
                         quality control mechanisms, and development of strategy for sustainable farm mechanization and
                         agricultural engineering; (ii) upscale use of improved seeds and planting material; (iii) integrated soil
                         fertility management through enhanced soil fertility knowledge management, improved availability
                         of appropriate fertilizers, and Increasing farmers demand and use of adapted inputs; and (iv) increase
                         farmers’ access to sustainable mechanization services in order to enhance labor use and efficacy,
                         provide greater precision and timeliness in farm operations, reduce agricultural losses due to climate
                         change and in post-harvest handling when properly managed, and contribute to adding value to
                         products with secondary processing and packaging (see Comp 3).

                         Component 3: Value addition and Marketing.
                         This component seeks to put in place measures to ensure more efficient linkage of farmers to market
                         opportunities in a manner that increases the share of final price received by the farmers. The aim of
                         subcomponent 3.1 is to promote and strengthen the momentum of farmer institutional development,
                         i.e. building of farmers’ organizations from primary level to ACE level, and other key stakeholders
                         of the project. Subcomponent 3.2 will provide investment support for critical infrastructure important
                         to the value chain process. This will include processing facilities for cassava, feeder and ACE level
                         warehouses – for maize beans and rice. Subcomponent 3.3 will improve access to financial services.

                         Under investment support for value addition, the project will provide: (i) cooperative facilities for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         bulking and processing of crops which will include warehouses, with handling, cleaning, drying,
                         grading and trading facilities and smaller feeder warehouses to be co-funded or rehabilitated/
                         upgraded through provision of buildings and run by cooperative societies; (ii) matching grants for
                         equipment in market-oriented cooperative enterprises which will entail provision of upgrade
                         equipment in targeted value chains, for example equipment for grading of maize, processing of
                         cassava and rice. In addition, demonstration processing units will be supported to act both as a
                         business incubation unit as well as a training center for farmers’ associations and entrepreneurs in
                         enterprise development. For example for cassava, demonstration units could be financed for
                         following niche markets: (i) cassava flour as glue extender for the plywood industry (hammer mill);
                         (ii) high quality cassava flour for the food industry, including bakeries (mechanical chipper, press,
                         flash drier, hammer mill); (iii) cassava chips and pellets for the animal feed industry (chipper,
                         pelletizer); (iv) high quality cassava for supermarkets and the formal economy. Investment support
                         will be combined with the required training on management and technical issues, mentoring of
                         cooperatives to develop business plans, technical assistance on quality assurance, capacity building
                         of public services.

                         Component 4: Stakeholder Coordination and Project Management.
                         The aim of this component is to: (i) improve on the existing policies and regulations of direct
                         relevance to this Project; (ii) to ensure stakeholder coordination at national and cluster level; and (iii)
                         ensure project management and coordination.
                         A policy environment, conducive for enabling cooperative and private sector investments and PPPs
                         is essential for the success of the Project. For each value chains, sub-sector production and marketing
                         policies need to be put in place or completed to enhance the competitiveness of Uganda’s produce in
                         domestic and regional markets. The development of enabling policy frameworks will be spearheaded
                         by MAAIF and MTIC, with full participation of national farmers’ organizations and private sector
                         organizations. The Project will support the review, development, enforcement and monitoring of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         regulatory frameworks. Relevant regulatory frameworks include: (i) the grading and packaging
                         standards; (ii) standards for processing and handling, and (iii) registration and quality assurance
                         including for cross-border trade.
                         Project management and coordination will include the following functions: (i) project administration
                         and coordination; (ii) procurement; (iii) financial management; (iv) monitoring and evaluation; and
                         (v) implementation of a Governance and Anti-Corruption (GAC) action plan. The Project will
                         provide the required capacity building, equipment, as well as short-term technical assistance and
                         contractual services as required for effective implementation.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is proposed to expand and develop selected gravity irrigation schemes in lowlands
                         totaling 6,000 ha of irrigated land in the 10 targeted Districts in cluster 2 (Iganga, Bugiri and
                         Namutamba), cluster 3 (Pallisa, Tororo and Butaleja), cluster 5 (Soroti and Serere), cluster 6 (Amuru
                         and Nwoya), cluster 7 (Lira), and cluster 10 (Hoima). The exact locations for the new irrigation
                         schemes have not yet been selected, though they are expected to fall within the above-listed 10
                         districts for rice commodity. In some cases, a scheme could lie astride two districts. The project will
                         prioritize expansion of existing schemes (about 1,000 ha) and the development of small (about 3,000
                         ha) and medium (about 2,000 ha) scale schemes, and will not support construction of large scale
                         irrigation structures in order to minimize extent of environmental and social impacts. In general, the
                         development of lowlands gravity irrigation schemes will be composed of the following
                         infrastructure: diversion weir from the river, main canal from the weir to the irrigated area,
                         distribution network canals, drainage network, internal road, protection dykes (in case of flooding
Public Disclosure Copy




                         risk), and land leveling. Other amenities/equipment required for the irrigation infrastructure will be
                         part of irrigation infrastructure. Dams are not required because the irrigation schemes will target
                         permanent streams/rivers with enough water for irrigation and downstream use.

                         The following works are envisaged in the existing schemes: (i) expansion of Mubuku irrigation
                         scheme (100 ha) in Phase IIB expansion area with existing diversion weir (on Sebwe River) and
                         main canal, will entail establishment of the secondary irrigation and drainage network. (ii) expansion
                         of Doho rice irrigation scheme (Bwirya and Lwoba sectors which total 900 ha and currently
                         cultivated by out-growers), will entail construction of the irrigation and drainage networks from the
                         existing diversion weir and if deemed necessary construct a protection dyke against the flooding
                         from Manafwa River. Water for irrigation will be abstracted from the Nile basin watershed which is
                         shared by 10 countries namely, Burundi, Democratic Republic of Congo, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
                         Kenya, Rwanda, Sudan, Tanzania, and Uganda. On the basis of maximum 35,000 M3/ha/yr as gross
                         water requirements for rice production, the impact would represent 210 M3/yr or 0.5% of the total
                         renewable water resources (39 KM3/year). Therefore the water abstraction volume is expected to be
                         minimal.

                         Some of the associated negative environmental and social impacts include water abstraction on
                         downstream users, loss of wetland habitat as a result of the irrigation infrastructure needed, point and
                         non-point pollution of water sources, soil erosion and siltation, acquisition of land for development
                         of irrigation infrastructure, water and land-use related conflicts. Most of these impacts are minor or
                         of low-intensity, site-specific and thus relatively straight forward to manage, with participation of the
                         Local Governments and WUAs. Infrastructures like dams will not be considered as they could lead to
                         flooding properties, settlement and affect biodiversity ecosystems. In Northern Uganda, where land
                         ownership issues are currently hotly debated, land ownership sensitivity analysis will be required.
                         The project will support rehabilitation of 1,700 km of farm access roads in total. The project will not
Public Disclosure Copy




                         support opening up of new roads but rather concentrate on improving existing access roads. The
                         priorities for road investment at district level will be based on the size of agricultural production for
                         respective commodities. Access road works will include reshaping (slight earthworks), provisions for
                         culverts and small bridges and limited lateritic lining to treat critical points as needed. Roads design
                         could include drainage ditches where longitudinal slopes are accentuated. The likely environmental
                         and social impacts are expected to be minor given the low mechanized road works that will be
                         involved, the labor influx during construction will be small and the roads may not be expanded
                         beyond the already existing width.
                         The market infrastructure under component 3 will includ e rehabilitation and/or construction of
                         storage facilities/structures (network of warehouses and feeder stores) mainly at the Area
                         Cooperative Enterprises (ACE) level of 500 metric tons each. At this moment in time, it has not yet
                         been determined whether central warehouses of a larger capacity (5000 tons) may be needed.

                         The targeted crops are not the traditional cash crops. These crops make the bulk of the food crops
                         and women managed crops in communities where they are produced. It is therefore important that
                         the project recognizes the balance between trade and home consumption as well as the role of women
                         in production of the strategic commodities for export. In addition, 70% of the agricultural labour is
                         by women; however, they are disproportionately disadvantaged in respect to controlling assets of
                         production and productivity in agriculture. Some of the associated negative social impact this project
                         may include increased gender inequality and equity gap. Gender sensitivity analysis in the project
                           will be beneficial to the communities and will be undertaken during the compilation of the ESMF.
                           Designing interventions that bring women on board for equitable empowerment and poverty
                           reduction through affirmative actions on all project activities is important to address this salient issue.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Project implementation will therefore be spread throughout the Country, specifically covering the
                           following districts: Masaka, Mpigi, Rakai, Iganga, Bugiri, Namutumba, Pallisa, Tororo, Butaleja ,
                           Kapchorwa, Bukwo, Mbale, Soroti, Serere, Amuru (including Nwoya), Gulu, Apac (including Kole),
                           Oyam, Lira (including Dokolo) , Kabarole, Kamwenge, Kasese , Kyenjojo (including Kyegwegwa),
                           Mubende, Kibaale, Hoima, Masindi, Kiryandongo, Ntungamo, Kabale, Bushenyi, Isingiro, Nebbi,
                           Arua (including Nyadri), and Yumbe.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries - MAAIF will be the main implementing
                           unit of this project at national level, working in liaison with local governments in the respective
                           districts. The Ministry does not have Environmental and Social management specialists. Given the
                           fact that agricultural activities contribute cumulatively to environmental degradation in Uganda, there
                           should be residential in-house capacity in MAAIF for environmental management. It is therefore
                           recommended that MAAIF creates in-house positions of Environmental and Social Development
                           Specialists to handle safeguard issues as well as integrate its Gender Focal person on the ACDP
                           project team within the ministry. The Local Governments have District Environment Officers,
                           District Agricultural Officers, District Community Development Officers and District Gender
                           Officers, some of whom are involved in the current Bank Financed ATAAS and NUSAF-2 Projects.
                           Sub-county extension staff shall also be involved in the implementation of safeguard policies.
                           However, the capacity development of both the National Level Steering Committee and the
                           respective District and Sub County staff needs to be strengthened through a hands-on training on
                           safeguard requirements as part of the preparatory phase of the proposed project. In the design stage,
                           the impact of agricultural production for trade/export versus agricultural production for consumption
                           in relation to food security and nutrition should be defined to safeguard beneficiaries. The MAAIF
                           will undertake an assessment to guide the project in safeguarding the communities from the negative
Public Disclosure Copy




                           impact of the project. The safe guard performance and experience of the private sector partners who
                           may participate under the PPP arrangement in the project be assessed and any arising strengths and
                           gaps incorporated into the design
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Herbert Oule (AFTN3)
                           Constance Nekessa-Ouma (AFTCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes              Component 1 and 3 involves irrigation and
                           BP 4.01                                                infrastructure activities (roads, irrigation related
                                                                                  infrastructure, grain storage and processing
                                                                                  facilities). These have a potential of causing
                                                                                  environmental impacts that require assessment
                                                                                  and mitigation recommendations. Most of the
                                                                                  environmental impacts from the proposed
                                                                                  activities will be of low-intensity, minor, site
                                                                 specific and relatively straight forward for
                                                                 farmers to manage, with guidance from the
                                                                 respective Local Governments. The specific
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 location/ site and scope of all project
                                                                 components are not yet known. Therefore, an
                                                                 Environmental and Social Management
                                                                 Framework (ESMF) for the whole project will
                                                                 be prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed
                                                                 before appraisal. Depending on the scope and
                                                                 environmental screening criteria in the ESMF,
                                                                 project/site specific Environmental and Social
                                                                 Impact Assessments/Environmental and Social
                                                                 Management Plans will be prepared. Once there
                                                                 is information specific to individual sub-
                                                                 projects, site/project specific Environmental
                                                                 Management Plans will be prepared during
                                                                 implementation. The ESMF will include an
                                                                 examination of potential cumulative and
                                                                 induced impacts.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes   The watershed related project activities will be
                                                                 carried out in wetlands, rivers and lakes. These
                                                                 habitats may be affected by the proposed
                                                                 project. The project will not support activities
                                                                 that may lead to clearance of any protected
                                                                 ecosystem or critical habitats. All the natural
                                                                 habitats that may be affected will be initially
                                                                 addressed under the ESMF and then
                                                                 subsequently assessed under the ESIAs and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 management of any potential impacts included
                                                                 in the respective sub-project EMPs.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    By design, the project will not support and/or
                                                                 involve any significant forestry conversion/
                                                                 degradation activities.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes   Under the proposed project, improved and
                                                                 increased agricultural activities and production
                                                                 may result in increased use of pesticides and
                                                                 thus the resultant environmental impacts.
                                                                 Therefore, a Pest Management Plan will be
                                                                 prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed prior to
                                                                 appraisal.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   This policy may be triggered by the civil works-
                         BP 4.11                                 related activities and thus the procedure of
                                                                 handling chance finds should be included in the
                                                                 ESMF.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No    There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
                                                                 area.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           The project may involve land acquisition
                                 4.12                                                                                            leading to involuntary resettlement and/or
                                                                                                                                 restrictions of access to resources or livelihoods.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 Since the exact locations and potential adverse
                                                                                                                                 localized environmental and social impacts of
                                                                                                                                 sub-project activities cannot be determined prior
                                                                                                                                 to appraisal, the project will prepare, consult
                                                                                                                                 upon, and disclose before appraisal a
                                                                                                                                 Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF).
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         TBD                           The Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) is to be
                                                                                                                                 determinedb. The irrigation schemes component
                                                                                                                                 will involve expansion of two existing schemes
                                                                                                                                 irrigating 1000 ha and development of new
                                                                                                                                 schemes to irrigate 5000ha. Doho irrigation
                                                                                                                                 scheme has an excavation water reservoir of
                                                                                                                                 volume 400,000M3, 1.6M deep. The project
                                                                                                                                 may also finance a protection dyke against
                                                                                                                                 flooding from the nearby Manfwa River. An
                                                                                                                                 operation and maintenance manual for each
                                                                                                                                 irrigation scheme shall be prepared during
                                                                                                                                 technical designs. The O&M manual shall
                                                                                                                                 include safety issues among others. FAO
                                                                                                                                 Manual on irrigation O&M will be used to
                                                                                                                                 ensure scheme sustainability . When the team
                                                                                                                                 has a better idea of what is happening at Doho,
                                                                                                                                 further technical consultations will be held
                                                                                                                                 regarding the irrigation scheme structures and
                                                                                                                                 safety issues.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects on International                                         Yes                           Projects on International Waterways OP/BP
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            7.50 is triggered because the project will
                                                                                                                                 support expansion and development of irrigation
                                                                                                                                 schemes in the Lake Kyoga basin and river
                                                                                                                                 tributaries which drain into the Nile, an
                                                                                                                                 International Waterway which is shared by 10
                                                                                                                                 countries namely, Burundi, Democratic
                                                                                                                                 Republic of Congo, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
                                                                                                                                 Kenya, Rwanda, Sudan, Tanzania, and Uganda.
                                                                                                                                 Notification of the riparian states will be done.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project will not be implemented in disputed
                                 7.60                                                                                            areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Oct-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS is 30 October 2013. The launching and
                             completing the safeguard related studies are expected to take three months. Ministry of
                             Agriculture Animal Industry and Fisheries will prepare an ESMF, RPF, and PMP which would
Public Disclosure Copy




                             guide the management of environmental and social aspects and handling of fertilizers and
                             pesticides respectively in project supported activities. The ESMF, PMP and RPF will be prepared
                             in close consultation with the respective district local governments and other stakeholders.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:      Name: Rasit Pertev

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name:                                                  Date:
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Tijan M. Sallah (SM)                             Date: 28-Jul-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
