                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                   Report No.: ISDSC929

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Aug-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Yemen, Republic of                Project ID:       P128161
                            Project Name:       Micro and Small Enterprise Revitalization Project (P128161)
                            Task Team           Nabila Assaf
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           07-Jan-2013                       Estimated         05-Mar-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      MNSF1                             Lending           Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector:             SME Finance (40%), Microfinance (30%), General industry and trade sector
                                                (30%)
                            Theme:              Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                               Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                              13.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                     32.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Total                                                                           45.00
                            Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The MSE Revitalization Project (MSERP) aims to support inclusive revitalization and growth of the
                           Yemeni private sector.

                           Inclusiveness will be achieved through the focus on micro and small enterprises as well as outreach
                           to women and youth beneficiaries, including the enterprise owners and those hired by those
                           enterprises as a result of the project. Revitalization will be achieved by including assistance to firms
                           seeking to recover from the effects of the 2011 crisis on their businesses, while growth will be
                           achieved through the uptake of skills, best practices, and innovation by enterprises that are expected
                           to improve their performance in terms of both domestic and export markets and employment.
                           C. Project Description
                         In addition to the typical challenges that face MSEs in competing effectively through innovation and
                         high productivity, MSEs in Yemen face a particularly difficult business environment and the need to
                         overcome the impacts of the 2011 crisis on their businesses with limited resources. Overcoming
Public Disclosure Copy




                         these combined factors will require an intervention that can address both the short-term challenges of
                         revitalizing businesses after the 2011 crisis and the challenge of competitiveness and growth in the
                         longer term. The 2011 WDR on Conflict, Fragility and Development emphasizes the importance of
                         early results and confidence building measures that promote jobs and business confidence, including
                         initiatives for private sector recovery. The WDR notes approaches that have been found effective in
                         fragile and conflict situations, including matching grant facilities for new market development that
                         exploit the private sector's capacity to innovate and help entrepreneurs develop new product lines
                         while sharing the risk of investment, and value chain approaches that address breakdowns in business
                         and market linkages.

                         MSEs looking to recover, innovate or grow are also likely to need financing for capital investments
                         or working capital, particularly given the likelihood that their own resources may have been
                         exhausted by coping with the 2011 crisis. Improving access to finance for micro and small businesses
                         is a proposed complementary element to the matching grant facility.

                         Proposed Micro and Small Enterprise Revitalization Project (MSERP) Components

                         Component 1: MSE Access to Business Development Services
                         o Matching Grant Facility
                         o Strategic Initiatives
                         o Technical Assistance to Small and Micro Enterprise Promotion Service (SMEPS), Business
                         Membership Organizations (BMOs)

                         Component 2: MSE Access to Finance
                         o Line of Credit
Public Disclosure Copy




                         o Technical Assistance to Micro and Small Finance lenders

                         Component 3: Project Management


                         Component 1: MSE Access to Business Development Services
                         The program would provide incentives and support mainly to existing, small firms to prepare and
                         implement well-defined business development plans aimed at developing new markets (particularly
                         new export markets), new products, and new processes or technology or at sustainable recovery. It
                         would aim to support mainly small scale firms - but micro and medium firms would also be eligible.
                         Services such as food retail, transport, car repair, and business service providers themselves; agro-
                         processing such as fishing, honey and coffee; and light manufacturing, such as food processing, stone
                         and marble, garments, and fabricated metals, are expected to be prominent industries as reflected in
                         the composition of the economy. The focus would not only be urban, but be inclusive of rural
                         communities involved in various value chains from across all regions of Yemen. The matching grant
                         facility would aim to provide matching grants (50% or 30% cost sharing basis) to 900 firms over a
                         three year intake period. The project would also support Strategic Market Development Initiatives
                         identifying and diagnosing constraints and seeking to break market development bottlenecks that
                         either commonly constrain individual firms or can benefit from treatment that will broadly benefit a
                         market of firms and business associations. Subject to further investigation, the SMEPS under the
                         supervision of the Social Fund for Development (SFD) should be responsible for the imple mentation
                         of the matching grant facility.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2  MSE Access to Credit
                         The objective of Component 2 is to attain a more inclusive financial services industry, focusing on
                         youth, women and regional disparities for financing MSEs. Subject to further confirmation of the
                         funding needs and gaps, the project proposes to offer a line of credit, likely through the SFD, which
                         would on-lend to financial institutions and intermediaries according to agreed criteria targeting MSEs
                         with the purpose of financing their capital investment and operating capital. This facility will be
                         complimented by a technical assistance program, that would focus on improving micro and small
                         finance institutions' resilience to political and economic shocks and small enterprise lending.

                         Component 3  Management
                         This component will cover activities and costs for management of the overall project and funds by
                         SFD, the Small and Micro Enterprise Development (SMED) or SFD, SFD's management of line of
                         credit and technical assistance activities for Component 2, and the sponsoring agency's sponsorship
                         and oversight of the matching grants, strategic initiatives and technical assistance in Component 1. It
                         should be noted that the complexity and cost of this component may be elevated due to the difficult
                         security context in Yemen, particularly as this project intends to be inclusive and have national reach.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the             safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented in different regions in Yemen. Implementation will take place
                         mostly within micro and small enterprises (less than 20 employees), operating at a small scale in
                         services and manufacturing.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         Due to the very small scale of financing for the sub-projects under this project (not likely to exceed
                         $US 25,000 for the matching grants and $100,000 for small lending), no major environmental issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                         are anticipated. Project activities are not expected to resultin any potential large scale, significant
                         and/or irreversible impacts. Nonetheless, the sub-projects may result in minor negative
                         environmental impacts. Such impacts can be effectively mitigated for through the diligent
                         implementation of the Environmental Management Plan (EMP) by the Social Fund for Development
                         (SFD), the proposed implementing agency.

                         SFD has an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) dated August 2003 previously appraised and
                         implemented under the SFD III project and which has been updated with lessons learned from the
                         previous phases and is being applied during project implementation for SFD IV. This EMP will be
                         reviewed and updated as necessary to take into account the environmental assessment requirements
                         of this project and the applicable elements will be incorporated into each of the Operations Manuals
                         for each of the two components. SFD has developed thorough procedures for screening of sub-
                         projects that it has used during previous phases, and IDA funds will not be used towards the funding
                         of any category A type sub-projects or other projects included in a negative list to be developed. An
                         assessment of likely sub-projects will be undertaken as part of preparation to inform the updating of
                         the EMP.

                         In terms of reporting on compliance with the EMP, SFD recruit an environmental consultant to
                         undertake an annual environmental compliance and performance audit, which the managing director
                         of SFD shares with the World Bank. This was being carried out in the SFD III and IV projects, and
                           this project expected to benefit from these prior arrangements.

                           For Component 1, SFD would procure a management firm through international bidding for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           implementation of the matching grants facility. The terms of reference put out for this management
                           company will require that capacity to assess environmental impacts be present on the management
                           team, and this capacity would be part of the selection criteria in the procurement process. For
                           Component 2, SFD would ensure that necessary capacity building on safeguards is provided through
                           the Yemen Microfinance Network or other means as needed to the financial intermediaries providing
                           the loans to micro and small enterprises. In both cases, the environmental assessment requirements
                           would be incorporated into each of the Operations Manuals for the two components.

                           The Operations Manuals for each of the two main project components would include a negative list
                           that would exclude certain projects (such as projects that involved land acquisition, resettlement,
                           purchase of livestock, projects over a certain value, and similar). In addition, the Operations Manual
                           would include a straightforward assessment framework to determine other activities with
                           environmental or social safeguard implications, and the management team responsible for matching
                           grant review and approval would include adequate capacity to evaluate these implications and
                           determine actions (exclude the project, allow the project with specific requirements, or approve). The
                           proposed safeguards assessment framework would need to be assessed in terms of its potential risk to
                           achieving results, and this approach will be further examined closely during preparation to determine
                           how best it can be refined to ensure the assessment requirements are not unnecessarily burdensome
                           and prohibitive, particularly on microenterprises.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Concepcion Esperanza Del Castillo (MNSWA)
                           Alaa Ahmed Sarhan (MNSEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes
                           BP 4.01
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No

                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No

                           Pest Management OP 4.09              No

                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No

                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       No
                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No

                           Projects on International            No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Sep-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      An assessment of likely sub-projects, to inform the necessary revisions to SFD's EMP and
                                      develop a negative list, would be undertaken during project preparation (estimated July, 2012).
                                      The revisions to the SFD EMP, including elements that will need to be incorporated into each of
                                      the two components' Operations Manuals, will be completed during project preparation as well
                                      (estimated September, 2012).
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Nabila Assaf

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (RSA)                                                                                            Date: 06-Aug-2012
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: William Peter Mako (SM)                                                                                              Date: 02-Aug-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
