                                                                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                            CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC150
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Oct-2011

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        Argentina                               Project ID:                       P125804
                              Project Name:                   Adaptation Fund: Increasing Climate Resilience and Enhancing Sustainab
                              Task Team Leader:               Marcelo Hector Acerbi
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 00-undefined-0000                             Estimated Board Date:             31-Jan-2012
                              Managing Unit:                  LCSEN                                   Lending Instrument:               Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                         Agricultural extension and research (25%), Crops (25%), Irrigation and drainage (25%), Animal production (25%)
                              Theme:                          Climate change (40%), Land administration and management (20%), Water resource management (20%),
                                                              Vulnerability assessment and monito ring (10%), Environmental policies and institutions (10%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                       Amount
                                   Borrower                                                                                                                    0.00
                                   Adaptation Fund                                                                                                             4.31
                                   Total                                                                                                                       4.31
                              Environmental Category:         B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              B. Project Objectives

                              12.        The PDO is to reduce climate vulnerability of the agriculture sector in the Southwest of the Buenos Aires Province that suffers from man-
                              made and increasingly climate change induced desertification processes. Participatory planning processes will be used to identify and pilot
                              concrete adaptation measures focusing on water, crops and livestock management to promote climate resilience, and degraded agroecosystems
                              will be enhanced through sustainable land management measures. The primary Project beneficiaries will be farmer associations and families in the
                              counties (partidos) of Pu, Villarino and Patagones.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              C. Project Description

                              The Project will prioritize implementation of production-based adaptation measures in dry land agroecosystems by introducing techniques for
                              climate resilient and sustainable management of natural resources (component 2). These technical interventions will be supported by cross-
                              institutional work aimed at creating an adequate political, social and economic framework to ensure pertinence, adoption and continuity of the
                              adaptation efforts. The other complementary intervention pillars aim at bolstering any adaptation measures identified and chosen through
                              institutional and community-level capacity building. Stakeholder ownership will be promoted through a bottom-up approach and participatory
                              procedures.

                              The selection criteria for the Project area by the National Secretariat of Environment and Sustainable Development (SAyDS) were informed by four
                              fundamental aspects: a) significant occurrence of the above-mentioned negative impacts of climate variability and change; b) significant weight of
                              these impacts on national sustainable development on a strategically important area of agricultural production; c) existence of a combination of the
                              three major impacts (flooding, drought and desertification); and d) major impacts on the population.

                              The region targeted by the Project through a mixture of direct interventions and expected indirect impacts, includes the counties (partido, an
                              administrative unit composed of various municipalities) of Guamin Monte Hermoso, Adolfo Alsina, Coronel Suez, Coronel Pringles, Coronel
                              Dorrego, Saavedra, Tornquist, Pu, Coronel Rosales, Bah Blanca, Villarino and Patagones.

                              The proposed direct intervention area would involve three counties with a predominance of dry land farming located in zones below the 600 mm
                              isohyetal line (dry counties with frequent water deficit) namely: Pu, Villarino and Patagones. They were selected based on the following two
                              criteria: 1) a scattered rural population equal or greater than 10% of their overall population, and 2) frequent occurrence of agricultural emergency
                              in terms of yield and livestock losses.

                              With an approximate area of six million five hundred thousand (6,500,000) hectares, the Southwest of the Buenos Aires Province has around five
                              hundred fifty thousand (550,000) inhabitants, representing four per cent (4%) of the total provincial population. According to data from the
                              Provincial Directorate of Statistics, farming in the SW of Buenos Aires accounts for an important 28% of the Gross Geographic Product (GGP) of
                              the Province. Further, the SW part comprises 15% of the provincial beef cattle production. It is essentially a cattle rearing zone with agriculture in
                              marginal lands highly vulnerable to wind erosion and droughts. Generally, agricultural risks increase from North to South and from East to West.

                              The population of the Southwestern Buenos Aires is highly dependent on small and medium-scale agricultural and cattle ranching activities. The
                              zone accounts for approximately 12.3% of all farms in the range of 0-500 hectares in the Province. According to the last National Agricultural
                         Census (2002), this stratum of family-run subsistence farming corresponds to 62.5% of the 5,000 farming units (explotaciones agropecuarias in
                         Spanish) of the zone.

                         Component 1: Reducing Institutional and Community-level Vulnerability (US$ 710,000) aims at improving response and planning capacity of local
                         institutions and communities by means of participatory governance systems through two sub-components:

                         Sub-component 1.1: Creating Institutional Tools for Climate Resilience will contribute to an on-going effort to create an early warning system for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         climate change and desertification at the provincial level in cooperation with the relevant technical institutions. Institutional capacity building will be
                         provided to build and sustain these processes. A multi-stakeholder Regional Consultative Observatory on Climate Change and Desertification will
                         be created as an overall coordinating entity to manage the EWS (Early Warning System), map climate risks and vulnerabilities, and generate
                         incentives through a sustainable land management program. The Observatory will be composed of public and private sector representatives,
                         including universities.

                         Sub-component 1.2: Promoting Climate-smart Socio-cultural Approaches to Land Management will aim at modifying negative patterns of
                         interaction between socio-productive systems and the natural environment through induction and adoption of change in community relations with
                         the natural environment. Socio-cultural barriers are intended to transform into windows of opportunities for transitioning to an adaptive process of
                         change. Local educational institutions and opinion leaders will be engaged together with farmers# families and communities as whole. A teacher
                         training program and training of key social disseminators such as journalists and town councillors aim at inducing motivational change and
                         generalize a comprehensive perspective of the issues at stake to promote success of proposed adaptation measures.

                         Component 2: Implementing Adaptation Measures in Productive Agroecosystems (US$ 2,700,000) will be discussed, defined and put in practice
                         jointly with local farmer families and related technical institutions. The main interventions, to be selected and appraised during the Project
                         implementation, will cover small-scale pilot interventions from a menu of options related to management of water resources, crops, livestock and
                         pasture lands. Possible adaptation measures could include decentralized measures to efficiently capture and store rainwater and install
                         microsystems for irrigation; creation of organic vegetable gardens to strengthen food and agroecological diversity and directly raise the standard of
                         living of the local population; crop rotation; organic pest control; adjusted sowing; cover crops; sustainable land tillage; and adaptation of cattle
                         ranching systems through use of forage banks, forest grazing, and sustainable management of pasture plots. Revolving funds are planned to be
                         set up to support community storage of winter forage, seed supply for soil fixation crops, provision of inputs for shelter belts against wind erosion,
                         and small community funds for emergencies (subsistence farming micro insurance). In addition, a program for strengthening value chains is
                         planned to improve access to markets through better products and marketing, and options to facilitate occupational changes within farmer families
                         will be discussed and analyzed during Project preparation. Adequate cost-benefit analysis will be conducted during following Project preparation to
                         ensure that only activities that generate sufficient direct benefits will be undertaken.

                         Component 3: Applying Participatory Approach to Knowledge Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (US$ 92,100) will build upon an overall
                         participatory approach through two sub-components:

                         Sub-component 3.1: Creating a Knowledge Management Strategy will develop a program for public awareness and gender-sensitive adaptation
                         strategies. Workshops in the direct intervention counties will be organized to develop and validate interventions and work plans. Capacity will be
                         built for development of knowledge systems that promote continuous improvement and adaptive management. Training will be offered for local
                         groups that will carry out KM tasks, and mutual knowledge sharing between and beyond the three key counties will be promoted. A specific KM
                         strategy will be prepared identify specific means to involve different stakeholder groups, and joint demonstrative field visits organized to promote
                         dialogue. At the Project end, events will be organized to disseminate best practices and lessons learnt at different administrative levels, including
Public Disclosure Copy




                         relevant international forums.

                         Sub-component 3.2: Creating a Participatory M&E System aims at developing progress information through participatory processes and providing
                         periodic reports to make Project information available to all stakeholders. Local capacity will be built for indicator development and measurement to
                         facilitate participatory monitoring and control of the processes and impact evaluation. At the Project end, local workshops will be organized for
                         participatory results evaluation. Development of continuous improvement measures will be strongly linked to the Sustainability/Exit Strategy under
                         component 4.

                         Component 4: Developing a Sustainability/Exit Strategy (US$ 115,500) includes generation of necessary institutional and community level
                         agreements for the measures to be sustained beyond Project closure. It is necessary to create a policy framework taking into account both
                         regulatory and material needs that contribute to continuation of key activities by relevant stakeholders, and a commitment to demonstrable
                         dissemination of experience and lessons. Continued financing for successful initiatives will be sought t hrough institutional arrangements that
                         enable linking measures with the Development Plan of the Southwest of the Buenos Aires Province. Local authorities will be provided a
                         compilation of potential sources of financing and a fund raising strategy involving private and public sectors.

                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         The region targeted by the project through a mixture of direct interventions and expected indirect impacts, includes the counties (partido, an
                         administrative unit composed by various municipalities) of Guamin Monte Hermoso, Adolfo Alsina, Coronel Suez, Coronel Pringles, Coronel
                         Dorrego, Saavedra, Tornquist, Pu, Coronel Rosales, Bah Blanca, Villarino and Patagones. The proposed direct intervention area would involve
                         three counties with a predominance of dry farming located in zones below the 600 mm isohyetal line (dry counties with frequent water deficit), Pu,
                         Villarino and Patagones. They were selected based on the following two criteria: 1) a scattered rural population equal or greater than 10% of their
                         overall population, and 2) frequent occurrence of agricultural emergency.

                         With an approximate area of six million five hundred thousand (6,500,000) hectares, the Southwest of the Buenos Aires Province has around five
                         hundred fifty thousand (550,000) inhabitants, representing four per cent (4%) of the total provincial population. It is to be noted, however, that more
                         than 300,000 of the inhabitants live in the county of Bah Blanca, and more than 275,000 in the City of Bah Blanca.

                         According to data from the Provincial Directorate of Statistics, farming in the SW of Buenos Aires accounts for an important 28% of the Gross
                         Geographic Product of the Province. Further, the SW part comprises 15% of the beef cattle. It is essentially a cattle rearing zone with agriculture in
                         marginal lands highly vulnerable to wind erosion and droughts, and agricultural risks increase from North to South and from East to West.

                         The population of the Southwestern Buenos Aires is highly dependent on small and medium-scale agricultural and cattle ranching activities. The
                           zone accounts for approximately 12.3% of all farms in the range of 0-500 hectares in the Province. According to the last National Agricultural
                           Census (2002), this stratum of family-run subsistence farming corresponds to 62.5% of the 5,000 farming units ("explotaciones agropecuarias" in
                           Spanish) of the zone.

                            E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

                           The main implementing institution, the National Secretariat of Environment and Sustainable Development (SAyDS) is familiar with the Bank
                           safeguards and has the technical and institutional capacity to comply with environmental requirements of the Project. It has a division specifically
Public Disclosure Copy




                           specialized in environmental impact assessment (EIA), yet so far it has not been involved with the Project preparation. The co-executing agency,
                           the Provincial Sustainable Development Agency (OPDS) is the agency in charge of EIA compliance in the Province of Buenos Aires. It has no
                           previous experience with Bank standards. However, it has a set of protocols for EA which are partly comparable to the Bank safeguard policies.
                           Any gaps deriving from these differences will be solved by using an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) acceptable to the
                           Bank. The Project will utilize, to the greatest extent possible, the existing human capacity, systems, and procedures with the aim of promoting
                           sustainable capacity building and quality enforcement of administration and management. The technical and supervisory capacity of these
                           institution's executive units will be evaluated during Project preparation. The social and environment risk of the Project is Moderate.

                            F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

                           Lilian Pedersen (LCSSO)
                           Tuuli Johanna Bernardini (LCSEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

                            Safeguard Policies Triggered                     Yes        No       TBD                                   Explanation
                            Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01               ✖                           The policy is triggered by implementation of adaptation measures
                                                                                                          through interventions in productive agroecosystems which will be
                                                                                                          discussed, defined and put in practice jointly with local farmer
                                                                                                          families and related technical institutions during the Grant
                                                                                                          implementation period (component 3). Given there is previous
                                                                                                          positive experience on the proposed base interventions from around
                                                                                                          the world, and the fact that no particularly sensitive environmental
                                                                                                          conditions are known to prevail in the target area, the Project is
                                                                                                          classified as a Category B. The main intervention areas will cover
                                                                                                          management of water resources, crops, and livestock and pasture
                                                                                                          management. For example, production oriented adaptation is
                                                                                                          expected to include decentralized measures to efficiently capture
                                                                                                          and storage rainwater and install microsystems for irrigation. To
                                                                                                          strengthen food and agroecological diversity and directly raise the
                                                                                                          standard of living of the local population, creation of organic
                                                                                                          vegetable gardens will provide multiple benefits beyond increased
                                                                                                          climate resilience at family level. Further adaptation measures
                                                                                                          proposed for transitioning from the current situation to more climate
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                          resilient and sustainable land management approach are crop
                                                                                                          rotation, organic pest control, adjusted sowing, cover crops,
                                                                                                          sustainable land tillage, adaptation of cattle ranching systems
                                                                                                          through use of forage banks, forest grazing, and sustainable
                                                                                                          management of pasture plots. The principal adaptation measures
                                                                                                          included in the Project proposal are: (i) rainwater harvesting and
                                                                                                          improved irrigation technology, (ii) enhanced crop management, (iii)
                                                                                                          Rangeland and forage management, (iv) silvopastoral livestock
                                                                                                          production, and (v) sustainable land management and erosion
                                                                                                          control

                                                                                                          The proposed sustainable land management interventions will
                                                                                                          include training and capacity activities. As many of these
                                                                                                          interventions could be new to project beneficiaries there may be
                                                                                                          some initial resistance to adopting non-traditional, therefore a strong
                                                                                                          knowledge sharing and training program will be develop as an
                                                                                                          important aspect of this project.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                            ✖      At this stage, it is not possible to determine presence of natural
                                                                                                          habitats in the Project's area of influence. Presence of natural
                                                                                                          habitats will be determined before the QER. Additionally it will be
                                                                                                          evaluated if the project will result in any expansion of the agricultural
                                                                                                          frontier or conversion of natural habits to agricultural which may
                                                                                                          result in adverse impacts to natural habitats. If so, mitigation
                                                                                                          measures to avoid such impacts will be included in the ESMF before
                                                                                                          the QER.
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                                ✖                           The policy is triggered because the Project could finance small
                                                                                                          forest plantations to built shelter belts and wind backers). In addition,
                                                                                                          and in some cases, the project could finance some management
                                                                                                          plans at farm level to ensure compliance with the native forest law at
                                                                                                          the provincial level. This law includes the identification of forests with
                                                                                                          critical conservation value. As per the requirements of OP 4.36,
                         Safeguard Policies Triggered                                      Yes           No           TBD                                             Explanation
                                                                                                                                 small and restricted pilot forest plantations (shelter belts, forestall
                                                                                                                                 wind-breakers) supported under the Project would not cause loss or
                                                                                                                                 degradation of these forests, but would rather contribute to their
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 reforestation and conservation efforts, including the planting of trees
                                                                                                                                 native to the region.
                                                                                                                                 The target area is situated in the Argentine Espinal ecoregion, which
                                                                                                                                 characteristic feature is thorny deciduous shrub land forest. This
                                                                                                                                 ecoregion has been heavily modified as most of it has been used for
                                                                                                                                 agriculture and its forests have been highly exploited and
                                                                                                                                 dismantled. Both the caldenal and the talares types of sparse
                                                                                                                                 xerophytic forests have been exploited by removal of firewood. The
                                                                                                                                 cald trees have also been used to obtain fence posts, make wooden
                                                                                                                                 paving blocks for streets and to operate sawmills for making parquet
                                                                                                                                 floors. Furthermore, they have become seriously threatened by the
                                                                                                                                 expansion of the agricultural frontier that, thanks to modern irrigation
                                                                                                                                 systems, is now reaching areas that in the past were not suited for
                                                                                                                                 this type of land management.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09                                             ✖                                   This Project seeks to reduce use of and dependence on harmful
                                                                                                                                 agricultural chemicals and will not increase or promote use of
                                                                                                                                 pesticides, so a pest management plan will not be prepared. It
                                                                                                                                 should be noted, however, that small amounts of pesticides will
                                                                                                                                 probably continue to be used by a portion of pilot farmers. The
                                                                                                                                 Project will provide training on the proper use of pesticides and the
                                                                                                                                 safe disposal of containers by communities to prevent any health
                                                                                                                                 and environmental risks associated with pesticide use. This disposal
                                                                                                                                 will follow the Bank OP 4.09 guidelines as well as pertinent national
                                                                                                                                 laws and regulations. Also an Integrated Pest Management
                                                                                                                                 approach to dealing with pests will be supported.

                                                                                                                                  A pest management framework will be prepared and applied and
                                                                                                                                 will greatly benefit the proposed Project to support technical
                                                                                                                                 assistance for the adoption of proven, economically and
                                                                                                                                 environmentally sustainable Integrated Pest Management (IPM)
                                                                                                                                 practices, an approach designed to increase farm productivity
                                                                                                                                 (yields) while reducing input costs, human health risks, and/or
                                                                                                                                 adverse environmental impacts through the virtual elimination of
                                                                                                                                 pesticide use.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                                                         ✖        At this stage, it is not possible to determine the presence of physical
                                                                                                                                 cultural resources in the Project's area of influence. Presence of
                                                                                                                                 physical cultural resources will be determined before the QER. The
                                                                                                                                 team will include in the ESMF, screening criteria to avoid any known
                                                                                                                                 areas to have physical resources and a process to address any
                                                                                                                                 chance finds which may arise during implementation.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                                                  ✖        There is no certainty regarding indigenous people living in the
                                                                                                                                 Project#s area of influence. As the Project preparation proceeds, it
                                                                                                                                 will be determined whether there are indigenous people living in the
                                                                                                                                 area, and the Project#s potential effects will be assessed
                                                                                                                                 accordingly. A Social Assessment will be conducted prior to QER to
                                                                                                                                 determinate if any Indigenous Peoples are present in the Project
                                                                                                                                 area and if so how they are either positively or negatively affected by
                                                                                                                                 this proposed Project.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                                 ✖                                   Although no involuntary resettlement is planned under any of the
                                                                                                                                 components, activities under component 2 could trigger the policy.
                                                                                                                                 In compliance with the policy, in order to avoid, minimize or
                                                                                                                                 compensate for any adverse impacts in this regard, Resettlement
                                                                                                                                 Policy Framework will be developed to ensure proper consideration
                                                                                                                                 before and during execution of pilot interventions. Additionally, all
                                                                                                                                 work toward pilot interventions will include participatory planning
                                                                                                                                 processes with stakeholders.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                           ✖                                   Although construction of and/or dependency on a planned/existing
                                                                                                                                 dam is not envisaged, the policy is triggered in order to ensure
                                                                                                                                 compliance with safety standards in case that small water reservoirs
                                                                                                                                 or micro irrigation systems are constructed. The ESMF will include
                                                                                                                                 the basic safety requirements for such works in line of the policy.
                         Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                                        ✖                      The Project does not involve international waters.
                         7.50
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                                            ✖                      The Project does not involve disputed areas.


                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                           A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 29-Feb-2012
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
                              should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                               Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS would be prepared: 02/28/2011
Public Disclosure Copy




                               For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS: N/A
                               Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing should be
                               specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
                               The Project appraisal is estimated to take place in March 2012.

                         IV. APPROVALS
                            Signed and submitted by:
                            Task Team Leader:                  Name: Marcelo Hector Acerbi                                               Date: 28-Oct-2011
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                                            Date: 11-Nov-2011
                            Comments:
                            Sector Manager:                    Name: Karin Erika Kemper (SM)                                             Date: 10-Nov-2011
                            Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy
