                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA2371
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Sep-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 20-Sep-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Vietnam                            Project ID:    P130014
                            Project Name:      Vietnam Irrigated Agriculture Improvement Project (P130014)
                            Task Team          Abdulhamid Azad
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          23-Sep-2013                        Estimated   15-Jan-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASVS                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Irrigation and drainage (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Water resource management (80%), Rural services and infrastructure (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         210.00               Total Bank Financing:     180.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:                0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                           30.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                 180.00
                              Total                                                                                       210.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to improve the sustainability of irrigated agricultural production
                           systems in selected Central coastal and Northern mountainous provinces in Vietnam.
                            3. Project Description
                           The project will have four main components with a total investment of US$210 million implemented
                           over a six year period.

                                                                        Page 1 of 9
                         Component 1: Improved Irrigation Water Management (US$10 million) will improve institutional
                         capacity for modern, efficient, and accountable irrigation and drainage service delivery. This will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         enable reduction in recurring government expenditure on O&M of irrigation systems as well as
                         through establishment of a financially self-reliant and transparent water services sector in all project
                         provinces and at Ministry level. This will include: i) formation or strengthening of water user
                         organizations and associations and the application of the concept of Irrigation Management Transfer
                         (IMT); ii) enhancing irrigation and drainage asset management and investment planning at provincial
                         and scheme levels; and iii) updating and applying efficiency and performance standards for water
                         user organizations and irrigation management and drainage companies.

                         Component 2: Irrigation and Drainage Scheme Level Improvements (US$170 million). Inefficient
                         performance and poor condition of irrigation and drainage infrastructure in the project area is a major
                         factor in poor water service delivery and low efficiency. This component represents the bulk of major
                         infrastructure investments in the project areas (83,400 ha). It will improve bulk water delivery to
                         irrigation systems, service delivery and management in the selected irrigation and drainage schemes
                         through (i) physical improvement of selected existing large, medium and small scale irrigation and
                         drainage infrastructure such as canals, pumps, weirs, pipes, and control structures; (ii) improvement
                         and protection works for existing dams; (iii) construction of small multi-purpose water harvesting
                         schemes; (iv) construction of measuring devices and installation of a supervisory, control and data
                         acquisition system for improved water management, with associated logistical support; and (v)
                         application of remote sensing imagery for monitoring of crop performance.
                         Component 3: Support Services for Climate Smart Agricultural Practices (US$23 million). This
                         component will build on the improved irrigation infrastructure and water delivery activities in
                         component 2 to improve the productivity of agriculture, increase farmers’ incomes, and reduce their
                         vulnerability to adverse climatic events. It will involve: i) enhancing on-farm systems for crop
                         intensification; ii) provision of laser land leveling services; iii) advisory services to facilitate shifts
                         into feed and horticultural crop production iv) identification and implementation of measures to
                         reduce the water and environmental footprints of cropping systems; vi) promoting community led
Public Disclosure Copy




                         initiatives to increase accountability and ownership at the local level. Field demonstration and
                         information dissemination will involve Farmer Field Schools and other methods. Each province will
                         undertake research projects on technical and policy-related issues to resolve specific problems or
                         bottlenecks to agricultural production or water management as a result of climate change. The
                         applied research will be done during the first two years of project implementation so that results can
                         be applied during the last four years of implementation.

                         Component 4: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$7 million). This component
                         supports the operating costs of the implementing agencies including MARD and the selected
                         provinces to manage the project. It would finance: (a) incremental operating costs; (b)equipment and
                         vehicles purchase; (c) monitoring and evaluation, including third-party monitoring; (d) staff training;
                         (e) internal and external audits; and (f) various consultancies for the design, construction supervision,
                         quality control support, gender action plan and safeguards compliance.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed project will focus on two regions of Vietnam: the Central Coast (Thanh Hoa, Ha Tinh,
                         Quang Tri, and Quang Nam provinces) and the Northern Mountainous Regions (Ha Giang, Phu Tho,
                         and Hoa Binh provinces).



                                                                        Page 2 of 9
                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Anjali Acharya (EASVS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Hoa Thi Mong Pham (EASVS)
                           Tuan Anh Le (EASVS)
                           Khang Van Pham (EASVS)

                            6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes
                            BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09            Yes

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/    Yes
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      Yes

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     Yes
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          Yes

                            Projects on International        Yes
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                No potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts are envisaged - as forecast
                              through the social assessment and environmental assessment of the project activities. However,
                              manageable safeguard issues associated with this project include:
                              Construction related environmental impact: The project implementation will cause some negative
                              environmental impacts during construction. These impacts may include: dust, wastes, cultivation
                              disturbance due to cutting off water flows, rural road damage, accident risk, and dam safety.
                              However, these environmental impacts are minor, localized, temporary and mitigable. Temporary
                              modification to irrigation systems and/or changes in water flow during scheme rehabilitation may
                              lead to disturbance of agricultural production.
                              On dam safety, the project will not finance the construction of any new dams. It will, however,
                              finance minor rehabilitation of existing dams to improve dam safety aspects. In addition, a number
                              of the sub-projects are expected to draw water from existing dams.


                                                                        Page 3 of 9
                           The sub-project to improve the South Ma scheme will draw water from Cua Dat Reservoir, located
                           on the Chu River. The Chu River is a transboundary river that originates from Laos. However after
Public Disclosure Copy




                           analyzing the exceptions, this project falls within the exception provided for in paragraph 7(a) of
                           OP 7.50. The exception memo was approved by RVP on July 17, 2013.

                           On pest management, during operation, an increase in irrigated areas may lead to an elevated level
                           of fertilizers and pesticides that may cause pollution to soil, water and air.

                           Loss of land, assets, and businesses associated to land: The Project will acquire land (both
                           permanently and temporarily) to allow rehabilitation of the existing infrastructure. It is estimated
                           that 4,500 households would be affected. While the number of affected household is substantial,
                           the impact at the household level is expected to be minimal. Most (95%) of the households is
                           expected to lose a small strip of land due to rehabilitation of existing irrigation channels. The
                           number of severely affected household is also expected to be low – about 220 households scattered
                           across the nine sub-projects. Only 13 households are anticipated to require relocation. In total,
                           about 97 hectares of land will be permanently acquired, while 105 hectares would be temporarily
                           affected to allow for construction operations. Most of the permanently affected land (97.2%) is
                           agricultural land, while the remaining is residential land.
                           Impact on ethnic minority peoples: The adverse impact on ethnic minority households is primarily
                           due to land acquisition to allow for the rehabilitation of the existing infrastructure. However,
                           various technical design options have been explored to keep the number of affected households to
                           the minimum. During project preparation, consultations with ethnic minority peoples at sub-
                           projects locations were conducted in a free, prior and informed manner. The objective of the
                           consultation was to inform local ethnic minority communities of the project activities and solicit
                           feedback from them on the potential positive and negative impacts. As the impacts from the
                           project are expected to be primarily positive (e.g. improve and ensure more reliable access to
                           water), the ethnic minority peoples indicated broad community support for project implementation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             The physical investments– the improvement of irrigation infrastructures – will not result in any
                           negative indirect and/or long-term environmental or social impacts in the project area. Overall, the
                           long-term environmental impact of the project will be positive as it will enable improvement of
                           irrigated infrastructures, such as irrigation canals and reservoirs, to efficiently utilize water
                           resources as well as to adapt to climate change. As such, the project helps to reduce water loss,
                           expand cropland irrigated and green coverage, reduce GHG emission, and increase soil fertility
                           through diversification of crops.

                           In terms of social impact, there is no potential indirect adverse and/or long term negative impact
                           due to future activities anticipated under the project. In the long term, the project will improve the
                           safety and functionality of rehabilitated physical structures, enhanced resilience of people
                           livelihoods, reduced potential loss of irrigation water, increased access to reliable irrigation water,
                           and enhanced community awareness and effectiveness in irrigation water management,
                           particularly between the downstream and the upstream. Rural water supply schemes will also
                           improve ethnic peoples’ access to safe water, and thus, reduce the risks of water-borne diseases.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             No alternatives exist as most structural rehabilitation activities are to be carried out for existing

                                                                       Page 4 of 9
                           works. Efforts have been made to minimize the adverse impacts, particularly impacts resulting
                           from land acquisition of land which may affect the livelihood of local people.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
Public Disclosure Copy




                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             Environment: MARD has prepared a project ESMF, two EMPs for Thanh Hoa and Quang Nam
                           Subprojects and one ECOP for Hoa Binh Subproject in accordance with World Bank policy
                           requirements. The ESMF includes an Integrated Pest Management Plan to address pest
                           management issues during project operation. A “chance find procedures? is incorporated in EMPs
                           and ECOPs to address Physical Cultural Resources that are unexpectedly found during
                           construction. In addition, MARD also formulated environmental impact assessments for identified
                           subprojects in accordance with national environmental protection law.

                          A Panel of Experts (POE) formed under VN-Managing Natural Hazards Project (P118783) will be
                          assigned the task to carry out the review of the dam safety report for the Cua Dat Dam.

                          MARD is the environmental safeguard implementing agency. In the past, MARD has
                          implemented a number of World Bank financed projects and is familiar with the Bank’s safeguard
                          policies. At central level, MARD’s qualified environmental and social safeguards staff are
                          responsible for the monitoring and evaluation of the project environmental safeguards compliance.
                          MARD will also hire qualified environmental management consultants to assist in the training,
                          monitoring and evaluation processes. At provincial level, each PPMU’s environmental and social
                          staff will be responsible for the monitoring and evaluation of subproject environmental safeguards
                          performance. Given the low capacity and in some cases limited familiarity of the PPMUs on the
                          Bank environmental safeguards policies, MARD will provide annual trainings for the PPMUs
                          environmental and social safeguards staff.

                          Social: An SA carried out in early 2013 confirmed that the overall social impact of the project is
                          positive, given the project aims to strengthen national, provincial, and local capacities for better
Public Disclosure Copy




                          irrigation management. However, some negative impacts, primarily related to acquisition of land
                          to allow for rehabilitation of existing infrastructure including on ethnic minority households, is
                          unavoidable. Thus, MARD has prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to guide
                          formulation and execution of sub-project Resettlement Action plan (PAR). The RPF features the
                          following:

                          •        Land, structure, crops, businesses: Compensation to land and physical structures will be
                          made at the replacement cost while compensation to crops will be made at market prices.
                          Businesses affected will be compensated for the loss of structures (at replacement costs) and
                          income loss irrespective of land status. Vulnerable groups such as women-headed households, the
                          elderly or disabled, households living below the poverty, the landless, ethnic minorities, etc. are
                          entitled to additional support under the income restoration program when 10% or more of their
                          total productive land are affected. These entitlements are provided in addition to compensation
                          made to the assets being affected. The level of support for affected households will be determined
                          on the basis of the project’ RPF combined with consultation to be made during the socioeconomic
                          survey that will be carried out during Detailed Measurement Surveys (DMS).

                          •       Relocation of graves: During the preparation of the three first-year subprojects, seven
                          graves were identified as affected. Relocation of graves would be carried out by households whose
                          graves are affected (as a common practice in Vietnam). Payment to the grave relocation includes


                                                                     Page 5 of 9
                          costs of excavation, relocation, reburial, purchasing land for reburial (if any), and all other
                          reasonable costs associated with necessary rituals by the local practice. Local ritual will be carried
                          out in accordance with local cultural practices. When graves of ethnic minorities are affected,
Public Disclosure Copy




                          grave relocation rituals adopted will be documented in respective Ethic Minority Development
                          Plan (EMDPs).

                          An Ethnic Minority Policy Framework (EMPF) was also prepared by MARD on the basis of free,
                          prior, and informed consultation with ethnic minority peoples present in the project area. The
                          consultation was conducted to ensure there is a broad support form affected ethnic minority
                          communities for project implementation, and to ensure ethnic minorities have opportunity to
                          receive socioeconomic benefits from the project in a way that is culturally appropriate to them.
                          The EMPF provides guidance on how an EMDP should be prepared.

                          To date, MARD has prepared three RAPs and one EMDP were prepared for the three first-year
                          subprojects.

                           PPMUs are the implementation agencies for the RAPs and EMDPs within their respective
                           provinces. The costs for land acquisition will be financed by the Government. During project
                           implementation, a social staff will be appointed at CPMU and at each PPMU to support to RAP
                           and EMDP implementation. CPMU will ensure social safeguards implementation and monitoring
                           are in accordance with the project’s RPF. A third party monitoring agency will also be hired to
                           ensure social safeguards implementation under the project is in full compliance with the RPF.
                           Given that CPMU and some PPMUs are familiar with the recently completed World Bank funded
                           project (VWRAP), some additional training during the first year would be sufficient to refresh the
                           working knowledge of safeguards staff. It is planned that at least two safeguard training courses
                           would be provided during the first two years of project implementation.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Environment: A series of consultations have been carried out during project preparation. The first
                           consultation was conducted in December, 2012 with the government officials at the all seven
                           provinces to present the proposed investments and obtain their views. The second consultation
                           took place in February - March, 2013 at the Sub-Project Areas with participation of key
                           stakeholders such as farmers and representatives of the women unions, affected people as well as
                           beneficiaries. In addition, a series of consultations with affected households, who may be
                           relocated, also took place as part of the preparation of ESMF. All comments and suggestions from
                           key stakeholders have been incorporated in the ESMF, EMPs and ECOP. All draft environmental
                           safeguards instruments including project ESMF, two EMPs and ECOP in Vietnamese language
                           was disclosed locally at provincial, district and commune levels on July 15, 2013 and in Vietnam
                           Development Information Center (VDIC) on July 10, 2013. The English versions were disclosed
                           in the World Bank InfoShop on July 15 and 19, 2013.

                          Social: Consultation was conducted in February – May, 2013 (including gender consultation) with
                          various key stakeholders such as: farmers, ethnic minorities, women, women’s union, and farmers’
                          association. Consultations with stakeholders aimed to: a) provide project information, including
                          project goal, project activities, and potential positive and adverse impacts; and b) solicit feedbacks
                          on the basis of information provided. For ethnic minorities, consultation was held separately to
                          ensure a free, prior, and informed process. All social safeguard documents including the SA, RPF,
                          EMPF, three first-year subproject RAPs, and EMDP for Hoa Binh were disclosed in Vietnamese


                                                                      Page 6 of 9
                           at the Vietnam Development Information Center during the period from June 19 to July 16, 2013.
                           The Vietnamese versions were also disclosed locally by the Central Project Office of the Ministry
                           of Agriculture and Rural Development, and at the provincial Department of Agriculture and Rural
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Development covered by the Project. The English versions of the above documents were disclosed
                           at the Bank’s InfoShop in Washington DC during the period from June 19 and July 16, 2013 prior
                           to commencement of appraisal of the Project.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      09-Jul-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   10-Jul-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Vietnam                                                          10-Jul-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      15-Jul-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   16-Jul-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Vietnam                                                          16-Jul-2013
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      15-Jul-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   16-Jul-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Vietnam                                                          16-Jul-2013
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      09-Jul-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   10-Jul-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Vietnam                                                          10-Jul-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level



                                                                    Page 7 of 9
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                          Bank?
                          Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                          Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]



                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                             If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                             Has the RVP approved such an exception?                          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Abdulhamid Azad
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name:                                              Date:




                                                                       Page 9 of 9
