                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSC3246

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Sep-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Sep-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            South Asia                        Project ID:       P145054
                            Project Name:       Central Asia South Asia Electricity Transmission and Trade Project
                                                (CASA-1000) (P145054)
                            Task Team           Sunil Kumar Khosla
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       15-Jan-2014                           Estimated         27-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: SASDE                                  Lending           Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Regional integration (60%), Climate change (40%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     1000.00                 Total Bank Financing:             510.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:            180.00
                              Financing Source                                                               Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                     145.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                       365.00
                              Islamic Development Bank                                                        280.00
                              Bilateral Agencies (unidentified)                                                30.00
                              Total                                                                           820.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The objective of the project is to create the conditions for sustainable electricity trade between the
                           Central Asia countries of Tajikistan and Kyrgyz Republic and the South Asian countries of
                         Afghanistan and Pakistan, in order to alleviate power supply shortages in the South Asian countries
                         and enhance sector and budget revenues in the Central Asian countries.
                         C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed project would be comprised of the following two components:

                         Component 1: Construction of transmission infrastructure in the four countries consisting of:

                         •       A High Voltage Direct Current (HVDC) transmission system, including a 500 kilovolt (kV)
                         linewith a capacity of 1,300 megawatt (MW) from Sangtuda to Peshawar via Kabul (750 kilometers);
                         1,300 MW alternating current to direct current (AC-DC) converter station in Sangtuda, a 1,300 MW
                         DC-AC converter station in Peshawar; and a 300 MW DC-AC converter station in Kabul;
                         •       A High Voltage Alternating Current (HVAC) 500 kV line from Datka to Khujand (477
                         kilometers) to transfer the surplus power from the Kyrgyz Republic to Tajikistan; and the 500 kV
                         line from Regar to Sangtuda to strengthen Tajikistan’s internal grid network.

                         Component 2: Support for project implementation and technical assistance (TA) required by the four
                         countries to the project implementing agencies, namely the National Transmission and Despatch
                         Company (Pakistan), the Open Joint Stock Holding Company (OJSHC) Barki Tojik (Tajikistan), Da
                         Afghanistan Breshna Sherkat (Afghanistan), and the Joint Stock Company (JSC) National Electric
                         Grid of Kyrgyzstan (the Kyrgyz Republic). Areas where support would be needed include the
                         provision of third-party monitoring and supervision of consultants during construction, the design of
                         benefit-sharing schemes, and so on.

                         Financing for the project is expected to be from multiple sources including the World Bank, Islamic
                         Development Bank and other bilateral agencies. The financing table includes indicative amounts that
                         are subject to review and approval by each institution.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis (if known)
                         The HVDC transmission line is expected to commence at Sangtuda in Tajikistan and pass through
                         Kunduz, Pul-e-Khumri, Kabul and Jalalabad in Afghanistan and terminate in Peshawar in Pakistan.
                         The total length of the transmission line is estimated to be 750 kilometers of which about 16 percent
                         passes through Tajikistan, 75 percent through Afghanistan and 9 percent through Pakistan. In
                         addition, a 477 kilometer 500 kV transmission line is expected to be financed under the project to
                         interconnect Kyrgyz Republic to Tajikistan. An Avian Risk Assessment study has identified five
                         important bird areas (IBAs) in Tajikistan and Afghanistan (Tigrovaya Balka Nature Reserve, Imam
                         Sahib, Salang Kotal, Kole Hashmat Khan and Jalalabad Valley) and one Ramsar site (1084, lower
                         part of Pyandj River) in Tajikistan along the alignment that is under consideration. No IBA or
                         Ramsar site has been identified along the proposed alignment in Kyrgyz Republic and Pakistan.
                         Security concerns in Pakistan and Afghanistan and presence or absence of unexploded land mines/
                         ordnances in Afghanistan will be studied to assess potential safety concerns for communities/
                         construction workers. Suitable mitigation measures are being incorporated in the proposed Regional
                         Environmental Assessment (REA) under preparation (see discussions under OP 4.01). There might
                         be a need to critically analyze the location of the relevant HVDC Converter stations and the right of
                         way in places passing through strategic areas, e.g., New Kabul City as well as the military
                         installations in the vicinity of Kabul and coordinate with all relevant agencies in the country. Also,
                         identification of a suitable location for HVDC converter station near Peshawar will be critical as the
                         area is heavily populated.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The implementing agencies are the four National Transmission Companies (NTCs) in their
                           respective countries who will be responsible for (i) establishing the transmission infrastructure for
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the CASA-1000 project, (ii) operating and maintaining the AC system in their countries; and (iii)
                           coordinating with the DC system operator for smooth operation of the overall CASA-1000 system.
                           These companies are:

                           •       National Transmission and Despatch Company (Pakistan)
                           •       OJSHC Barki Tojik (Tajikistan)
                           •       Da Afghanistan Breshna Sherkat (Afghanistan)
                           •       JSC National Electric Grid of Kyrgyzstan (the Kyrgyz Republic)

                           The institutional capacities of the above mentioned institutions will be assessed during preparation of
                           the country specific Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs) (see discussions under OP 4.01) and
                           appropriate country-specific capacity building measures will be incorporated in the Environmental
                           Management Plans (EMPs). The implementing agencies for Pakistan, Tajikistan and Kyrgyz
                           Republic have some experience with implementing projects under financing from International
                           Finance Institutions.
                           -       The Implementing Agency in Tajikistan has successfully implemented the cross-border
                           220kV transmission line from Nurek to Pul-e-Khumri under ADB financing, and the 220kV line in
                           the Rasht region under IsDB financing. No public information leads to believe that implementation
                           of ADB’s or IsDB’s safeguard policies was not satisfactory. Barki Tojik also implemented a
                           Chinese- funded North-South 500 kV transmission line;
                           -       The Implementing Agency in Kyrgyz Republic has successfully implemented a 220 kV
                           transmission line from Aigul-Tash to Samat and an another 500 kV line with associated substations
                           both under IsDB financing, as well as a Chinese-funded 500 kV transmission line from Datka to
                           Kemin and from Kemin to Osh with associated substations. No public information leads to believe
                           that implementation of IsDB’s safeguard policies was not satisfactory;
Public Disclosure Copy




                           -       The Implementing Agency in Pakistan is implementing a Distribution and Transmission
                           improvement project and a hydropower extension project with full safeguard assessment under
                           World Bank safeguard policies.
                           - DABS of Afghanistan is currently preparing two Bank-financed projects, including a category A
                           hydropower rehabilitation project and is receiving capacity-building accordingly.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           L. Panneer Selvam (SASDI)
                           Chaohua Zhang (SASDS)
                           Arcadii Capcelea (ECSEN)
                           Asta Olesen (SASDS)
                           Anna C. O'Donnell (SASDS)
                           Mohammad Arif Rasuli (SASDI)
                           Javaid Afzal (SASDI)
                           Angela Nyawira Khaminwa (AFTCS)
                           Samina Mussarat Islam (SASDS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                         Safeguard Policies             Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes          The project is rated Category A because it
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BP 4.01                                     involves greenfield construction of a long span
                                                                     of high voltage Overhead Transmission Lines
                                                                     (OTL), some of it through potentially sensitive
                                                                     areas.

                                                                     The final package of environmental assessment
                                                                     documents for the project will include: (i) prior
                                                                     to appraisal, an REA providing general
                                                                     information for the whole project area and a
                                                                     guidance framework for preparing country-
                                                                     specific ESIAs and site-specific plans; (ii)
                                                                     during implementation, a country-specific
                                                                     ESIA/EMP for each country; and (iii) site-
                                                                     specific EMPs and site management plans to be
                                                                     prepared by the engineering, procurement and
                                                                     construction (EPC) contractors and approved by
                                                                     the NTCs and the Bank.

                                                                     The Client prepared an original project-wide
                                                                     ESIA based on the prefeasibility study,
                                                                     summarizing potential impacts from
                                                                     construction of transmission lines within a 2
                                                                     kilometer-wide corridor. The detailed design,
                                                                     including final routing/alignment of
                                                                     transmission lines within this corridor and the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     exact location of DC-AC converter stations and
                                                                     tower footings, etc. will be defined later by the
                                                                     engineering, procurement and construction
                                                                     (EPC) contractors, following detailed route
                                                                     surveys and considering the site-specific
                                                                     environmental and social aspects.

                                                                     While acknowledging the relatively early stage
                                                                     of project preparation and the security issues
                                                                     that preclude on-site data collection in some
                                                                     areas, the Bank review of the original ESIA
                                                                     concluded that it did not satisfy WB
                                                                     requirements because it lacked sufficient
                                                                     information on baseline conditions to make a
                                                                     reasonable evaluation of potential project risks
                                                                     and because it was prepared by the same
                                                                     engineering consultant s who prepared the
                                                                     prefeasibility study. As recommended by the
                                                                     Bank, the Client subsequently engaged an
                                                                     independent consultant firm to review and
                         update the original ESIA, incorporating
                         additional baseline data in the form of 6 m
                         resolution satellite imagery for the entire CASA
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1000 route to augment existing baseline
                         information. This helped identify some sites
                         along the route which present particular risks
                         that will require further assessment. This
                         additional baseline data will be strengthened
                         further during the course of project preparation
                         to provide a more detailed analysis of
                         potentially sensitive areas based on the satellite
                         images and a more concrete discussion of
                         mitigation measures and actions to be taken
                         during further design and implementation.

                         Based on the fact that this is a regional project
                         covering four countries, and the project design
                         is still at a relatively early stage (only overall
                         specifications and a broad corridor defined, with
                         the final designs to be completed as part of the
                         construction contracts), it was agreed that a
                         form of Environmental and Social Management
                         Framework (ESMF) would be the most
                         appropriate EIA instrument for this project.
                         Therefore, the existing ESIA will be replaced by
                         a Regional Environmental Assessment (REA),
                         under preparation by an independent consultant
                         based upon the extensive information available
Public Disclosure Copy




                         from the existing ESIA and other appropriate
                         inputs. The REA under preparation covers all
                         four countries and when finalized will serve as
                         the basis for future preparation of country-
                         specific ESIAs (by independent consultants) and
                         site-specific plans (by contractors) during the
                         implementation phase of the project.

                         Because the broad corridor of the OTL is known
                         and considerable site information is already
                         available, the REA is being prepared to go
                         beyond the typical “Framework? type of
                         document and to include both substantive and
                         process elements. On the substance side, this
                         includes, for example: baseline data drawn from
                         the original ESIA, the satellite images from
                         2011 and any other appropriate sources;
                         identification of environmentally or socially
                         sensitive areas (“hotspots?) based on the
                         available information and analyses (e.g. the
                         Avian Risk Assessment, social assessments);
                         analysis of alternatives; and general mitigation
Public Disclosure Copy




                         measures including applicable Environmental
                         Codes of Practices (ECOPs) relating to
                         construction/operation/ maintenance of high
                         voltage OTL.

                         On the process side, the REA is being prepared
                         to provide an outline (for each country) of
                         implementation arrangements and the roles and
                         responsibilities of all parties (e.g. construction
                         contractors; independent monitoring/supervision
                         consultants; environment and social
                         development specialists/consultants); an
                         assessment of the institutional capacities (and
                         any required capacity building) in each
                         participating country to manage the
                         environmental and social issues arising in the
                         project and to implement the proposed
                         mitigation and monitoring measures will be
                         conducted as part of country-specific ESIAs.
                         The REA is being prepared to provide clear
                         procedures and processes for preparation of
                         country- and site-specific EIAs & EMPs during
                         project implementation including
                         recommendations for institutional capacity
                         assessment (in addition, the REA will provide
Public Disclosure Copy




                         guidance for preparation of country-specific
                         Land Acquisition and Resettlement Policy
                         Frameworks – see section on OP 4.12 below).

                         Several rounds of public consultations were
                         carried out as part of preparation of the
                         environmental and social assessment of the
                         project, including as part of a benefit-sharing
                         scheme proposed to be implemented alongside
                         the project and agreed to in principle by the four
                         countries as a means to include communities
                         along the corridor which goes beyond standard
                         development practice for transmission line
                         projects. Further public consultations will be
                         organized in the context of the preparation of
                         the REA, involving key stakeholders in each of
                         the four participating countries prior to
                         Appraisal. Country-specific ESIAs will be
                         prepared based on the REA and public
                                                             consultations will be held in each of the four
                                                             countries on the Terms of Reference for
                                                             preparation of the ESIAs and on the ESIAs
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             themselves. In addition, as this is a Category A
                                                             project, the REA will be disclosed in-country
                                                             and in Infoshop when finalized, with an
                                                             Executive Summary submitted to the Board
                                                             prior to appraisal.

                                                             During project implementation, the standard
                                                             disclosure and consultation requirements will
                                                             apply for the country-specific ESIAs and site-
                                                             specific EMPs, including disclosure both in-
                                                             country and in Infoshop. All requirements for
                                                             preparation, disclosure and consultation on
                                                             ESIAs/EMPs will be met prior to
                                                             commencement of construction works to which
                                                             they relate.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   This project is not expected to cause significant
                                                             impact to critical and natural habitats based on
                                                             the nature of the project investments and the
                                                             results of the preliminary ESIA. However, the
                                                             Avian Risk Assessment and Management study
                                                             identified several Important Birds Areas and
                                                             Ramsar sites within the project area that need to
                                                             be considered during the detailed design phase
                                                             and as part of country-specific environmental
                                                             and social assessments to be prepared.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             Furthermore, during the construction phase (and
                                                             potentially during the operations stage), there
                                                             will be some cutting of vegetation for right-of-
                                                             way maintenance and for access roads and other
                                                             associated facilities. The construction and
                                                             operation may also cause disturbance or
                                                             increased pressures to fauna. All these would
                                                             require developing relevant mitigation and
                                                             monitoring activities which are being
                                                             considered in the preparation of the REA as
                                                             well as in the country specific EIAs and EMPs
                                                             under OP 4.01. Specific measures may include
                                                             alternative alignments to avoid natural habitats,
                                                             avian protection measures on cables and towers,
                                                             prohibiting wildlife hunting, and minimizing
                                                             impacts to habitats from operation and
                                                             maintenance of lines, among other potential
                                                             measures.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes   This project is not expected to cause significant
                                                                 impact to critical and natural forests. While the
                                                                 project does not include any plantation activity,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 commercial harvesting or harvesting conducted
                                                                 by small-scale landholders or local
                                                                 communities, it might require tree cutting
                                                                 during construction and maintenance of the
                                                                 right of way. This presence of forests is being
                                                                 considered in the context of OP 4.01. in the
                                                                 preparation of the REA at the scale of the
                                                                 project, and in country-specific ESIAs and
                                                                 EMPs at a more local scale. Measures would be
                                                                 included in the EMP's to avoid or minimize
                                                                 impacts to forests if any are identified in the
                                                                 project area.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The OP 4.09 is not triggered as the project will
                                                                 neither finance the procurement of fertilizers/
                                                                 pesticides nor create conditions which may lead
                                                                 to increased use of pesticides. The current
                                                                 practices for maintenance of the right of way of
                                                                 the transmission line and facilities have been
                                                                 reviewed for each country with respect to the
                                                                 use of pesticide or chemicals. The four countries
                                                                 have confirmed that no chemicals or pesticide
                                                                 would be used for that purpose.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    The initial screening of the route has not
                         BP 4.11                                 revealed any important Physical Cultural
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 Resource (PCR) from a national and global
                                                                 perspective. The final routing and alignment of
                                                                 the transmission line will be detailed in the
                                                                 country-specific ESIAs and will avoid
                                                                 damaging PCR if any, or restricting access to
                                                                 them.
                                                                 Special precautions will be detailed in the
                                                                 country-specific EMPs as part of OP 4.01 (see
                                                                 above) with specific mitigation measures and
                                                                 provisions for the use of chance find
                                                                 procedures, if encountered.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No    Communities in the project area in the four
                                                                 project countries, both within and along the
                                                                 transmission lines corridors, do not fall under
                                                                 the definition of indigenous people as stated
                                                                 under OP 4.10 (paragraph 4 in defining
                                                                 indigenous peoples). Therefore, OP 4.10 is not
                                                                 considered triggered under this project.
                                                                 However, considering the unique characteristics
                                                                of the ethnic groups in the project areas,
                                                                particularly the tribal communities in
                                                                Afghanistan and Pakistan, the project has
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                carried out desk research as well as some field
                                                                surveys to identify these communities and
                                                                understand their socioeconomic conditions,
                                                                unique cultural and institutional systems. These
                                                                are summarized in the various field reports and
                                                                the Social Impact Assessment. The client will
                                                                ensure effective consultations with these
                                                                communities of different ethnicities, and ensure
                                                                culturally appropriate benefits for these
                                                                communities. Necessary mechanisms and
                                                                measures will be incorporated into the project
                                                                design to ensure their participation, mitigation
                                                                of any possible adverse impacts upon them and
                                                                benefit-sharing arrangements under the project.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes   OP 4.12 is triggered due to the potential need
                         4.12                                   for land acquisition related to the various
                                                                components of the transmission system; the
                                                                existence of physical structures that might have
                                                                to be removed; and the possibility that affected
                                                                settlements might have to be physically
                                                                relocated.

                                                                Because the precise locations of the tower
                                                                footings and alignment of the transmission lines
                                                                are not yet determined, the exact scope of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                impacts cannot be determined until the technical
                                                                designs are finalized. Also, since the relevant
                                                                national policies, laws, institutions and
                                                                conditions differ in each country, separate Land
                                                                Acquisition and Resettlement Policy
                                                                Frameworks (LARPF) have been prepared as a
                                                                condition of World Bank appraisal to guide the
                                                                land acquisition/resettlement planning process.
                                                                Based on the LARPFs for each of the four
                                                                countries, specific Resettlement Plans and/or
                                                                Land Acquisition Plans will be prepared as
                                                                required when precise details of transmission
                                                                line locations (alignment, locations for pylons,
                                                                substations and other structures) are available.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No    The project will not be financing any new dam
                                                                construction or making any modifications to
                                                                existing dams. The assets financed under the
                                                                project are not expected to be at risk for
                                                                extensive damage in case of dam failure.
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            Only existing summer surplus will be utilized
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            under the CASA-1000 project. No additional
                                                                                                                                 generation capacity will be required or built for
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 the project. The existing operation modes of the
                                                                                                                                 hydropower plants and/or quantity of water
                                                                                                                                 being released are not expected to change from
                                                                                                                                 the current practices. The legal documents to be
                                                                                                                                 agreed upon with the clients may incorporate
                                                                                                                                 covenants to address this aspect as appropriate.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             None of the project components will be located
                                 7.60                                                                                            in a disputed area.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Dec-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Environmental and social assessments have been underway since 2011; the REA preparation was
                                      begun in July 2013 and is expected to be completed in September 2013; additional country-
                                      specific ESIAs will be prepared during the first year of project implementation in parallel with
                                      preparation of detailed designs.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Sunil Kumar Khosla

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 26-Sep-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Ranjit J. Lamech (SM)                                                                                                Date: 26-Sep-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
