                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                            ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                      Report No.: ISDSA4218

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 30-Aug-2013
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 31-Aug-2013
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          Tuvalu                             Project ID:    P145310
                                                        Parent         P128940
                                                        Project ID:
   Project Name:     Tuvalu Aviation Investment Project - Additional Finance (P145310)
   Parent Project    Pacific Aviation Investment - Tuvalu (P128940)
   Name:
   Task Team         Christopher R. Bennett
   Leader:
   Estimated         09-Jul-2013                        Estimated   01-Nov-2013
   Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
   Managing Unit:    EASNS                              Lending     Adaptable Program Loan
                                                        Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (100%)
   Theme(s):         Regional integration (46%), Climate change (23%), Natural disaster
                     management (23%), Administrative and civil service reform (8%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:       5.90           Total Bank Financing:                5.90
   Total Cofinancing:                       Financing Gap:                       0.00
     Financing Source                                                                     Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                     0.00
     IDA Grant                                                                              5.90
     Total                                                                                  5.90
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:
   Is this a         No
   Repeater
   project?

   2. Project Development Objective(s)


                                              Page 1 of 7
   A. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   B. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)
   To improve the safety and security of air transport and associated infrastructure.

 3. Project Description
The approximately 18 km road network in Funafuti, Tuvalu was paved around 2000 and is reaching
the end of its service life. The deterioration of some roads has markedly accelerated and the heavily
trafficked sections adjacent to the airport is now starting to pothole. Other sections are also
potholing, and unless the good sections receive treatment soon, they will also begin to fail. The
Government of Tuvalu (GoTv) has requested that the repair and resurfacing of the roads be done at
the same time as the proposed runway resurfacing. The same technology would be used, and having
a single contractor procured to repair both the roads and runway at the same time will offer
significant economies of scale. The proposed project will: (i) resurface the existing paved roads on
Funafuti; and, (ii) provide improved drainage to mitigate climatic effects.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project is located at Fongafale Island, Funafuti Atoll. The main island of Tuvalu, home to the
capital and just under 50% of the country’s population of some 10,000 people, is at its widest point
only 650m wide, with much of this land taken up by the runway for the international airport. Much of
Fongafale is less than 75 m wide. According to the South Pacific Commission, after Nauru, Tuvalu’s
population density is on the second highest in the Pacific, with 431 persons/km2—and the density is
higher in Fongafale given the limited land area. Fongafale is home to the country’s hospital, high
schools, a branch campus of the University of the South Pacific, radio station, main port, as well as
most of the businesses.

The road network traverses residential and commercial land uses. Dwellings and businesses are
located immediately adjacent the road. Some of the road network is affected by sea water inundation
during king tides.
 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Beverly Ann McLean (EASNS)
Penelope Ruth Ferguson (EASWE)

 6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The environmental impact will be manageable,
 BP 4.01                                             and will not necessitate a change from the current
                                                     project’s Category B rating. The project will
                                                     mitigate some of the negative impacts of climate
                                                     change on Funafuti’s road network. The Draft
                                                     Tuvalu Aviation Investment Project EMP (4 Nov
                                                     2011) was updated in May 2013 to reflect the
                                                     potential environmental and social impacts
                                                     relating to the resurfacing of roads and the
                                                     potential improvements to drainage. Among the
                                                     key impacts identified and measures to be


                                             Page 2 of 7
                                               implemented include:

                                               1.       Increase generation of solid and
                                               construction waste as well as hazardous waste.
                                               The primary measure is to ship out the waste
                                               outside of the island and to dispose them to a
                                               designated waste facility. Hazardous waste will
                                               also be removed outside of the island;

                                               2.       Increase generation wastewater from
                                               construction activities. The measure is to ensure
                                               that the construction camp wastewater is properly
                                               managed and disposed of;

                                               3.      Water requirements during construction
                                               may compete with the water requirements of the
                                               local. The contractor shall be required to
                                               minimize their impact on potable water supplies
                                               in a way that would not put an undue burden on
                                               residents;

                                               4. Impact on Sensitive Receptors during civil
                                               works given their close proximity to the
                                               construction areas. The EMP has put in measures
                                               to ensure that impacts on sensitive receptors will
                                               be managed, including consultations.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No             The resurfacing activities are located within the
                                               existing footprint of the road network. Drainage
                                               discharges may occur to coastal marine
                                               environments in places, but the discharges will
                                               not cause significant degradation (the discharges
                                               will be low volumes of stormwater which would
                                               find their way to the ocean in any event).
                                               Mitigation measures are adopted under OP4.01.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

Pest Management OP 4.09           No

Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No             The resurfacing activities are located within the
BP 4.11                                        existing footprint of the road network, so no new
                                               areas will be disturbed.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No             As with the parent project, OP 4.10 Indigenous
                                               People is not triggered. The population of Tuvalu
                                               is culturally homogenous and the population is
                                               primarily Polynesian (about 96%) with the rest
                                               ethnically Micronesian. The population do not



                                       Page 3 of 7
                                                       meet the criteria of being a distinct, vulnerable
                                                       social and cultural group as described in OP 4.10.
                                                       The project is for the benefit of all people, and
                                                       will not adversely impact present livelihoods
                                                       resources. Physical interventions are limited to
                                                       the resurfacing of the existing road and the
                                                       provision of improved drainage within the current
                                                       right-of-way.
   Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     Yes                The proposed works would not have major
   4.12                                                social impact as they will be done on the same
                                                       alignment and within the current right-of-way.
                                                       Temporary land acquisition may be required to
                                                       address drainage issues. This will be confirmed
                                                       only once the detailed designs are completed. A
                                                       Resettlement Policy Framework prepared under
                                                       the project will cover any impacts, and
                                                       Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans will be
                                                       prepared based on the RPF's requirements if
                                                       applicable.

                                                       Temporary access restriction during construction
                                                       will follow the outlined consultation procedures
                                                       with the affected communities and specific
                                                       measures including provision of alternatives that
                                                       have been put in place in both the RPF and EMP.
   Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No

   Projects on International        No
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
   7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
     Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
      The environmental and social impact will be minimal, and will not necessitate a change from the
     current project’s Category B rating. The project will mitigate some of the negative impacts of
     climate change on Funafuti’s road network.

    The resurfacing activities are located within the existing footprint of the road network. Once the
    detailed design is completed, it may prove necessary to improve drainage. This will be done via
    temporary easements to run culverts to the ocean. The discharges will not cause significant
    degradation (the discharges will be low volumes of stormwater). Impacts will be assessed and
    mitigation measures adopted in the contractor's EMP.



                                               Page 4 of 7
  The project will consider the opportunity to backload selected waste/recyclables from Tuvalu to
  licensed / permitted landfills or recycling facilities in Fiji or New Zealand using barges that would
  otherwise return empty, having brought in surfacing stones. This will only be done if such
  activities would be consistent with the Bank's safeguard policies and an Environmental
  Management Plan (EMP) for these activities will be prepared..

  The Draft Tuvalu Aviation Investment Project EMP (4 Nov 2011) was updated in May 2013 to
  reflect the potential environmental and social impacts relating to the change in the project’s
  expanded area of influence, such as: (i) environmental issues related to resurfacing of roads and
  (iii) the potential improvements to drainage.

  The proposed works would not have major social impact as they will be done on the same
  alignment and within the current right-of-way. As noted above, temporary land acquisition may be
  required to address drainage issues. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) is under preparation
  to ensure that these issues are properly addressed. Once the detailed designs are completed, and
  the location of drainage easements identified, an Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan will be
  prepared to ensure affected parties receive compensation.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
  in the project area:
    There are no long term negative impacts arising from the project. The improvements to the roads
  will mitigate the negative impacts of storms on infrastructure, and should it prove practicable to
  export solid waste materials, this will be of great environmental and social benefit given the
  limited land available in Tuvalu.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.
    None.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
    The Borrower has an awareness of, but limited capacity, for implementing the safeguard policies.
  However, the Design and Supervision Consultant hired for the parent project has ample capacity,
  having prepared EMP and RPFs for other countries in the PAIP Program. The EMP has been
  submitted to the Bank for review. An RPF has been prepared and disclosed to address the potential
  drainage easements, the locations of which would be identified during the detailed design of the
  investments.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
    The project will affect all residents on Funafuti atoll. Consultations will take place with the
  kaupule and residents of affected areas, with particular care taken to inform women and children,
  during safeguards documentation preparation and before commencement of civil works. The EMP
  and RPF have been publicly disclosed. Public consultations will take place prior to the
  commencement of civil works.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                          23-May-2013
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                       23-May-2013


                                             Page 5 of 7
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Tuvalu                                                           24-May-2013
  Comments: Provided to government departments. Hard copy to be provided to public library.
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      14-Aug-2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   15-Aug-2013
"In country" Disclosure
  Tuvalu                                                           15-Aug-2013
  Comments: Provided to government departments. Hard copy to be provided to public library.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Sector Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 World Bank's Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 place in a form and language that are understandable and
 accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
 measures related to safeguard policies?
 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 in the project cost?



                                            Page 6 of 7
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader: Christopher R. Bennett
   Approved By
   Regional Safeguards Name: Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (RSA)                   Date: 30-Aug-2013
   Advisor:
   Sector Manager:     Name: Michel Kerf (SM)                             Date: 31-Aug-2013




                                             Page 7 of 7
