                                                                        INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                                 APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA831
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Jun-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                               Country:                           Bangladesh                              Project ID:                    P127015
                               Project Name:                      Climate Resilient Participatory Afforestation and Reforestation Project (P127015)
                               Task Team Leader:                  Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi
                               Estimated Appraisal Date: 14-Jun-2012                                      Estimated Board Date:          06-Sep-2012
                               Managing Unit:                     SASDI                                   Lending Instrument:            Specific Investment Loan
                               Sector:                            Forestry (100%)
                               Theme:                             Climate change (65%), Biodiversity (20%), Environmental policies and institutions (15%)
                               Financing (In USD Million)
                                     Financing Source                                                                                                       Amount
                                     Borrower                                                                                                                   1.20
                                     Bangladesh MDTF for Climate Change                                                                                       33.80
                                     Total                                                                                                                    35.00
                               Environmental Category:            B - Partial Assessment
                               Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              The project development objective is to reduce forest degradation through participatory planning/ monitoring and to contribute in building the long-
                              term resilience of selected coastal and hilly communities to climate change. It will be achieved by (i) increasing the afforested and reforested
                              areas; (ii) supporting alternative livelihoods of forest-dependent communities; and (iii) strengthening the institutional capacity of the forest
                              department to manage forests in participatory and sustainable manner.

                              3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                              The project will have four components:

                              Component 1: Afforestation and Reforestation Program (US$22.0 million)

                              The component objective of this component is to increase the afforested/reforested areas through participatory forestry and co-management
                              approach in the degraded forestland, marginal, fallow and newly accreted land in coastal and hilly areas. In achieving the target of the
                              participatory Afforestation and Reforestation, the component will also support the rehabilitation/reconstruction of the existing field offices of the
                              Bangladesh Forest Department. The component will have 2 subcomponents: (i) participatory afforestation and reforestation and (ii) rehabilitation/
                              reconstruction of forest department field infrastructure.

                              (i)            Participatory Afforestation and Reforestation (US$ 19.0 million):

                              TThe objective of this component is to increase the afforested/reforested areas through participatory forestry and co-management approach in the
                              degraded forestland, marginal, fallow and newly accreted land in coastal and hilly areas. Tree planting will contribute to (i) better protection of lives
                              and property in coastal areas against cyclones and storm surges and (ii) improved soil stability and water retention capacity in hilly areas. The
                              afforestation and reforestation will be undertaken on available lands that are not yet covered by other planned, on-going and completed projects of
                              BFD or other development partners. In the coastal zone, afforestation and reforestation will cover 6,767 ha of lands and 1,672 km of roadside
                              area. In hilly areas, the project will cover 3,878 ha of core zone and 6,352 ha of buffer zone. This component will support nursery raising,
                              plantations, 2 years plantations maintenance, cost of beneficiaries’ selection, and monitoring and evaluation of the plantation program.

                              The project will engage local communities in afforestation and reforestation activities throughout the project cycle. Community engagement in the
                              hilly areas is expected to be critical to the sustainability of the program. In the coastal areas, particularly where foreshore afforestation is to take
                              place, community engagement will still be encouraged, though less critical to the program’s sustainability. In addition to the income generated
                              social forestry program and livelihood support, provided under the second component, the poor and vulnerable people will be selected as the core
                              beneficiaries of afforestation program. The beneficiary selection will be open, transparent and inclusive. The selected groups will also be
                              responsible for maintaining plantations and will receive benefits from the earnings of the afforestation/reforestation program.

                              (ii)           Rehabilitation/Reconstruction of Forest Department Field Infrastructure (US$3 million)

                              The objective of the subcomponent is to rehabilitate and/or reconstruct the existing field level offices in the project area to ensure proper operation
                              of the Bangladesh Forest Department. The subcomponent will follow the design and construction practices that have no or little residual impacts

                                                                                                                                                                           Page 1 of 5
                         on the surrounding biological, physical and natural environment and could potentially support forest biodiversity conservation by i) minimizing and
                         mitigating adverse impacts of infrastructure through appropriate site selection and construction methods; and ii) remediating and compensating for
                         any residual damage to have a net positive impact. The design options will consider solar system, rainwater harvesting and other renewable
                         sources. It is anticipated that the civil works will generate local employment of about 0.18 million man days.


                         Component 2: Alternative Livelihoods to Support Forest Communities (approximately US$ 4.0 million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The objective of this component is to reduce forest dependence of selected communities through the introduction of alternative livelihood
                         opportunities. This will serve to reduce pressure on forests, thereby improving its sustainable use, conservation and protection. The Arannayk
                         Foundation (AF) will implement this component. AF’s mandate is to promote conservation and restoration of tropical forests and forest biodiversity
                         through promoting alternative income-generating activities (AIGAs). AF has developed an approach to support AIGAs for community-based
                         organizations through USAID-financed-grants, such as vegetable cultivation, small scale businesses, poultry rearing, and handicrafts. Grants are
                         typically given to communities to be channeled for AIGAs at the household level, and are often supplemented by participatory savings.

                         AF will use the same approach in this component by targeting 4,500 beneficiaries in 150 villages located in forest buffer zones. In the first year,
                         funds will be channeled to promote small-scale AIGAs at the household level (e.g. goat and poultry rearing, vegetable cultivation, small scale
                         trade). In the second year, the project will identify the activities which have potential for being expanded at the community level (e.g. establishing
                         cooperatives for improving marketing channels for local products, community based eco-tourism, making energy efficient cooking stoves, and
                         agricultural firms). The component will also improve linkages with BFD through mobilizing the targeted communities into Forest Dependent
                         Groups (FDGs). These FDGs will benefit from AIGA and will also participate in social forestry and afforestation works and to jointly protect forest
                         resources. This will directly link with Component 1 of the Project. The component will finance technical assistance consultancies, training,
                         development of informational and educational materials, skill development, and investment support in cash grants.

                         Component 3: Capacity Development for Forest Resource Planning and Management (US$ 8.5 million)

                         This component aims to improve forest management through two subcomponents: i) Institutional strengthening ; and ii) training..

                         (i)       In stitutional Strengthening (approximately US$ 4.0 million)

                         The objective of the subcomponent is to improve the technical knowledge base on forest resource assessment, program monitoring and long-term
                         planning for sustainable development of forest sector. This subcomponent will establish the forest resource assessment and monitoring system
                         using Remote Sensing (RS) and Geographic Information System (GIS) for BFD. The RS and GIS based system will be strengthened through
                         cross field verification. The assessment will provide scientific and comprehensive information on existing resources in coastal and hilly areas of
                         Bangladesh, areas to be covered under the afforestation/reforestation projects, the future needs and thereby contribute to better planning and
                         monitoring process. Comparison between first and last year’s assessments of the project area will reflect the changes in the plantation cover or
                         forest. In addition, the subcomponent will help the Forest Department in strengthening overall monitoring system by formulating guidelines for
                         quality assurance of data, results, mapping and assessment of change in forest and providing accuracy assessment of the same.

                         The subcomponent will also support the review and update the existing Forestry Sector Master Plan (1993-2013). The update will include
                         contemporary issues of climate change impacts, adaptation measures and carbon sequestration. The analytical studies such as economic cost-
                         benefit of afforestation/reforestation investment, impact of climate change, improved water management in hilly areas, land tenure issue in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         accredited afforested areas, policy and institutional structure of BFD for participatory approach and better forest management will be carried out
                         under the assignment to strengthen the present knowledge base and contribute to master plan.

                         (ii)      Training (US$1.5 million)

                         The objective of the subcomponent is to develop further capacity of the BFD and targeted communities to better manage forest resources in a
                         country confronted with climate change risks. This subcomponent will support capacity assessment and will provide a strategy for capacity
                         development. Some BFD officials and staff will receive longer training (i.e. one year masters/diploma program for around five officials and two-
                         three months training for around twenty officials), while another 370 officials and staff will be benefited from short-term training on climate change
                         impact on bio-diversity and forests, community mobilization and participatory process, methods to design and implement policy, program and
                         projects in coastal and hilly areas. The subcomponent will also support a general awareness campaign on forest conservation.


                         Component 4: Project Management (US$2.0 million):

                         This component will support the establishment of a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) at the BFD. This PIU will also provide necessary support like
                         financial management, social and environmental safeguard, communication and procurement to the AF. The budget allocation will cover
                         consultancy fees, routine monitoring, travel, purchase of office equipment and vehicles (including small water vessels), emergency maintenance
                         works, meeting costs, audits and other operating costs necessary for project implementation and reporting.

                         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         The activities will be mainly focus on the degraded forestland, marginal, fallow and newly accreted land in coastal and hilly areas. In coastal region,
                         target geographic area will cover 9 coastal districts out of the 19 coastal districts of Bangladesh. These coastal districts are Cox’s Bazar,
                         Chittagong, Noakhali, Lakshimipur, Barisal, Pakuakhali, Barguna, Bhola, and Feni. In the hilly area, the project will target the core and buffer zones
                         of the Reserved Forest Land of Chittagong District and Cox’s Bazar District. The afforestation and reforestation will be undertaken on available
                         lands that are not yet covered by other planned, on-going and completed projects of the BFD or other development partners. Around 7,832 hector
                         lands and 1,037 Km roadside plantation will be carried out in coastal area. The hilly areas reforestation will include 3,878 hector core zone
                         plantation and 5,925 hector buffer zone plantation. The other project interventions include (i) rehabilitation/reconstruction of field level offices; (ii)
                         alternative income livelihoods; and (iii) technical studies and capacity building.

                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists


                                                                                                                                                                       Page 2 of 5
                         Sabah Moyeen (SASDS)
                         Nadia Sharmin (SASDI)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01      Yes          The increase of forest coverage rates will have a positive impact on the local
                                                                               ecological environment. Afforestation in coastal areas will help to dissipate wave
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               energy and reduce floods on embankments during storm surges. It will also
                                                                               contribute in reducing land degradation and resource depletion. Plantation in hilly
                                                                               areas is expected to play an important role in improving soil stability, thus reducing
                                                                               the risk of landslides and erosion. In addition, the ability to fix CO2 and maintain air
                                                                               balance, minimizing dust and pollutants, will be greatly enhanced with the growth
                                                                               of plantation. Soil stability and fertility after project implementation will be improved
                                                                               by humus accumulation under canopy and top soil. Environmental improvements
                                                                               will offer favorable living conditions for soil micro organisms. Local species by
                                                                               natural selection and succession are most suitable for local climates and natural
                                                                               conditions and key elements to develop stable forest ecosystem which fulfill
                                                                               multifunctional roles.
                                                                               However, it is anticipated that some activities may trigger reversible environmental
                                                                               impact during the site clearance of plantation, species selection, use of fertilizer in
                                                                               the plantation program, use of polypropelene bag for seed germination, minor
                                                                               construction related disturbance and community level livelihood options in areas of
                                                                               high ecological sensitivity and vulnerability. Hence, certain short term negative
                                                                               environmental impacts may occur during the implementation phase. These
                                                                               negative impacts are expected to be largely on-site and easily mitigated with
                                                                               proper planning and sound environmental practices. The project will not support
                                                                               the use of any kind of pesticide. However, in case of emergency like during
                                                                               disease outbreak, pesticides can be used only upon prior approval from bank.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04              Yes          The project is expected to make a positive long-term contribution to the
                                                                               environment such as protecting against soil and water erosion, working as a
                                                                               barrier during cyclone and storm surge, reducing atmospheric pollution, providing
                                                                               habitat for flora and fauna etc.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                       Yes          The project will promote afforestation and reforestation throughout the project
                                                                               cycle from the planning phase and a community participation model will be
                                                                               developed using as basis the social forestry program and co-management
                                                                               approach. The plant species should be carefully selected in consultations with the
                                                                               local communities and professionals.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09                  No
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   No
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            Yes          Since the project is expected to be operational in areas where indigenous people
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               live (hilly areas), OP 4.10 will be triggered by the project. A Social Management
                                                                               Framework (SMF) has been prepared for the project that includes an Indigenous
                                                                               People’s Planning Framework (IPPF). Appropriate screening mechanisms to
                                                                               determine whether IPs are affected by project activities are also included. The
                                                                               IPPF contains basic principles, social concerns unique etc. IP groups, guidance on
                                                                               the identification of IPs and consultation strategies that will guide the preparation of
                                                                               Indigenous People’s Plans (IPP) where and when required. Once the SMF is
                                                                               approved by the Bank it will be disclosed locally and internationally as per WB
                                                                               policies.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      Yes          BFD has decided that no private lands would be acquired for plantation, but has
                                                                               adopted certain guidelines to obtain private lands where they are absolutely
                                                                               necessary to maximize and sustain the benefits of a given subproject. On the
                                                                               other hand, it is unlikely that all public lands everywhere could be found free of
                                                                               encumbrances. Possibilities are there that some of these lands may have been
                                                                               under authorized and unauthorized use, as well as not formalized use by local
                                                                               peoples for living and livelihood. The project will screen the locations where
                                                                               activities are slated to be carried out in order to avoid as much as possible any
                                                                               sites where the displacement or involuntary resettlement of people may be
                                                                               expected.

                                                                               Therefore a Resettlement Policy Framework has been prepared as part of the
                                                                               SMF to guide the preparation of site specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs)
                                                                               and Social Impact Assessments (SIA) where and when required. The design and
                                                                               implementation of the alternative livelihood component will be carried out by the
                                                                               Arannayk Foundation separately.

                                                                               The SMF also provides guidance on addressing gender issues via specially
                                                                               tailored consultation and communication strategies. A Gender Action Plan will be
                                                                               prepared to help gender sensitization programs, which will target all levels of
                                                                               officials, especially field-based officials who will be directly involved in
                                                                               implementation and supervision the work.

                                                                                                                                                            Page 3 of 5
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                        No
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP        No
                               7.50
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60            No
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any potential l arge scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                   The proposed project is expected to make a positive long-term contribution to the environment such as protecting against soil and water
                                 erosion, working as a barrier during cyclone and storm surge, reducing atmospheric pollution, providing habitat for flora and fauna etc. The
                                 activities will be mainly focus on the degraded forestland, marginal, fallow and newly accreted land in coastal and hilly areas. However, the
                                 project has been classified as “Category B? considering risk associated with the site clearance of plantation, species selection, use of fertilizer
                                 in the plantation program, minor construction related disturbance and community level livelihood options in areas of high ecological sensitivity
                                 and vulnerability. The Project has triggered four environmental safeguard policies for environmental assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Natural Habitats
                                 (OP/BP 4.04) and Forests (OP/BP 4.36).
                               2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                                  The afforestation and reforestation activities may create possible environmental issues from (i) inappropriate site selection (ii) plantation of
                                 non-native species (iii) monoculture plantations, (iv) excessive and disproportionate use of fertilizer which will cause damage to sensitive and
                                 valuable ecosystem.

                                 Environmental issues like (i) deterioration of natural drainage system (ii) sedimentation of surface water (iii) cutting of trees may trigger from the
                                 rehabilitation/reconstruction of existing field infrastructures. Without knowing the specific site and design of the infrastructure, it’s not possible to
                                 ascertain the exact environmental impact.

                                 The activities under Alternative Livelihood Support will be implemented both individually and at community level. Without knowing the specific
                                 type of activities for livelihood support, it’s not possible to identify specific impact for this component at this stage.
                               3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                                  The project at this stage will not have any alternative analysis. During site and plant species selection alternative analysis will carried out in
                                 consultation with the community. Similarly, during design finalization, site and construction material selection for infrastructure project,
                                 alternative analysis will be performed in consultation with the community.
                               4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                                  and implement the measures described.
                                  The implementing agencies BFD and AF have experience on conserving the natural resources and pay due diligence to environmental issues.
                                 BFD also implemented three IDA supported projects during 1980-2001 and presently implementing the Regional Wildlife Project. However,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 both BFD and AF needs to be further oriented on bank environmental and social safeguard policies. The capacity weakness has been covered
                                 by hiring both social and environmental specialist during preparation phase.

                                 To safeguard against the possible environmental issues arisen from the afforestation and reforestation activities a three steps resolution
                                 approach will be prepared and followed. The three steps are (i) accumulation of site specific ecological baseline (ii) preparation of a plantation
                                 guideline and (iii) development of environmental code of practice to mitigate the environmental issues at any stage of project implementation
                                 and operation.

                                 To avoid the probable adverse environmental impacts the implementing agency has developed a construction related Environmental Code of
                                 Practice (ECP) as part of EMF, which will delineate the methodologies for site selection and construction to minimize the adverse
                                 environmental impacts due to construction of infrastructure.

                                 The selection of possible activities at community level will require environmental screening during activities selection. The community will follow
                                 the activity specific Environmental Management Plan in consultation with Staff Officer (SO).
                               5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                                  on potentially affected people.
                                   An Environmental Management Framework (EMF) has been prepared by Bangladesh Forest Department (BFD) and Arannayk Foundation
                                 (AF) in consultation with the stakeholders and community describing the general baseline condition and typical environmental impacts from
                                 different types of activities during preparation, design, construction and operation. The EMF also provides the guidelines to comply with
                                 national legislation and World Bank safeguards policies, and defines the environmental requirements needed for reconstruction/rehabilitation of
                                 infrastructure in the forest. In addition, the EMF has laid out the procedures for simple screening of the co-operative level AIG activities and
                                 environmental code of practice for various project activities. The draft EMF has been disclosed on BFD and AF website for public comments.
                                 The final EMF will reflect public comment. A Social Management Framework (SMF) has been prepared for the project that includes an
                                 Indigenous People’s Planning Framework (IPPF).

                               B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                               Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                                 Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                   17-May-2012
                                 Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                               17-May-2012
                                 Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                29-Jun-2012
                                                                                                                                                                              Page 4 of 5
                              For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                              Directors
                             Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                    17-May-2012
                              Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                                17-May-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                 29-Jun-2012
                             Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                    17-May-2012
                              Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                                17-May-2012
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                                 29-Jun-2012
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                            disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                            C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                              Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                     Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                            OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                              If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) natural   Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              habitats, does the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                              If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and approved by           Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                              If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the             Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              plan?
                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                              Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include provisions for              Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              certification system?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?                     Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language             Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for          Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?                     Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard           Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same               Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Task Team Leader:                     Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:      Name: Sanjay Srivastava (RSA)                                                    Date: 28-Jun-2012
                            Sector Manager:                       Name Herbert Acquay (SM)                                                         Date: 02-Jul-2012




                                                                                                                                                                        Page 5 of 5
