                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                        Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSR5142
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Jul-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-Jul-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Congo, Republic of                           Project ID:           P095251
                                                                                           Additional
                                                                                           Project ID
                                                                                           (if any):
                            Project Name:     Agricultural Development and Rural Roads Rehabilitation Project (P095251)
                            Task Team         Amadou Oumar Ba
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         30-Nov-2006                                  Estimated   05-Jun-2007
                            Appraisal Date:                                                Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    AFTA2                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                           Instrument:
                            Sector:           Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (40%), Crops (27%), Central
                                              government administration (17%), Animal production (8%), Genera l industry
                                              and trade sector (8%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Theme:            Rural services and infrastructure (29%), Rural markets (29%), Rural non-farm
                                              income generation (14%), Rural policies and institution s (14%), Public
                                              expenditure, financial management and procurement (14%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                                          No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        28.00           Total Bank Financing:                                      20.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                         Financing Gap:                                                  8.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                 Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                   0.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                                           20.00
                              Financing Gap                                                                                        8.00
                              Total                                                                                               20.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:



                                                                               Page 1 of 10
                         Is this a           No
                         Repeater
Public Disclosure Copy




                         project?

                         2. Current Project Development Objectives
                         The primary objective of the project is to assist the Republic of Congo to increase the ability of the
                         rural poor to raise their income through the generation and promotion of improved agricultural
                         technologies, the provision of market infrastructure, and the formulation and implementation of
                         poverty-focused agricultural policies and expenditure programs.
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                         Keep the PDO which is in the Project Appraisal Document stated as:

                         The primary objective of the project is to assist the Republic of Congo to increase the ability of the
                         rural poor to raise their income through the generation and promotion of improved agricultural
                         technologies, the provision of market infrastructure, and the formulation and implementation of
                         poverty-focused agricultural policies and expenditure programs.
                         3. Project Description
                         The project has four components: (i) Capacity building of the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and
                         Fisheries; (ii) Rehabilitation of rural roads and market in                              frastructure;
                         (iii) Support to productive activities and sustainable livelihoods                               in
                         rural areas; and (iv) Project coordination and management. A brief descript
                         ion of the project components is provided below.

                          Component 1: Capacity building of the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Livestock (Total US$
                         4.8 million).
Public Disclosure Copy




                          The objective of this component is to strengthen the capacity of the Ministry of Agriculture,
                         Livestock and Fisheries (MAEP) in pro-poor policy formulation, bud
                         geting and public expenditure management, so that it can increase the efficacy a
                         nd efficiency of its expenditure programs. Two types of activities are envisage
                         d: (i) strengthening the basic skills of staff in policy planning, budgeting, a
                         nd implementation within MAEP, and (ii) strengthening of the public expenditure
                         management system, including M&E, public finance management and procurement of M
                         AEP.

                         Technical Capacity: The project will support:

                          ?       On the job training and targeted short-term training (in-country and abroad) of staff in
                         priority skills: (i) public investment planning and budgeting, (ii) p
                         rocurement, and public financial management, and (iii) monitoring, evaluation, a
                         nd expenditure tracking;

                          ?      Thematic studies to strengthen the strategic focus of policies and expenditure programs,
                         including two public expenditure reviews; and

                         ?       The acquisition of offices and field equipments for selected central and regional operational

                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                         units.

                         Public Expenditure Management: The project will finance:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          ?       The formulation of medium term poverty-focused sub-programs in the agriculture, fisheries,
                         and livestock sub-sectors; the structure of these sub-programs will             include (i) statement of
                         purpose and link to the strategic priorities in povert          y reduction strategy, (ii) the objectives,
                         (iii) expected results, and M&E plan,             and (iv) the estimated medium-term cost;

                          ?       The preparation of annual budgets which are consistent with the content of the sub-programs,
                         and which ensure the secured transfer of appropriations to the re gional operational units of MAEP
                         that are responsible for service delivery to fa      rm households and other rural producers;

                          ?      The creation of a procurement unit to support sound procurement practices, including
                         planning of procurement, enforcement of procurement rules, and publishing            quarterly
                         reports of contracts costing US$20,000 and more, and carrying out ind ependent procurement audits;
                         and the strengthening of the legal and regulatory f ramework for public financial management
                         through effective accounting and, contr          ols and audits; and

                          ?       Performance measurement and monitoring: the strengthening of the Direction des Etudes et
                         de la Planification (DEP) and the establishment of an effective syste          m that will monitor and
                         evaluate the implementation of MAEPs? expenditure progra                          ms; in order to
                         enhance the result-orientation of expenditure programs and to en                     sure that the
                         managers of the central and regional operational units focus on re                  al progress toward
                         the achievement of their respective sub-programs, the DEP wil                   l help to define output
                         and outcome targets and goals for the agriculture, fishe ries and livestock sub-sectors, and a small set
                         of monitoring indicators and the ir means of verification program. Annual expenditure tracking
                         studies and benef iciary assessments will be used to assess the performance of each expenditure su b-
                         program, and the results will be reported in the MAEP?s annual performance report.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2: Rural Infrastructure and Roads Rehabilitation (US$ 18.8 million)

                          The objective of this component is to provide and maintain reliable all-season rural road
                         infrastructure that connects rural communities to markets (and other s             ocial services) so that
                         they sell marketable production at remunerative prices,             and buy inputs at affordable prices. In
                         order to achieve this objective the pro ject will finance two types of activities: (i) the rehabilitation of
                         rural roads         , and (ii) the construction or rehabilitation of rural market infrastructure.

                          Rehabilitation of Rural Roads. The project will support the rehabilitation of about 1,300 km
                         (representing 10.4% of the rural roads network) in the project are as. It will finance the following
                         activities: (i) preparation of feasibility studies, including the environmental and social environmental
                         assessment studies, (ii) the preparation and publication of bidding documents, (iii) civil works, (i v)
                         the supervision of civil works, and (v) the implementation, monitori ng, and e valuation of the
                         environmental and social (including resettlement, if necessary) mitigation measures, and (vi) the
                         monitoring and evaluation of maintenance acti vities following the rehabilitation of the selected
                         roads. The Road fund will f inance the rehabilitation of the roads rehabilitated by the project. An EU
                         tech nical assistance project is currently helping the Government to strengthen the t echnical,
                         managerial and financial capacity of this Fund. It has been agreed with the Government that the
                         maintenance of the project-funded roads will be inclu                     ded in the annual work plan

                                                                        Page 3 of 10
                         and budget of the Road Fund. An MOU formalizing thi           s arrangement will be signed between
                         the MAEP and METP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Rehabilitation/construction of Market Infrastructure. The project will finance: (i) consultant services
                         for feasibility studies including environmental and soci al safeguard assessment; (ii) civil works; and
                         (iii) supervision of works for th e rehabilitation and/or construction of market infrastructure. The
                         investments i                            n market infrastructure will include: (i) the construction of
                         two small fisherie                            s landing and trade halls; and (ii) the construction/
                         rehabilitation of community                              collection and storage centers, and rural
                         markets for agricultural, fisheries,                          livestock, and non-farm products.

                         Component 3: Support to productive investments and sustainable livelihoods in rural areas (US$ 8.0
                         million)

                          The objective of this component is to help increase the capacity of rural producers, especially
                         subsistence-oriented farmers in targeted areas to raise their pr oductivity and income. The project
                         will achieve this objective by financing sel ective bundles of complementary activities that meet
                         the specific needs of farme        rs, livestock raisers, fishermen and women, and non-farm
                         producers. The typical bundle of complementary activities would include: (i) generation and
                         disseminati         on of improved production technologies and market information, (ii) capacity str
                         engthening of producer organizations, and (iii) financial support to selected productive investments.

                          Technology development and dissemination. Agricultural production: The project will finance: (i)
                         the rehabilitation and the operation of two (2) seeds/seedling       s centers to produce foundation
                         seeds for the promotion of a farmer-based seeds multiplication program, (ii) the provision of
                         appropriate inputs to selected imp roved seed-growers, (iii) the establishment of demonstration plots
                         to help disse minate technology packages, and (iv) equipment for, and training of extension wo rkers.
                         Fisheries production: the project will finance (i) the rehabilitation of one (1) fish breeding and
                         multiplication station; (ii) the development and diss emination of improved fish handling and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         processing techniques; (iii) the dissemi nation of improved fish farming methods, and (iv) equipment
                         for and training of extension workers to provide adequate advisory services to fishermen and women.
                         Livestock production: The project will finance (i) equipment for, and the train ing of extension
                         workers for the provision of advisory services in animal health, and improved animal husbandry
                         practices to producers. The project will financ                                e the establishment of a
                         pilot crop market information system (MIS) to collect, process, and disseminate information (through
                         media, radio, other means) on prod uction quanti ties, prices, and spatial distribution of marketable
                         surpluses in t hree of the eight regions covered by the project (Bouenza, Niari, and Plateaux). The
                         resulting reduced search and transaction costs will benefit for both trade                     r s and
                         producers.

                          Capacity building of producer and community organizations.. Producer associations and community
                         organizations will play a crucial role in the implementation of this component, as the projectwill use
                         them to channel resources to the benefic         iaries. The project will help to strengthen the
                         relevance and effectiveness of                   the developmental role and the capacity of these
                         producer and community-based or                     ganizations in the following ways: (i) using them as
                         the conduit through which c                apacity building activities and grant resources for productive
                         investments will be delivered, and (ii) empowering them economically by helping them to establish
                         savings and credits schemes, and accessing micro-finance services that will all ow members to invest
                         in a range of income generating activities during and after the project.

                                                                       Page 4 of 10
                          Financial support for productive investments. The resources channeled through the producer and
                         community organizations will help finance matching grants for in come generating activities in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         following core activities:

                         Support to agricultural development activities would include (but not limited to):

                          ?      Technology package including improved seeds, inputs, and tools to be provided to small
                         groups o f 5-6 seed-growers to be selected on the basis of their ability , the quality of their land, their
                         land use pattern, and the importance of the p articular crop in the surrounding area;

                          ?     Technology package including tools and improved farming practices to upgrade current
                         farming practices, and help farmers to adopt and replicate demonstration sites technologies; and

                          ?      Small-scale irrigation infrastructure for the production of vegetables (including in peri-urban
                         areas) and other crops.

                         Support to fisheries and aquaculture production:

                          ?     Technology package including tools (e.g., recommended nets and other fishing gear),
                         equipment for post capture handling and storage;

                         ?       Repair shops and spare parts for fishing gear; and

                         ?       Pond excavation, stocking and initial feed (aquaculture for groups of fishermen or women).

                          Support to livestock production: the project will finance a community-based mechanism for
                         distributing goats and sheep to qualifying households who would have t     o donate two of the
                         offspring to other households within a given period.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          The process and methods for micro-project identification, preparation, procedures for their selection,
                         mechanisms for disbursing funds, the implementation and m                onitoring arrangements, and a
                         list of non-eligible investments will be detailed in the project implementation manual (PIM).
                         Beneficiary contributions will vary according to the type and/or total cost of the proposed micro-
                         project(s) as sho         wn in the table below).



                         Component 4: Project coordination and management (US$ 4.7 million)

                          The objective of this component is to ensure the effective management and coordination of the
                         project activities. A Project Coordination Unit (PCU) placed with       in MAEP will ensure that the
                         project activities are executed with efficacy and e     fficiency. The PCU will establish four regional
                         implementation support units to support and coordinate field operations. The PCU will prepare and
                         consolidate      the work programs, the annual budgets and the statements of results. It will en
                         sure the timely deliver of inputs to all the operational units, and manage the p roject resources in a
                         transparent and efficient manner by using sound financial        management and procurement
                         procedures. Details of the financial management and         procurement systems are described in annex
                         7 and 8 respectively. The PCU will p ut in place an effective monitoring and evaluation system that

                                                                       Page 5 of 10
                         will help to adjust implementation when needed, and to track the performance of the project throu
                         gh timely periodic reports.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented in the following regions (d?partements): Bouenza, Cuvette,
                         Kouilou, L?koumou, Niari, Plateau, Pool and Sangha; and in the vicini
                         ty of Brazzaville and Pointe-Noire. Implementation responsibility for the proje
                         ct rests with the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries (MAEP). MEAP
                         will entrust a dedicated unit with the responsibility to coordinate the impleme
                         ntation of the project activities. Overall guidance to this Project Coordinatio
                         n Unit (PCU) will be provided by a multi-sectoral Steering Committee (SC) chaire
                         d by MAEP. The SC will also oversee the operations of the PCU. Details on the
                         operating procedures are spelled out in the Implementation Manual.

                         The activities of the project are: (i) Capacity Building for the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and
                         Fisheries,(ii) Rural Infrastructure and Roads Rehabilita tion, and (iii) Support to Productive
                         Activities and Rural Livelihoods.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Paul Jonathan Martin (AFTSN)
                         Antoine V. Lema (AFTCS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes
                          BP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09             Yes

                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                          BP 4.11
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       Yes               As a result of the project’s Mid-Term Review,
                                                                              the Indigenous Peoples policy (OP/BP 4.10) was
                                                                              retroactively triggered as project investments for
                                                                              components II and III included and affected areas
                                                                              inhabited by indigenous communities. An
                                                                              Indigenous People’s Planning Framework (IPPF)
                                                                              was consequently prepared between July 12, 2011
                                                                              and June 1, 2012, then reviewed and disclosed on
                                                                              December 7, 2012. The restructuring (a)
                                                                              consolidates support to indigenous communities
                                                                              and ensures proper technical assistance in
                                                                              finalizing the implementation of investments
                                                                              made; (b) strengthens the institutional foundation



                                                                      Page 6 of 10
                                                                                 for the inclusion of safeguards aspects into the
                                                                                 planning and implementation of projects in the
                                                                                 Ministry of Agriculture; and (c) improves project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 safeguards compliance of the project.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       Yes
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                Project impacts before and after restructuring will be similar. The Project is not expected to have
                              significant and/irreversible or large scale impacts after restructuring. Civil works of component 2
                              (Rural Infrastructure and Roads Rehabilitation) and component 3 (Support to productive and
                              sustainable livelihoods in rural areas) have and will still induce land acquisition. However,
                              potentially adverse environmental and social impacts will be site-specific and limited in scope.
                              Adverse environmental and social impacts identified in the Environmental and Social
                              Management Framework (ESMF) will include: (i) temporary loss of strips of potential agricultural
                              land in the right of way; (ii) temporary air pollution due to dust and exhaust fumes (respiratory
                              disorders, eye troubles); (iii) risk of water resources pollution due to inappropriate handling of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                              solid and liquid waste; and (iv) increased flood risks for the adjacent neighborhoods due to ill-
                              designed and/or ill-built drainage structures. Main adverse social impacts identified in the ESMF,
                              the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and the Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework
                              (IPPF) include: (i) temporary loss of strips of potential agricultural land in the right of way; (ii)
                              potential infringements of resources of indigenous people, and (iii) HIV/AIDS contamination by
                              influx of workers coming from urban areas.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                                Project impacts before and after restructuring will be similar. No large scale, significant and/
                              irreversible impacts are expected after restructuring the project.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.

                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                                The client prepared three safeguards instruments prior to appraisal, to mitigate potential adverse
                              environmental or social impacts: (i) an Environmental Social Management Framework (ESMF);
                              (ii) a Pest Management Plan (PMP) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). An independent
                              consultant prepared the instruments, which were cleared by the client and the Bank, and disclosed


                                                                         Page 7 of 10
                           in 2006 and 2007. At midterm review, January 2011, Indigenous Peoples policy (OP/BP 4.10),
                           was triggered, as project investments of components II and III included and affected areas
                           inhabited by indigenous communities. An Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) was
Public Disclosure Copy




                           consequently prepared in 2011 –2012, cleared and disclosed in December 2012. The project
                           implementation unit supported the safeguards training of the agronomist, likewise head of the
                           monitoring and evaluation unit, to strengthen project safeguards capacity and compliance.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Key stakeholders include: project affected persons and communities, host communities, local
                           governments (communal and regional councils), provincial government, NGOs, and local and
                           national staff of the ministries of Ministry of Agriculture and fishery. Project preparation has been
                           participatory at village level, at civil society level, as well as at local and provincial administration
                           level.
                           The result of the public consultations, carried out in conjunction with the preparation of the
                           safeguards instruments, confirm a solid support for the implementation of the project. The
                           implementation of the project has further enhanced project support at all levels of stakeholders.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                            20-Oct-2006
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                         27-Oct-2007
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                            27-Oct-2006
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                         27-Oct-2006
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                06-Nov-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                             07-Dec-2012
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Congo, Republic of                                         CG
                           Comments: Les Dépêches de Brazzaville # 1630 du 3 Décembre 2012
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?             Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                20-Oct-2006
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                             27-Oct-2006



                                                                       Page 8 of 10
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?
                          Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                          the project legal documents?



                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:   Amadou Oumar Ba
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Severin L. Kodderitzsch (SM)   Date: 10-Jul-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                Page 10 of 10
