                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                    Report No.: ISDSC369

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Jun-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            China                              Project ID:      P126813
                            Project Name:       Ma'anshan Cihu River Basin Improvement Project (P126813)
                            Task Team           Meskerem Brhane
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           21-Jan-2013                        Estimated        30-May-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      EASCS                              Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector:             Other Mining and Extractive Industries (50%), Flood protection (50%)
                            Theme:              City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (30%), Urban planning and
                                                housing policy (40%), Urban services and housing for the poo r (30%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                                Amount
                              Borrower                                                                         176.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                            110.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Total                                                                            286.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed project development objective is to assist the Government in their efforts to promote
                           environmentally and socially sustainable abandoned mine closing options and reduce urban
                           inundation by improving storm drainage management.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed project is designed to build on the lessons learned from prior and ongoing government
                           investments and presents a model for integrating the three reaches of the Cihu River Basin which
                           have thus far been managed in a fragmented fashion. First, it will ecologically rehabilitate land
                           degraded by mining operations, thereby reducing soil erosion and siltation in the river that
                           exacerbates urban inundation and also would make more good quality land available for productive
                           use as the city expands. This is intended as a demonstration of best practice for the city to adopt in its
                         other mining areas. Second, it improves urban storm drainage management to reduce incidents of
                         urban inundation. Third, it strengthens the capacity of the municipality to manage mine closures in
                         an effective manner. A critical aspect of Bank support is the introduction of an area wide
Public Disclosure Copy




                         management system that integrates a thus far fragmented approach, especially in its storm water
                         management aspects.

                         Component 1. Rehabilitation of Abandoned Mined Land (US$ 93.8 million). This component is
                         designed to demonstrate methods for rehabilitating abandoned mine areas. Rehabilitation techniques
                         will draw on best practice methods and may need to vary from site to site, depending on the specific
                         types of iron ore mining activities that took place and the intended future uses of the land. The reuse
                         of the land will first be determined by international standards that set rehabilitation performance
                         targets. Once eligible land uses have been defined, land use planning will begin, incorporating it into
                         an updated version of the city's development plan and masterplan (2002-2020). The key tasks
                         during preparation are to:

                         i.       identify and agree on the sites for remediation under the project based on detailed site
                         specific information, such as land ownership, the type of mining activity that took place, the nature
                         and extent of pollution, proposed future use of the rehabilitated land etc
                         ii.      determine the most appropriate methods for reclamation and remediation, applying
                         international standards and least cost principle

                         The rehabilitated land may be used for industrial and residential development as well as parks and
                         green spaces based on international standards for remediation. Criteria for determining "good
                         practice" rehabilitation standards will be finalized prior to appraisal and included in bid documents.
                         A key principle in the rehabilitation of the land and its future uses includes ensuring that adequate
                         mitigation measures are incorporated to safeguards against social, environmental and legal risks. The
                         lessons learned from the land area and facilities rehabilitated under the project should be applicable
                         for the ecological rehabilitation of other mined out areas being rehabilitated, not only by the
                         Municipality but also by mining companies. It will also inform the preparation of Mine Closure
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Guidelines described under Component 4 below.

                         Component 2: Improving Urban Storm Drainage Management. (US$ 101.5 million). This
                         component is intended to improve storm water collection and removal in order to reduce incidents of
                         urban inundation. Approximately 26 km of the river channel and some of its key tributaries in the
                         downstream and upstream areas will be rehabilitated, among which 6 km is being rehabilitated under
                         domestic funding. A combination of structural and non-structural approaches will be adopted in
                         improving storm drainage management as follows:
                         Structural measures: these may include, establishing storm drainage holding basins; strengthening
                         river embankments to accommodate peak storm discharges; construction or rehabilitation of
                         pumping stations and improving river channels and associated infrastructure; storm water drainage
                         pipes.
                         Non-structural measures for reducing inundation risks, such as constructed wetlands.

                         Component 3. Capacity Building and Implementation Support (US$ 5 million). This component will
                         comprise of three key tasks for the main stakeholders of the project:
                         (a)     TA for the PMO: implementation support for project management and monitoring and
                         evaluation.

                         (b)     TA to prepare Guidelines for Mine Closures. Ma'anshan has expressed strong interest in
                         developing guidelines for management of mine closure based on international procedures and best
                         practices, covering environmental, institutional, social, economic and financial aspects. The
                         guidelines will also include guidance on developing a plan to identify when existing mining activity
Public Disclosure Copy




                         sites will need rehabilitation in the future and prepare and take necessary preparatory actions.

                         (c)      TA for Water Quality Monitoring. Since improvement in drainage management and closure
                         of abandoned mine sites will have an impact on the quality of the Cihu River, TA to strengthen water
                         quality monitoring is being considered. Baseline data are currently being collected, based on
                         guidance provided to Ma'anshan by the Bank team as part of project preparation. Another area of
                         technical assistance being considered is updating of flood risk maps to guide future development and
                         protect green spaces and natural water streams, thereby improving natural infiltration and reducing
                         runoffs. This will strengthen Component Two.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the            safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be located in Ma'anshan Municipality, one of China's top 20 fastest growing cities,
                         located in the Yangtze Delta in Anhui Province in Eastern China and comprising three urban districts
                         and three rural counties. It has a population of 2.3 million, 68% of which is urbanized, and a per
                         capita GDP of US$ 9,300. The city was established in 1956, as home to Ma'anshan Iron and Steel
                         Company (Ma Steel), but is now diversifying its economy to automotive, textile, chemical and hi-
                         tech industries. Considered the gateway to Anhui province, it has a good transport network -
                         expressways, rails, an impending high-speed train, and a deep water port -- that has supported its
                         current economic growth.

                         The city has developed along the 26 km long Cihu River, a river discharging to the Yangtze River.
                         The Cihu River has a 126.64 km2 catchment area and a maximum flow in wet season of about
                         80-100 m3/second. The Cihu River Basin broadly includes three functional areas of the city: the
                         lower reaches (5.3 km) near the Yangtze River containing the older heavy, especially steel,
                         industries; the middle reaches (6.3 km) in the newer urban areas; and the upper reaches (13 km) that
Public Disclosure Copy




                         are in the rural and mining areas. Water pollution, soil erosion and siltation are contributing to the
                         environmental degradation of the Cihu River Basin, impairing its function as an important means for
                         urban flood discharge and source of water supply for agriculture and industry. The rehabilitation of
                         the middle stretch of Cihu river (about 6 km) is under way funded by the government. Bank
                         financing will be for the rehabilitation of the channels and tributaries of Cihu river (about 20 km in
                         total) upstream and downstream of this middle stretch.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The implementing entity is the Development and Reform Commission (DRC) which is a strong
                         government agency with the capacity to coordinate the project's different stakeholders. There are at
                         least four municipal agencies (Bureaus) that will be involved in implementation of the proposed
                         project, namely the Urban Housing and Construction Bureau, Water Resources Bureau, Land
                         Resources Bureau, and Environmental Protection Bureau (EPB)

                         The PMO has already hired consultants experienced with Bank safeguards policies to prepare the
                         required documentation for the environmental assessment (EA), social assessment (SA) and the
                         resettlement action plan (RAP). In addition, the social and environmental specialists of the Task
                         Team are providing close guidance to these consultants and the PMO as they prepare these reports.
                         F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Bernard Baratz (EASCS)
                           Chongwu Sun (EASCS)
                           Zhefu Liu (EASCS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies             Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes          Through implementation of the proposed
                           BP 4.01                                     activities under Components 1 and 2,
                                                                       environmental improvement of the project areas
                                                                       is expected to be achieved, thus bringing
                                                                       environmental benefits overall. However, the
                                                                       project includes multiple types of construction
                                                                       activities in built up urban areas and the mining
                                                                       areas that will merit careful environmental
                                                                       planning and implementation.

                                                                       General Environmental Issues: A detailed
                                                                       feasibility study and proper design would be
                                                                       critical factors for implementing construction
                                                                       activities under Component 1, as some
                                                                       environmental baseline information, such as the
                                                                       type of mining activity that took place and the
                                                                       nature and extent of pollution, should be
                                                                       collected and analyzed. However, some required
                                                                       information is either not available or scattered in
                                                                       different agencies and companies. For
                                                                       Component 2, there may potentially be short
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       term adverse environmental impacts during
                                                                       project construction stage. These potential
                                                                       impacts are anticipated to be of limited extent
                                                                       and duration, and readily managed with
                                                                       accepted measures of good engineering codes of
                                                                       practice (ECOP), especially for the activities
                                                                       under Component 2. Furthermore, Component 2
                                                                       may involve dredging, impacts of which can be
                                                                       well controlled by good site selection, sound
                                                                       transportation requirements and standard
                                                                       measures or ECOP.

                                                                       Based on above, this is a Category A project.
                                                                       With regard to the EA instrument, an EA and an
                                                                       EMP should be prepared for Component 1 and 2
                                                                       respectively, by qualified EA consultants, and
                                                                       an EA Summary will be prepared to cover both
                                                                       environmental and social safeguards issues from
                                                                       all safeguard documents. TORs of the EA are
                                                                       being prepared and will be reviewed and agreed
                         by the Task Team in preparation of
                         environmental safeguards documentation, the
                         Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines
Public Disclosure Copy




                         should be referred to, especially for Component
                         1.

                         The EA for Component 1 should include: (a)
                         Baseline data collected through site survey and
                         monitoring activities;
                         (b) Evaluation of different options of
                         rehabilitation technology that are potentially
                         suitable for the proposal of future land use;
                         (c) Assessment of the potential environmental
                         impacts from implementing the rehabilitation
                         activities;
                         (d) Preparation of An EMP to avoid, reduce or
                         mitigate the potential adverse impacts
                         identified. The EMP will specify the budget,
                         institutional arrangements, monitoring and
                         reporting arrangements for the implementation
                         of the mitigation measures.
                         (e ) Monitoring program should be included in
                         the EMP;
                         (F) Public consultation should be carried out at
                         least two times in the EIA process. All activities
                         should be well documents in the EIA, including
                         the participants, location, time, main concerns
                         raised during the consultation events, how they
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will be or have been addressed.

                         For Component 2, primary potential
                         environmental issues are associated with
                         rehabilitation/upgrading of embankments,
                         widening of river channels, rehabilitation of
                         access roads/bridges, pumping stations,
                         extension/rehabilitation of drainage networks
                         and therefore, do not require environmental
                         assessment. Therefore, the EIA for Component
                         2 should be prepared covering the following
                         aspects:

                         (a) A due diligence review of government own
                         funded projects for the middle reaches of Cihu
                         River.
                          (b) Environmental assessment to examine the
                         potential impacts from the creation of storm
                         water holding basins and wetlands, with a focus
                                                             on their site selection.
                                                             (c) EMP should be prepared to have site specific
                                                             mitigation measures. Environmental Codes of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             Practices (ECOPs) (i.e., environmental
                                                             specifications for contractors) will be prepared.
                                                             The ECOPs will include management measures
                                                             and site selection criteria for the disposal sites
                                                             of the dredged materials from river channel
                                                             widening and dredging.
                                                             (d) Public consultation should be conducted
                                                             with the project affected people at least two
                                                             times and all activities carried out should be
                                                             adequately documented in the EA report,
                                                             including the participants, location, time, main
                                                             concerns raised during the consultation
                                                             activities and how they will be or have been
                                                             addressed.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   TBD   No natural habitat or protection areas are
                                                             expected to be present in the municipal area of
                                                             this industrial city. Most of the area has been
                                                             urbanized for decades and the rest is dominated
                                                             by suburban farming and mining activities.
                                                             There is an existing wetland located in upstream
                                                             areas of Cihu River, which is artificial and
                                                             therefore, not expected to have any significant
                                                             habitat value.

                                                             The Project team will perform a due diligence
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             effort to determine whether or not this policy is
                                                             triggered by performing the following actions:
                                                             (a) meet with local EPB and determine if there
                                                             are any protected areas or species within the
                                                             Cihu River Basin project areas; (b) check
                                                             Ma'anshan Municipality, Anhui and Chinese
                                                             lists of areas/species that are protected locally,
                                                             provincially, or nationally, or by international
                                                             treaty and found in or near the project areas, (c)
                                                             identify and meet with local NGOs to determine
                                                             if there are any rare, endangered or otherwise
                                                             protected species that either inhabit, migrate
                                                             through, or otherwise utilize any of the project
                                                             areas.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No    The project will not involve any forestry
                                                             activity.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       No    The project will not involve any pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   Initial screening and site visit by the task team
                         BP 4.11                                 did not reveal any relics or physical resources
                                                                 that are culturally or historically significant.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 Nevertheless, the EA study team will carry out
                                                                 detailed surveys and meet with relevant
                                                                 government authorities responsible for
                                                                 protection of physical cultural resources during
                                                                 EA preparation process. Furthermore, all EA
                                                                 documentation will include chance find
                                                                 procedures in accordance with both Chinese
                                                                 regulations and World Bank policy.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No    The Bank's Social Safeguards Specialist has
                                                                 already screened the area and determined that
                                                                 no minority communities are found in the
                                                                 proposed project area and therefore, OP 4.10
                                                                 will not be triggered. The citizens in the project
                                                                 area are from the Han population which
                                                                 constitute the majority of the Chinese
                                                                 population and as such are not part of the 56
                                                                 ethnic minorities that have officially been
                                                                 recognized by the government. Given the
                                                                 criteria of the Bank's IP definition, no
                                                                 indigenous people are present in the project
                                                                 area.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   The physical investments financed under the
                         4.12                                    project, especially those related to improvement
                                                                 of the river channel and embankments, disposal
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 sites for dredged materials, and storm water
                                                                 storage basins are likely to result in the
                                                                 displacement of people or their economic
                                                                 activities. A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP)
                                                                 will be prepared to mitigate social risks
                                                                 resulting from the infrastructure works under
                                                                 Component 2 Improving Urban Storm Drainage
                                                                 Management. It will be carried out as early as
                                                                 possible in order to identify and analyze the
                                                                 social risks and will incorporate mitigation
                                                                 measures into project design. The RAP will
                                                                 cover the following key topics: social impact
                                                                 analysis, compensation procedures, livelihood
                                                                 rehabilitation measures, monitoring and
                                                                 evaluation and grievance redress mechanisms.
                                                                 Based on currently available information, it is
                                                                 estimated that there will be urban families that
                                                                 may be relocated from the downstream areas
                                                                 and two hectares of collective land in rural areas
                                                                 will be required in the upstream areas, as part of
                                                           the river channel improvement activities under
                                                           Component 2.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                           The PMO has already contracted an experienced
                                                           consultant to identify the negative impacts
                                                           associated with resettlement in urban and rural
                                                           areas.
                                                           Under Component 1 , Rehabilitation of
                                                           Abandoned Mined Land, a Social Assessment
                                                           will be carried out to assess all potential social
                                                           impacts of the land reclamation process which
                                                           will examine (a) the ownership of the land at the
                                                           abandoned mined sites to be rehabilitated, and
                                                           (b) the potential physical relocation and
                                                           economic displacement resulting from the
                                                           project interventions.The social risks under this
                                                           component are not expected to be significant
                                                           because the plants have already been shut down
                                                           for the past 5 years and were abandoned by their
                                                           operators. The the intervention is not expected
                                                           to result in any involuntary resettlement or job
                                                           losses associated with mining activities.

                                                           In accordance with its master plan, the
                                                           municipality is using its own funds and has
                                                           launched the rehabilitation of the middle section
                                                           of the Cihu River Basin, some of the works
                                                           include strengthening sections of river
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                           embankments by widening or deepening them.
                                                           The Bank will finance the upper and lower
                                                           reaches of the Cihu River and therefore, this
                                                           constitutes a linked activity: the achievement of
                                                           the PDO, to "reduce urban inundation," as well
                                                           as the effectiveness and technical viability of
                                                           the project interventions are not dependent on
                                                           the works of the middle section of the river.
                                                           The project feasibility study will provide
                                                           detailed information regarding these activities
                                                           and they will be included in the EA analysis.
                                                           The task team will undertake due diligence
                                                           reviews of all related locally funded projects ,
                                                           when the draft project feasibility study report is
                                                           completed.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   TBD   The project is not expected to involve any dams.
                                                           The drainage component might include
                                                           construction of dykes but not dams. The project
                                                           does not depend on any existing dams. The task
                                                                                                                                 team will conduct further screening in project
                                                                                                                                 preparation on this policy.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The project will not involve any international
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project will not involve any disputed areas.
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 20-Jun-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      May, 2012
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Meskerem Brhane

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan (RSA) Date: 21-Jun-2012
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Mark R. Lundell (SM)                  Date: 23-Jun-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
