                                                                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                             CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC798
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-May-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              A. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                       Peru                                     Project ID:                      P129647
                              Project Name:                  Peru Strengthening Sustainable Management of the Guano Islands, Isles and Capes National Reserve System
                                                             Project (P129647)
                              Task Team Leader:              Gabriela Arcos
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 00-undefined-0000                             Estimated Board Date:            17-Jul-2013
                              Managing Unit:                 LCSEN                                    Lending Instrument:              Specific Investment Loan
                              Focal Area:                    Biodiversity
                              Sector:                        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (70%), Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (30%)
                              Theme:                         Biodiversity (60%), Environmental policies and institutions (20%), Other environment and natural resources
                                                             management (20%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                       Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                         0.00
                                   Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                                                          8.78
                                   Total                                                                                                                      8.78
                              Environmental Category:        B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              B. Global Environmental Objective(s)

                              The Global Environment Objective is to improve management of marine and coastal ecosystems and protect biological diversity through
                              instituional stregthening and support for collaborative regional projects for the Guano Islands, Islets and Capes National Reserve System of Peru
Public Disclosure Copy




                              (RNSIIPG).

                              The Project Development Objective is to improve the management effectiveness of the RNSIIPG by: (i) securing sustainable financing through the
                              establishment and operation of an endowment fund and other sources of revenue; (ii) developing socially viable biodiversity management models;
                              and (iii) building stakeholder capacity and scientific foundations, through training and adequately assessing and monitoring biodiversity and
                              ecosystems dynamics.

                              C. Project Description

                              The project will be funded by GEF with a US$8.75 grant and by KfW through a €10 million grant for a marine project with emphasis on the
                              RNSIIPG and an additional $2 million contribution to the endowment fund of this reserve. The Government of Peru, through SERNANP will assign
                              $1.6 million. The Project comprises four components:

                              Component 1: Institutional Strengthening (GEF US $ 3.0 M )

                              This component will build capacity at SERNANP and other institutions involved in the management of coastal-marine resources, by improving the
                              baseline data on marine and coastal biodiversity; developing master plans for priority zones and management plans for target species;
                              implementing a communications strategy and developing inter-institutional coordination mechanisms. It will also include a sustainable financing
                              mechanisms by allocating US$2 million from GEF to create a trust to finance recurrent costs of RNSPIIG, with a matching fund of US$2 million to
                              be provided by KfW and by developing a financial sustainability strategy.

                              Component 2: Collaborative Regional Management (GEF US $ 4.155 M)

                              This component will include the development of collaborative management projects in at least 10 priority zones of the reserve aiming at
                              developing socially viable organization models with strong participation of the local community and other relevant stakeholders (e.g., regional
                              governments, research institutions, NGOs, etc.). The projects would seek to introduce more sustainable resource use practices (guano extraction,
                              fishing, tourism, etc.) by improving the level and type of extractive activities, adding value to products and services, and seeking to connect them to
                              higher-value markets. The priority zones will be characterized for the relevant ecosystem functions they support based upon the planning
                              instruments developed under component 1 and the biodiversity baseline data to be generated under each project.

                              The priority zones have been identified on a preliminary basis using criteria, such as representativeness of ecological processes present; the
                              relative value of biodiversity (e.g., endemism); and degree of threats from local extractive activities.
                           Component 3: Monitoring and Evaluation (GEF US $ 1.0 M )

                           Project monitoring and evaluation will be carried at three levels: (i) monitoring of management effectiveness of the Reserve, (ii) biodiversity
                           monitoring in the collaborative projects (for component 2); and, (iii) financial and administrative monitoring. The first level includes the monitoring
                           of project progress against the overall objectives and targets in the project results matrix, including tracking protected area management through
                           the GEF Management Effectiveness Tracking Tool. The second level pertains to tracking specific targets of the collaborative projects, including
Public Disclosure Copy




                           local biodiversity, relevant market data for marine products and services (e.g., tourism), project inputs, outputs, and lessons learned. The third level
                           refers to tracking efficiency in overall project implementation, contrasting progress in project activities with use of funds and procurement decisions.

                           Component 4: Project Management (GEF US 0.60 M )

                           Coordination among and between project components and the various actors involved in project implementation will require an efficient and well-
                           trained coordination team. Funds under this component will be used for the Project Coordination Team (PCT), who will be work with SERNANP
                           and other institutions in arrangements to be identified during the preparation stage. Also included in this component is support for a Technical
                           Committee to serve as a consultative body and to include government agencies, research entities, and NGOs with proven expertise in
                           management of marine areas. This committee would be expected to provide technical guidance during the implementation of the project.

                            D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                           The Guano Islands, Islets and Capes National Reserve System comprises 33 sites located along the Peruvian Coast. The area for the proposed
                           project will include approximately ten of these sites that will be selected during the preparation phase.

                            E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

                           The first experience with PROFONANPE in managing GEF projects with the World Bank goes back to 1995, with the establishment of the seed
                           fund to initiate the operation of the Protected Areas Fund. Since then, this institution has implemented 3 GEF operations and is currently
                           implementing the fourth GEF Project. Over this period, PROFONANPE has developed the required skills to adequately implement the Bank’s
                           Safeguard policies and instruments.

                            F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

                           Maria Elizabeth Dasso (LCSTR)
                           Raul Tolmos (LCSEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

                            Safeguard Policies                               Triggered?        Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01              Yes                 Given the environmental management and biodiversity conservation main
                                                                                               focus of the project, a category B is proposed. The project is expected to have
                                                                                               significantly positive environmental outcomes as it will improve biodiversity
                                                                                               conservation and natural resources sustainable use practices in ecologically
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               very important marine and coastal areas throughout the strengthened
                                                                                               implementation of the National Reserve of the Guano islands, Islets and Capes.
                                                                                               The project might support small-scale infrastructure in guano islands and capes,
                                                                                               including demarcation, visitors centers, trails, as part of the surveillance and
                                                                                               control activities. The Project will also support the preparation of management
                                                                                               plans, monitoring plans, surveillance and control plans. Possible negative
                                                                                               impacts from these small-scale investments are expected to be low, localized
                                                                                               and reversible.
                                                                                               Given that most of the project activities will be identified during the preparation
                                                                                               phase, an Environmental Assessment (EA) will be prepared by the grant
                                                                                               recipient (to be reviewed by the Bank), to assess potential environmental
                                                                                               impacts. The study will include an Environmental Management Plan for
                                                                                               preventing or mitigating the potential impacts. Given the risks associated with
                                                                                               living in the guano capes and islands and surveillance in coastal areas,
                                                                                               information on occupational health and safety will also be included in the EMP.
                                                                                               An Environmental Management Framework (EMF) will be developed for those
                                                                                               activities that will be identified during the implementation phase.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                      Yes                 The team decided to trigger this policy given the location of the project
                                                                                               interventions within the critical natural habitat comprised by the National
                                                                                               Reserve on Islands, Islets and Guano Capes. Endangered species living in the
                                                                                               National Reserve might be negatively affected by visitors, resource users,
                                                                                               including researchers, and reserve rangers if proper measures/protocols are not
                                                                                               adopted. EA and EMP will ensure this policy is addressed appropriately.
                                                                                               Moreover, increased effectiveness in management of the National Reserve
                                                                                               might induce socioeconomic pressures in other natural (marine and coastal)
                                                                                               habitats outside the National Reserve. The EA will also evaluate the existing
                                                                                               institutional capacity of SERNANP and other stakeholders to manage and
                                                                                               control such risks.
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                               No                  Forest or forest dependent community will not be affected by the Project. All
                                                                                               the activities will be developed in the coastal and marine regions.
                                Pest Management OP 4.09                                            No                     The Project will develop activities related to coastal and marine resources,
                                                                                                                        therefore, no pesticides or other agricultural chemicals will be purchased or
                                                                                                                        promoted under the Project.
                                Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                             TBD                    Areas to be supported under the project are known (22 island and islets and 11
                                                                                                                        guano capes). It is likely that historical monuments and/or archaeological
                                                                                                                        artifacts may be found in some of the Guano capes and islands. During project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        preparation the team will determine if project activities will impact any known
                                                                                                                        physical cultural resource and include this information in the EA. The EMP will
                                                                                                                        include appropriate measures for the management of any sites impacted by the
                                                                                                                        Project. More specifically, “chance find" procedures will be included in the
                                                                                                                        resulting EMP as a way to include relevant provisions to mitigate any potentially
                                                                                                                        adverse impacts on physical cultural resources. Such provisions will include
                                                                                                                        compliance with the guidelines defined by the Culture National Institute (INC)
                                                                                                                        regarding historical sites and/or archaeological monuments and artifacts.
                                Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                      TBD                   As there are no Indigenous Peoples affected by the project this safeguard is
                                                                                                                        not likely to be triggered. However, depending on the results of the Social
                                                                                                                        Assessment indicated below, the triggering of this policy will be determined
                                                                                                                        before appraisal.
                                Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                                TBD                    Given the size and economic importance of the existing and emerging threats,
                                                                                                                        the management of RSNPIIG will require high levels of inter-institutional
                                                                                                                        coordination, highly participatory approaches with local stakeholders, efficiency
                                                                                                                        and specific management plans that provide both increased protection and that
                                                                                                                        guide the interventions and investments of relevant sectors to prevent and
                                                                                                                        mitigate the potential impacts of the existing threats.

                                                                                                                        A Social Assessment will be developed during the preparation stage to
                                                                                                                        understand livelihood dynamics and guide the selection of pilot project activities
                                                                                                                        that combine more sustainable marine resource use with enhanced livelihoods.
                                                                                                                        More specifically, the team will evaluate the type of activities to be developed
                                                                                                                        under the proposed Component 2 to determine if there are potential livelihood
                                                                                                                        impacts, that is, nonphysical displacement, from the implementation of
                                                                                                                        biodiversity management models regulatory activities, strengthening of RNSPIIG
                                                                                                                        and other activities.

                                                                                                                        Given the nature of the analysis to be developed during the preparation phase,
                                                                                                                        the triggering of this policy will be determined before appraisal.
                                Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                          No

                                Projects on International Waterways OP/BP                          No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                7.50
                                Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                              No



                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 09-Nov-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and their timing1
                                  should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                    Environmental assessment and social framework studies should be finalized and disclosed by December 15, 2012.

                         IV. APPROVALS
                                Task Team Leader:                                Name: Gabriela Arcos
                                Approved By:
                                Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                 Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                                                                           Date: 14-May-2012
                                Sector Manager:                                  Name: Karin Erika Kemper (SM)                                                                         Date: 23-May-2012




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
