                                                                     INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                              APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA678
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-May-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                       Niger                                    Project ID:                      P127204
                              Project Name:                  Niger - Competitiveness & Growth Support (P127204)
                              Task Team Leader:              Djibrilla Adamou Issa
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 11-Apr-2012                                   Estimated Board Date:            28-Jun-2012
                              Managing Unit:                 AFTFW                                    Lending Instrument:              Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                        General industry and trade sector (50%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (20%), SME Finance (15%), Central
                                                             government administra tion (15%)
                              Theme:                         Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (25%), Regulation and competition policy (25%), Other Private Sector
                                                             Development (25%), E xport development and competitiveness (15%), Legal institutions for a market economy
                                                             (10%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                       Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                         6.03
                                   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                               50.00
                                   LOCAL BENEFICIARIES                                                                                                        9.21
                                   Total                                                                                                                     65.24
                              Environmental Category:        B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve selected aspects of Niger's business environment, to support the development of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                              meat processing industry and to increase local business participation in the extractive industries sector.

                              3. Project Description

                              Overall approach

                              It appears from the various policy and strategy documents that to support private sector-led growth, actions need to be taken in a number of
                              mutually-supportive areas to create a minimum platform for private sector development. This platform involves a combination of elements
                              including: (i) providing policy, regulatory, and institutional support to key government institutions involved in private sector development; (ii)
                              supporting technical and business management skills to improve productivity at the firm level; (ii) developing linkages with the regional/global
                              economy; (iii) promoting a conducive business environment, in particular, financial services; (iv) trade and investment facilitation regulations and
                              institutions; and (iv) facilitating increased availability of critical infrastructure and services.

                              However, given the low capacity and while promoting such an integrated approach, prioritization and sequencing of the reforms are vital for a
                              successful implementation. These priority reforms to be supported by the Project would aim to develop conditions conducive for the private sector
                              to invest and for Niger to attract more private investment in the two selected high potential value chains and make necessary investment and policy
                              reforms to increase trade with the large neighboring Nigerian market.

                              The lending instrument is a Specific Investment Loan (SIL). A SIL (instead of the Technical Assistance Loan) is proposed as it is a flexible
                              instrument that can finance the diverse activities which are needed to support the private sector, such as technical assistance, equipment and civil
                              work, and provision of financial and non-financial services to SMEs.

                              The project will have the following components and activities:

                              Component 1: Investment Climate, Investment Promotion and SME Support for identified value chains (US$14.0 million)

                              This component will finance activities to help (i) improve the Niger business environment in four key areas i.e. (starting a business; protecting
                              investors; paying taxes; and trading across borders); (ii) provide Business Development Services to support enterprises development primarily in
                              the identified value chains supported by the project (mining and meat) through a matching grant program; and (iii) support the Government effort
                              for investment and export promotion.

                              Component 2: Support to selected value chains (US$22.1 million)


                                                                                                                                                                         Page 1 of 5
                         Niger has few “competitive industries?, i.e. value chains or sectors which have strong potential and for which Niger has a proven comparative
                         advantage and a proven track record. During project preparation, an exhaustive long-list of such value chains was identified in discussions with the
                         Government and private sector. These value chains included: mining and enterprises/SMEs and services providers to major mining companies,
                         onion, meats and the butchery industry, sesame, cow peas, souchet, Arabic gum, handicraft, construction and real estate industry and small and/
                         or large scale irrigation for fruit and vegetable related to the Kandadji barrage.

                         It was decided that the project will support the extractive industries and service providers to major extractive industry companies; and the meat and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         butchery value chain as they offer high potential for growth and employment. The project will aim to increase the incentive to invest in these
                         identified value chains by improving their competitiveness and make required needed public investment. The project includes the following sub
                         components:

                         Sub-component 2.1: Support to the extractive industries value chain (US$13.5 million)
                         This subcomponent will finance activities to help (i) improve the policy and regulatory framework to support diversification of mineral production; (ii)
                         strengthen the institutional capacity for efficient management of the extractive industries and (iii) integrate extractive industry projects into local and
                         regional development and increase the industry’s local supply base, spurring the growth of other services and industries and creating more
                         employment in those sectors.

                         Sub-component 2.2: Support to the meat and butchery value chain (US$8.6 million).
                         The project will support the following activities:
                         - Strengthen the domestic meat market and butchery industry: To this end the project will finance (i) investment to upgrade the Niamey abattoir for
                         the specific purpose of increasing its production capacity; (ii) the provision of cold chain system including a refrigerated warehouse and
                         transportation equipment; and (iii) the installation of wastewater treatment (for the separation of animal waste at slaughterhouses and meat
                         processing plants which reduces the amount of materials and other pollutants released into the watercourses) and financing of a system for
                         hygienic and flexible distribution of meat.
                         - Strengthen the export market for meat: The project will finance the following: (i) investment in the Maradi abattoir for the specific purpose of
                         increasing its production capacity; (ii) the installation wastewater treatment, and the acquisition of a system for hygienic and flexible distribution of
                         meat; (iii) the provision of cold chain including a refrigerated warehouse transportation equipment; (iv) provision of TA through consultancy for the
                         creation of a “Made in Niger? export label for meat; (iv) the improvement of food safety throughout the meat chain by setting and enforcing quality
                         standards and certifications, taking as reference the rules of the European Union included in the package commonly called "food hygiene?.

                         Component 3: Policy Reforms, Infrastructures and Services to harness relationship between Niger and Nigeria through the Kano, Katsina, Maradi
                         (K2M) corridor (US$9.1 million)

                         The objective of this component is to help foster trade and regional integration with Nigeria and attract private investment in the K2M corridor. The
                         project will help develop the K2M corridor by (i) financing technical assistance (TA) to support the Niger-Nigeria Joint Commission for cooperation
                         to define and implement reforms to facilitate cross border trade between the two countries along the Kano, Katsina and Maradi (K2M) corridor (ii)
                         financing a study for the development of a master plan and engineering designs for updating the existing trade corridor in Maradi and identifying
                         the exact location of the required access roads; (iii) financing TA to the local community in Maradi to better take advantage of the corridor,
                         participate in the design of the plan and the development of the corridor; (iii) supporting the preparation of tender documents and technical
                         supervision plans for the rehabilitation of access roads and border markets; and (iv) providing advisory services and equipment for upgrading the
                         slaughterhouse and cattle market in the corridor.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         Nationwide and selected sites to be confirmed during preparation and implementation.


                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                         Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTCS)
                         Amadou Konare (AFTED)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                             Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01               Yes              Although the project is not expected to engender significant negative
                                                                                            environmental impact, the Environmental Assessment Safeguard Policy (OP 4.01)
                                                                                            has been triggered. It will help determine possible negative environment impact of
                                                                                            project activities, particularlyof the slaughterhouses. An ESMF has been prepared,
                                                                                            consulted upon, and disclosed. It will guide the mitigation of potential impacts. In
                                                                                            addition, an ESIA for the Niamey slaughterhouse and other slaughterhouses in
                                                                                            Maradi, has been prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed. The ToRs for a SESA
                                                                                            have also been prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                       No
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                                No
                         Pest Management OP 4.09                           Yes              The project as it supports the meat industry, increase in meat production and
                                                                                            export of meat may trigger increased upstream production of livestock and the use
                                                                                            of agricultural chemical, such as fertilizers and pesticides (i.e., herbicides and
                                                                                            other chemical products designed to reduce the proliferation of disease vectors).
                                                                                            Further, improvement in livestock production and productivity may imply improved
                                                                                            veterinary treatments for diseases prevention and care of the livestock population.
                                                                                            The project will not undertake any activity to increase the livestock production
                                                                                            itself. The activities to support the upstream production of livestock are being
                                                                                            funded by PRODEX.


                                                                                                                                                                        Page 2 of 5
                               Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11          No
                               Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                   No
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12             Yes              Although the project will not involve any land acquisition nor restrict access to
                                                                                                income sources of the population, the involuntary resettlement safeguard policy
                                                                                                (OP/BP 4.12) is triggered for precautionary measures and because of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                proposed works under the project comprising mainly of rehabilitation of existing
                                                                                                structures. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared, consulted
                                                                                                upon, and disclosed.
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                       No
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP       No
                               7.50
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60           No


                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                  As the project is primarily offering technical assistance and capacity building with limited infrastructure rehabilitation, the overall environmental
                                 impact of the project are largely expected to be positive.

                                 The Project is classified as environmental category B because funded activities are not expected to have a significant negative environmental
                                 or social impact.

                                 Although the project proposes works comprising mainly of rehabilitation of existing structures and will not involve any land acquisition nor
                                 restrict access to income sources of the population, the Involuntary Resettlement Framework (RPF) (OP/BP 4.12) is triggered for precautionary
                                 measures. The Environmental Assessment safeguard (OP 4.01) has been also triggered. It will help determine possible negative environment
                                 impact of project activities, particularly of the slaughterhouses. The project as it supports the meat industry, increase in meat production and
                                 export of meat may trigger increased upstream production of livestock and the use of agricultural chemical, such as fertilizers and pesticides (i.
                                 e., herbicides and other chemical products designed to reduce the proliferation of disease vectors). Further, improvement in livestock
                                 production and productivity may imply improved veterinary treatments for diseases prevention and care of the livestock population. The project
                                 will not undertake any activity to increase the livestock production itself. The activities to support the upstream production of livestock are being
                                 funded by PRODEX. The PRODEX has already prepared a Pest Management Plan (PMP). It has been cleared and disclosed in the Infoshop
                                 on January 30, 2009. The PMP is considered acceptable for this Project as the activities that will likely involve pest and pesticide management
                                 issues are all financed under PRODEX. However, the current project will provide training to its implementation staff in the area of pest and
                                 pesticide management.
                               2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                  N/A
                               3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                                  As initially designed at the Project Concept Note (PCN), the project would have larger negative social and environmental impact. Since PCN
                                 and Quality Enhancement Review (QER), the project has been simplified to keep it mostly as a technical (TA) operation in nature with limited
                                 rehabilitation of existing infrastructure, designed to help Niger improve its investment climate, support private enterprises in selected value
                                 chains. In addition, the project will no longer undertake the creation of a Special Economic Zone at the Niger/Nigeria border. It will focus on
                                 providing TA to the Niger and Nigeria joint commission to have existing free trade agreements implemented between the two countries. The
                                 project investment in infrastructure will be limited to the upgrade of two existing slaughterhouse and feeder roads. The mining supply chain
                                 component will only finance TA to the Government to better oversight the mining companies and to local firms to improve their capacity to be
                                 service providers to the main mining companies. This new design adopted by the decision meeting will help lower the negative impact.
                               4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                                  and implement the measures described.
                                  The Borrower has prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), an Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF), an
                                 Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) for the Niamey slaughterhouse and for three other slaughterhouses in Maradi. Those
                                 documents were cleared by the Bank on March 26, 2012 and disclosed in country on March 27, 2012 and in the Infoshop on March 28, 2012.

                                 The Government will also prepare during project implementation, a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) to identify and
                                 address the project’s potential positive and negative environmental and social impacts along the entire mining value chain. The SESA will
                                 provide strategic guidance for enhancing environmental sustainability and social equity of the sector as a whole and specific recommendations
                                 to be incorporated into national policies and programs. Terms of Reference for the SESA have been prepared and cleared by the Bank and
                                 disclosed on April 11, 2012.

                                 The Government will prepare Environmental Audits to assess the environmental, social and health impacts/liabilities of the current production
                                 and processing systems of the existing slaughterhouses in Niamey and Maradi and an Environment and Social Management Plan (ESMP) as it
                                 relates to the rehabilitation activities of the slaughterhouse in Niamey during the first year of project implementation.

                                 The activities to support the upstream production of livestock are being funded by PRODEX. The PRODEX has already prepared a Pest
                                 Management Plan (PMP). It has been cleared and disclosed in the Infoshop on January 30, 2009. The PMP is considered acceptable and this
                                 project will build on it to implement the activities that will likely involve pest management issues. Furthermore, the project will provide training to
                                 enhance the skills of its implementation staff on the optimum use of pest and pesticide management.

                                                                                                                                                                            Page 3 of 5
                           The Government has little capacity to manage safeguards, but has benefited from experience in several Bank-financed projects in other sectors
                           including: agricultural and rural development, energy, transport, health, education and urban development. In addition, the project will help
                           strengthen, as necessary, relevant stakeholders’ capacity to meet its safeguard requirements. It will also finance (i) environmental action plans
                           and activities including the installation of wastewater treatment for the separation of animal waste at slaughterhouses and meat processing
                           plants which will reduce the amount of materials and other pollutants released into the watercourses; and (ii) capacity building of stakeholders,
                           creating awareness of environmental issues in order to promote sustainable management.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                            on potentially affected people.
                             The project involves all level stakeholders such as government, public institutions, private sector, local governments, communities, butchers,
                           professional groups, local NGOs. The following entities have been identified and had played a role in the preparation and disclosure of
                           safeguards policies and will be involved in the project safeguards management: (i) the Project Steering Committee will provide a framework of
                           guidance, consultation for monitoring safeguards issues; (ii) the PIU will hire an Environmental and Social Staff (ESS) who will be responsible
                           for the preparation of the RAPs and other needed safeguard documents, the preparation of Environmental and Social Terms of Reference
                           (TORs), the recruitment of consultants, and assistance in the preparation, implementation and monitoring process; (iii) the ESS will liaise with
                           the Office of Environmental Assessment and Impact Studies (BEEEI) and will play an important role in the effective implementation of mitigation
                           of impacts through awareness activities, monitoring, capacity-building of stakeholders in compliance with environmental and social measures;
                           and (iv) the ESS will ensure the capacity enhancement training for the technicians at the regional, departmental and municipal governments to
                           monitor the compliance of the safeguards related documents.

                           Safeguards documents (RPF, ESMF, ESIA) have been prepared by the Government in consultation with different stakeholders at national,
                           regional, communal and local level. Copies of the documents are available to the public online and at the library of the "Centre de
                           Documentation Economique et Sociale" (CIDES), Ministry of Planning, Ministry of Livestock , Direction regionale de l’ Elevage, Abatoires de
                           Niamey et Maradi in Niger and at the Bank’s Infoshop.

                           The consultation will continue, especially with people who may be affected by the project. The RAP, when necessary, will be prepared in
                           compliance of RPF and be submitted to the Bank prior to the commencement of the civil works. People affected by the Project (PAPs) will
                           participate in the process of preparation and implementation of the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP).

                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                               26-Mar-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                           27-Mar-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                            28-Mar-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                           Directors
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                               26-Mar-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                           27-Mar-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                            28-Mar-2012
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                            Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                               27-Jan-2009
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                           29-Jan-2009
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                            30-Jan-2009
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                         disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                           Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                Yes [     ]      No [    ]       NA [    ]

                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                           If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or SM? Are              Yes [     ]      No [    ]       NA [    ]
                           PMP requirements included in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                           Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                           If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the        Yes [     ]      No [    ]       NA [    ]
                           plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information


                                                                                                                                                                Page 4 of 5
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?              Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language      Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for   Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?              Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard    Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same        Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Task Team Leader:                    Djibrilla Adamou Issa
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:     Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                        Date: 15-May-2012
                            Sector Manager:                      Name Amadou Dem (SM)                                                     Date: 14-May-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                                               Page 5 of 5
