                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA2710
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Feb-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 25-Feb-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Lesotho                            Project ID:    P114859
                            Project Name:      Lesotho Maternal & Newborn Health PBF (P114859)
                            Task Team          Kanako Yamashita-Allen
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          20-Aug-2012                        Estimated   11-Apr-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTHE                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector:            Health (90%), Central government administration (10%)
                            Theme:             Child health (20%), Health system performance (35%), Population and
                                               reproductive health (40%), HIV/AIDS (5%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                               Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                              4.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              International Development Association (IDA)                                    12.00
                              Health Results-based Financing                                                  4.00
                              Total                                                                          20.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           The overall project development objective is to improve the utilization and quality of maternal and
                           newborn health (MNH) services in selected districts in Lesotho.
                            3. Project Description
                           The project has two components: Component 1 is MNH service delivery at community, primary and
                           secondary levels through PBF while Component 2 entails training of health professionals, and VHWs
                           as well as improving M&E capacity. The project will be implemented in three phases. In Phase I
                           (July 2013-June 2014), the project will be piloted in Leribe and Quthing districts. In Phase II (June


                                                                        Page 1 of 7
                         2014-June 2015) and Phase III (June 2015-June 2017), the project will gradually scale-up to all
                         selected districts excluding Maseru district. This three-phased approach will allow for adjustments in
                         design based on lessons learned during the pilot phase. Districts enrolled in the PBF implementation
Public Disclosure Copy




                         in phases I and II will continue implementation through phase III, incorporating lessons learned in
                         each phase.

                         Component 1: Improving Maternal and Newborn Health (MNH) Service Delivery at Community,
                         Primary and Secondary levels through PBF (US$17.7 million).

                         This component will be jointly financed by IDA (US$9.7 million), the Health Results Innovation
                         Trust Fund (US$4 million) and, in parallel by GOL (US $4 million). The objective of this
                         component is to improve MNH service delivery at health facility and community level through two
                         sub-components, as detailed below. The sub-components will dovetail the almost complete support
                         provided by the Millennium Challenge Account (MCA) to renovate, refurbish and equip health
                         centers, including reinstating adequate provisions for waiting shelters for expecting mothers.
                         Building on infrastructure improvement supported by MCA the project will contribute to the supply-
                         side improvements which are fundamental to strengthen the quality and utilization of health services.

                         Sub-component 1A: Delivery of MNH Services through PBF ($13 million) will support the provision
                         of quality MNH services as well as selected services in the Essential Services Package in
                         communities, health centers and hospitals by providing performance-based incentives to VHWs,
                         health centers, and hospitals. Health centers and VHWs will be considered as one unit for payment of
                         incentives in their respective catchment areas in order to strengthen their collaboration. Furthermore,
                         performance incentives for VHWs will be linked to the overall performance of the health centers to
                         which they are mapped. The incentivized services to be delivered by health centers (Minimum
                         Package of Activities [MPA]) and hospitals (Complementary Package of Activities [CPA]) are
                         shown in Annex 2 (Tables 3 and 4).

                         Additionally, performance-based payments will be made to DHMTs (which will become part of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         District Councils with the decentralization of health services) based on supervision of health facilities
                         using a quality checklist, providing feedback to health facility staff, submission of quarterly overall
                         reports to the District Council Secretary with lessons learned, identified constraints and suggested
                         solutions, and other information related to service delivery within the district. The performance-
                         based incentives linked to achievement of predefined quantity and quality indicators at the health
                         facilities are expected to stimulate health worker motivation and productivity and provide additional
                         cash to overcome obstacles affecting the quality or continuum of care of their patients. Performance-
                         based incentives will be adjusted based on comparative isolation of a facility to provide additional
                         incentives to hospitals and health centers in remote areas and influence retention of health personnel
                         in remote areas.

                         Sub-component 1B: PBF Implementation and Supervision Support ($4.7 million) will provide
                         critical support for: (i) PBF implementation and supervision; (ii) capacity building of the MOH and
                         CHAL at central and district levels, district and community councils; and, (iii) best practice
                         documentation and sharing. The MOH has established a central PBF Unit to handle the day-to-day
                         management of the MNH PBF Project. The PBF unit consists of five full time MOH staff. Given that
                         MOH and CHAL have had limited experience with PBF, both strategic and operational capacity will
                         be built at respective levels. The project will competitively recruit a performance purchasing
                         technical assistance (PPTA) firm to provide technical assistance and build in-country capacity. The
                         PPTA’s key functions are to: (i) provide technical and implementation support to the MOH PBF unit

                                                                       Page 2 of 7
                         and other PBF implementing entities on managing performance-based contracts for the delivery of
                         incentivized services; and (ii) verify delivery of the quantity and quality of services, prepare the
                         invoices for performance-based payments, and assist health facilities with preparing their PBF
Public Disclosure Copy




                         business plans. The role of the PPTA will gradually reduce as the implementing entities and facilities
                         gain greater experience with PBF implementation.

                         Component 2: Training of health professionals and VHWs and improving Monitoring and Evaluation
                         (M&E) capacity (US$2.3 million)

                         This component will be solely financed through IDA financing and have two sub-components.

                         Sub-component 2A: Training health professionals and Village Health Workers will support an
                         ongoing MOH program for training doctors, nurse anesthetists and midwives to achieve an
                         acceptable standard of competency in the delivery of MNH services including EmONC. In August
                         2012, the Bank engaged a consultant to review the turnaround time in the working capital
                         management of the National Drug Service Organization (NDSO) and related processes at NDSO,
                         MOH, GOL and CHAL health facilities. Based on the report’s findings, the project will support a 5-
                         day training of health center nurses on the MOH adopted drug supply management manual. This
                         would allow the health centers to improve their forecasting and order preparation for NDSO, which
                         will potentially reduce the delays in turning around and delivering orders and help curtail stock-outs
                         of drugs and medical supplies at the health center level. Additionally, 18 hospital and DHMT
                         pharmacists, one NDSO staff, and one MOH Pharmacy Directorate staff will participate in Eastern
                         and Southern African Management Institute (ESAMI) training courses on (i) overview of supply
                         chain management and (ii) quantification of health commodities. Refresher training will also be
                         provided to MOH financial management and procurement staff.

                         Currently, health centers do not provide the full complement of Basic EmONC services since
                         midwives are not allowed to perform three basic EmONC procedures: manual removal of retained
                         placenta; removal of retained products of conception; and assisted vaginal delivery. The Nursing and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Midwifery Act is being revised to allow advanced midwives to perform these procedures.

                         Advanced midwives are needed at hospitals to train nurse midwives and also for the mentorship and
                         preceptorship of newly trained nurse midwives. The Directorate of Nursing indicated that 36
                         advanced midwives are required (two for each of the 18 hospitals), but there are currently only three
                         advanced midwives nationwide. The project will support part-time training for 15-20nurse midwives
                         at a university in South Africa for Advanced University Diploma in Advanced Midwifery and
                         Neonatology. Given the shortage of nurse anesthetists, the project will also support the ongoing
                         MOH effort to provide pre-service training of nurse anesthetists in African training institutions.
                         Twelve nurse anesthetists are expected to be trained.

                         In 2013, the MOH together with UNFPA, UNICEF, and WHO plan to conduct an EmONC
                         assessment, which will inform the need for on-the-job training for nurse midwives and medical
                         doctors providing obstetric services in districts. The project will provide support for this assessment.

                         In terms of VHWs, the MOH, with support from development partners, has established a VHW
                         training manual and curriculum and is conducting ongoing training for VHWs. This sub-component
                         will support the ongoing VHW training on basic services such as family planning and referrals as
                         well as taking care of mothers and children in the postnatal period and promotion of exclusive
                         breastfeeding. VHWs will also be supported to conduct community head count and periodically

                                                                       Page 3 of 7
                         update the village health registers for more accurate health facility catchment area data.

                         Sub-component 2B: Improving M&E capacity will support the strengthening of the Health
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Management Information System (HMIS) in all districts and build the capacity of M&E personnel at
                         the central and district levels. Specific activities under this sub-component include: (i) improving the
                         quality of health data by reviewing, updating and harmonizing data collection tools for strengthening
                         the HMIS; (ii) printing, training, dissemination, and utilization of the updated data collection tools,
                         HMIS registers, forms and reports at all health facilities over the project duration; (iii) enrolling
                         District Health Information Officers (DHIO) and central MOH staff in a short course on M&E of
                         health programs (for 2 central and 10 district personnel) as well as a two-year part-time Master of
                         Public Health (MPH) degree program with an M&E or Biostatistics concentration (for 2 central
                         personnel) ; and (iv) conducting health facility quality of care assessments and baseline household
                         survey.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be based in Lesotho and will cover 9 districts over a three-phased implementation
                         period. Phase I districts are Leribe and Quthing; Phase II districts are Mafeteng, Mohale’s Hoek,
                         Mokhotlong, and Thaba Tseka; and Phase III districts are Berea, Botha-Bothe, and Qacha's Nek.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Hocine Chalal (AFTN3)
                         Melissa C. Landesz (AFTSG)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes
                          BP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                          BP 4.11
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
                          4.12
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                          Projects on International        No
                          Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                          Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                          7.60




                                                                       Page 4 of 7
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The main environmental safeguard policy issue is likely to relate to health care waste
                              management, in view of the risks associated with the handling and disposal of medical waste. The
                              Government has prepared and adopted a 2010 National Health Care Waste Management Plan,
                              which was subsequently reviewed, consolidated and applied to the Lesotho MNH PBF Project.
                              This consolidated HCWM Plan is intended as a synthesis of the various documents that were
                              developed as part of the updated HCWM, including: (i) the Situational Analysis; (ii) HCWM
                              Policy; (iii) HCWM Strategic Plan; (iv) HCWM Implementation Plan; (v) HCWM Monitoring
                              Plan and (vi) HCWM Support Document. The document therefore provides a detailed
                              consolidated overview of the management of healthcare waste in Lesotho, and will be applied as
                              the safeguards instrument accompanying the Lesotho Maternal and Newborn Health Performance-
                              Based Financing Project.

                              No major works will be directly financed by the project. However, health centers and hospitals
                              may use the performance-based payments under sub-component 1A for small repairs of existing
                              health structures. Such minor works shall exclude any new building and will be undertaken
                              according to national and local laws and regulations. Accordingly, no specific environmental
                              safeguard instrument is required for these activities.

                              The project is a Category B environmental safeguard project.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                               The project is not expected to have any potential indirect and/or long-term environmental and
                              social impacts as a result of future activities, as the medical waste will be managed according to
Public Disclosure Copy




                              the requirements of OP 4.01 and international best practice.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.

                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                                As the main implementing agency, the MOH is well versed in World Bank safeguard policies as
                              displayed in its ability to prepare the 2010 National Health Care Waste Management Plan. The
                              Ministry has a dedicated Environmental Health unit for ensuring compliance with safeguards
                              requirements.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                                The 2010 National Healthcare Waste Management plan was qualified in consultation with key
                              stakeholders from a series of inter-ministerial and cross-sectoral bodies, as well as from within the
                              Ministry of Health, ranging from Department Heads, representatives from the District Health
                              Management Teams, health facility representatives, as well as representatives of different cadres
                              of health professionals, private enterprise and Non-governmental Organizations (NGOs). Six
                              stakeholder workshops were held from May 2010 through to September 2010 that together
                              culminated in the development of this 2010 National Health Care Waste Management Plan. Five

                                                                         Page 5 of 7
                           recommended feasible scenarios were formulated and preliminary costs estimated to assist in the
                           strategic decision-making process. Alternatives for both the technological as well as the
                           institutional and capacity building elements were debated at the stakeholder consultation
Public Disclosure Copy




                           workshops and individual meetings. The Consolidated Lesotho National Health Care Waste
                           Management Plan (CLNHCW) reflects the outcomes of these consultations and was subsequently
                           disclosed in country on the Ministry of Health website. Since the project is only indirectly
                           concerned with health Care waste, there is an indirect linkage between project activities and the
                           management of health care waste as described in the safeguard instrument submitted. As such, the
                           project does not comprise activities related to health care waste. The safeguard instrument is
                           submitted in order to demonstrate that the requisite due diligence has been conducted to ensure
                           that the counterparts have the necessary measures in place to effectively and safely manage and
                           dispose of health care waste. Under the CLNHCW, a phased approach – 4 phases - to the
                           implementation of an improved HCWM system was developed. MOH is currently implementing
                           Phase II (2012-2014), first through a Pilot Project, testing improved HCW management options
                           for containerization, collection, and disposal of Health Care Risk Waste (Berea, Leribe, and
                           Maseru districts; Nov 2012-Nov 2013). National roll-out is anticipated to be launched for all other
                           districts starting in May 2013. IFC is supporting the Pilot Project through the Health Care Waste
                           Management PPP which has helped the MOH with the procurement of a private operator to
                           undertake health care waste management services.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      13-Aug-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   22-Aug-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Lesotho                                                          21-Aug-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [      ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the    Yes [      ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [       ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies

                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Kanako Yamashita-Allen
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                    Date: 25-Feb-2013
                            Coordinator:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Olusoji O. Adeyi (SM)                          Date: 15-Feb-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 7 of 7
