                                                                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                            APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA215
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Oct-2011

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        Tonga                                   Project ID:                       P128939
                              Project Name:                   Pacific Aviation Investment - Tonga (P128939)
                              Task Team Leader:               Christopher R. Bennett
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 18-Oct-2011                                   Estimated Board Date:             13-Dec-2011
                              Managing Unit:                  EASNS                                   Lending Instrument:               Adaptable Program Loan
                              Sector:                         Aviation (100%)
                              Theme:                          Regional integration (35%), Trade facilitation and market access (35%), Administrative and civil service reform
                                                              (20%), Infrastructur e services for private sector development (10%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                       Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                          4.24
                                   IDA Grant                                                                                                                 27.00
                                   Pacific Regional Infrastructure Facility Trust Fund                                                                         1.27
                                   Total                                                                                                                     32.51
                              Environmental Category:         B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              The project development objective is to improve operational safety and oversight of key air transport infrastructure.

                              3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Component A: Aviation Infrastructure Improvements: This component will invest in the aviation infrastructure at the Tongatapu Fua'amotu airport
                              (TBU) and Vava'u airport (VAV) so that they are able to meet the ICAO standards, while preserving and extending the service life of existing airport
                              assets. The activities include:
                              # Rehabilitation of airport pavements: The project will rehabilitate the runways, taxiways and aprons and at the two airports. This will see the
                              existing surfaces milled (if needed) and replaced with asphalt concrete, cement concrete and/or interlocking concrete/stone pavers as appropriate,
                              with proper attention to airfield drainage to prevent ponding on shoulders, aprons and other critical areas.
                              # Provision of renewable power: Implementation of discrete photovoltaic power source for generation of on-site power at VAV that is carbon-
                              neutral during operation. This will not only significantly reduce airport operating costs, but do so using a non-polluting, renewable, and importantly,
                              reliable energy source. Potentially, excess energy could be supplied to the national grid, thereby reducing the diesel fuel demands and their
                              related CO2 effects.
                              # Energy optimization of terminals: Improvements to terminals to reduce electrical consumption through both passive and technological means.
                              # Upgrading of runway lighting: The existing lighting and cabling will be replaced with low power consumption LED fixtures, reducing the energy
                              demand by 90%.
                              # Security improvements: Improved fencing, access control, building management system, FIDS and CCTV for Fua'amotu airport; X-ray
                              equipment for hand baggage at Vava'u airport;
                              # Rain water harvesting and improved efficiency: Facilities will be provided to collect and store rain water from roof areas to significantly reduce the
                              potable water demand and preserve natural water resources. The water will be used to service all sanitary demands and provide required
                              collections for fire water for Crash Fire Rescue demands, and ground vehicle maintenance. Water consumption will be reduced by utilizing high
                              efficiency/low consumption fixtures and valves within the terminal buildings.
                              # Control tower: Construction of a new control tower at TBU, along with the necessary communication and surveillance equipment, for example
                              PAPI and NDB for Fua'amoto and an ADS-B for Vava'u and Fua'amotu airports.
                              # Fire safety: Provision of a fire tender for Vava'u airport; provision of fire equipment for firemen (jackets, oxygen, etc.).
                              # Weather monitoring: Automatic Weather Observation Stations for both airports.
                              # Consulting services: (i) Procurement of design and supervision consultant; and, (ii) Specialists for preparation of technical specifications on
                              aviation equipment.

                              Component B: Aviation Sector Reform: The reform underway will continue through the project providing support to the Civil Aviation Department
                              (CAD) to adopt and implement the new Civil Aviation Regulations as well as the agreed corrective action plan following the ICAO safety and
                              security audits. This support will likely include a civil aviation advisor to CAD.

                              Component C: Strengthening Airport Operations and Management Capacity: The project will coordinate the following regional studies:
                              Options for Regional Aviation Supply: A study into the options for the regional aviation market. This will consider the current and future travel
                                                                                                                                                                          Page 1 of 4
                               demand patterns in the region-for passengers and freight-and the types of aviation services that would be most appropriate to meet these
                               demands.
                               Long-Term Sustainability of Aviation Infrastructure: With the often very low levels of demand, many countries in the region do not have the revenue
                               to ensure that future operations and maintenance needs can be financed. This study will review the options for countries in the region for
                               sustainable long-term financing and operations of key aviation infrastructure, and ways in which this financing can realistically be met.
                               Analysis of Flight Information Region: Each country has a 'flight information region' (FIR) through which aircraft travel. This study will review the
                               revenue received by the participating countries for access to the FIR and consider options for improvements to the current approach.
Public Disclosure Copy




                               Component D: Program Support: This component will finance the support required by of various parties involved in the program:
                               # Support to the Technical and Fiduciary Services Unit (TFSU): Grant resources will be used to support the hiring of key technical specialists and
                               staff in the TSFU, including operating costs such as office space and equipment.
                               # Project Financial Audit: The cost of financial audits.
                               # PASnet Annual Subscription: The cost of annual subscriptions for the operation of the PASnet infrastructure.

                               4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                               The investments will at Tonga's two main airports#Tongatapu Fua'amotu International (TBU) and Vava'u (VAV). These provide access to the main
                               population and holiday centers respectively. The project's investments will take place entirely on existing airport lands.

                               5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                               Anil H. Somani (EASNS)
                               Maria Fernanda Miralles Gasparini (SEGOM)

                               6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                   Yes        No      Explanation
                               Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                 ✖                The physical interventions include improvements to the runways,
                                                                                                    improvements to terminals, and provision of navigation aids. All activities will
                                                                                                    be undertaken within the areas of the existing airports. The project is Category
                                                                                                    B based on the screening criteria provided in the Environmental and Social
                                                                                                    Management Framework (ESMF) prepared for the Pacific Aviation Investment
                                                                                                    Project. The potential environmental impacts from the above interventions are
                                                                                                    mostly construction-related, temporary in nature and can be addressed
                                                                                                    through engineering design and by implementing sound environmental
                                                                                                    management of construction activities. As noted above, the area of influence is
                                                                                                    very limited as the civil works will be carried out within the existing property
                                                                                                    boundaries of the airports. In summary, the main potential environmental
                                                                                                    impacts and concerns identified include: (i) construction-related nuisances
                                                                                                    such as noise, dust from construction and exhaust emissions from machines;
                                                                                                    (ii) disturbance to local traffic; (iii) construction workers' and community safety;
                                                                                                    (iv) risks from the use and disposal of hazardous materials such as used fuel
                                                                                                    and lubricants; (v) land clearance around the boundary of the airport; (vi) solid
                                                                                                    waste and wastewater management during construction and operation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                               Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                   ✖
                               Forests OP/BP 4.36                                            ✖
                               Pest Management OP 4.09                                       ✖
                               Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                        ✖
                               Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                 ✖
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                           ✖
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                     ✖
                               Projects on International Waters OP/BP 7.50                   ✖
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                         ✖

                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                  The physical interventions include improvements to the runways, improvements to terminals, and provision of navigation aids. All activities will
                                  be undertaken within the areas of the existing airports. The project is Category B based on the screening criteria provided in the Environmental
                                  and Social Management Framework (ESMF) prepared for the Pacific Aviation Investment Project. The potential environmental impacts from the
                                  above interventions are mostly construction-related, temporary in nature and can be addressed through engineering design and by
                                  implementing sound environmental management of construction activities. As noted above, the area of influence is very limited as the civil
                                  works will be carried out within the existing property boundaries of the airports. In summary, the main potential environmental impacts and
                                  concerns identified include: (i) construction-related nuisances such as noise, dust from construction and exhaust emissions from machines; (ii)
                                  disturbance to local traffic; (iii) construction workers' and community safety; (iv) risks from the use and disposal of hazardous materials such as
                                  used fuel and lubricants; (v) land clearance around the boundary of the airport; (vi) solid waste and
                                  wastewater management during construction and operation.

                                  Following the safeguards approach laid out by the ESMF, an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was prepared to address the afore-
                                                                                                                                                              Page 2 of 4
                           mentioned environmental impacts and concerns. The EMP will form part of the contract and hence the contractor will be legally bound to
                           comply with the EMP. The EMP comprises four main components, namely, mitigation plans, monitoring plans, institutional arrangements, and a
                           field supervision checklist. It covers the design, construction and operational phases of the project, and summarizes the budget, reporting
                           arrangements, timing and the responsibility for its implementation and supervision. The mitigation measures are built on relevant national laws
                           and regulations, EHS Guidelines
                           for Occupational Health and Safety, and OP4.01. The field supervision checklist will be used by the supervising engineers. The signed
                           checklists will be provided to the Head of Civil Aviation Department (CAD), who will be responsible for the compliance reporting to the Bank.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The project will not have an impact on people's lands, assets, access to assets or livelihoods in any way. Investments are taking place on
                           existing airports, and therefore no land acquisition or resettlement is envisioned. These lands are not used in any way by any persons outside
                           the airports, as all airports are fenced and secure and are used for aviation operations only. No businesses will be affected in any way by the
                           project. The lands where the two airports are located are already leased by GoTg. In early 2011 negotiations were completed with lease holders
                           at Fua'amotu and Vava'u Airports to renew lease agreements with the GoTg. These negotiations resulted in major increases in the annual lease
                           rates. The GoTg decided it would hold these agreements and sub-lease to TAL. This sub-leasing being formalized is a condition of
                           effectiveness for the PAIP.

                           OP 4.10 Indigenous People is not triggered because people in the project area in Tonga are not considered indigenous as per the World Bank's
                           Indigenous People's Policy (OP 4.10). Tongans are predominantly homogenous (Polynesian). The 2006 Census for the Kingdom of Tonga
                           showed that over 96 percent of the Tongan population is Tongan (Polynesian).
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                           The improved airport safety and facilities as the result of the project may increase the frequency of flights, and traffic of vehicles and people in
                           the surrounding area. The flight frequency, though expected to grow, will still be low. Therefore the increase in long-term impacts is expected to
                           be marginal.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                           There are no project alternatives as the investments are being made at the existing airports and relocation of the airports is not feasible
                           because of the cost.

                           Aggregates for the civil works will largely be sourced from local private suppliers, and in some instances may need to be imported from
                           overseas if no appropriate local supplies are available. Construction trucks will be required to respect load limits set by the governments to
                           reduce potential damage to roads from heavily loaded trucks. Finer aggregates and sand will be transported to the construction site during off
                           peak traffic hours, in covered transport vehicles, with water sprayed to minimize dust generation.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                            and implement the measures described.
                           An EMP was prepared and disclosed on February 28, 2011 at the InfoShop and June 1, 2011 in-country. The implementation of the EMP shall
                           be monitored by the Design and Supervision Consultant on behalf of MCTDD. The Ministry of the Environment (MOE) shall oversee
                           environmental compliance. With the combination of the supervision consultant and MOB there is sufficient capacity to address safeguard
                           issues. Potential risks in implementing the EMP due to low client capacity will be mitigated by having the project's Design and Supervision
                           Consultant monitor and report on safeguard compliance as part of their project supervision activities. The Bank and the Design and Supervision
                           Consultants will also provide training to the Airport operational staff and the environmental staff in Tonga. Consultations were undertaken by the
                           Borrower and the feedback will be used during project design.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                            on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders of the project are the people who live or work in buildings close to the airport. Consultations have been held to inform
                           stakeholders of the proposed project, the potential impacts, and proposed measures and arrangements to address the impacts. Other potential
                           stakeholders include airport passengers, aircraft operations and airport services providers.

                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                              Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                 22-Feb-2011
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                             01-Jun-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                              28-Feb-2011
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                           Directors
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                         disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                           Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                  Yes [     ]       No [    ]       NA [     ]

                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                           Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?                  Yes [     ]       No [    ]       NA [     ]

                                                                                                                                                                    Page 3 of 4
                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language      Yes [   ]       No [      ]          NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for   Yes [   ]       No [      ]          NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?              Yes [   ]       No [      ]          NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard    Yes [   ]       No [      ]          NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same        Yes [   ]       No [      ]          NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Signed and submitted by:                                                Name                                                    Date
                            Task Team Leader:                    Christopher R. Bennett                                                   05-Oct-2011
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:     Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan (RSA)                                    08-Nov-2011
                            Comments:
                            Sector Manager:                      Charles M. Feinstein (SM)                                                05-Oct-2011
                            Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                                                    Page 4 of 4
