                                                                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                            APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSA1216
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Jul-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                       Bangladesh                              Project ID:                      P131394
                              Project Name:                  BD: Reaching Out of School Children II (P131394)
                              Task Team Leader:              Dilip Parajuli
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 13-Jul-2012                                  Estimated Board Date:            23-Oct-2012
                              Managing Unit:                 SASED                                   Lending Instrument:              Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                        Primary education (70%), Other social services (30%)
                              Theme:                         Education for all (50%), Participation and civic engagement (25%), Gender (25%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                  Financing Source                                                                                                      Amount
                                  BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                         0.00
                                  International Development Association (IDA)                                                                             100.00
                                  Total                                                                                                                   100.00
                              Environmental Category:        B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? Yes

                              2. Project Objectives

                              The key project development objective is to improve equitable access, retention and completion in quality primary education for out-of-school
                              children in under-served areas.

                              3. Project Description

                              The proposed ROSC II project would support access to learning opportunity for out-of-school children by providing education allowances to
Public Disclosure Copy




                              students and grants to learning centers. With community management as the fulcrum, buttressed by a partnership between the government and
                              non-governmental organizations (NGOs), the approach would focus on the establishment of learning centers by community based Center
                              Management Committees (CMC) following a transparent mapping of underserved areas. ROSC-II will finance activities to (i) continue supporting
                              students in currently operational ROSC LCs (established in 2010 and 2011 from additional financing) to enable them to complete grade 5; (ii)
                              scale-up ROSC operation in 100 new upazilas; and (iii) pilot ROSC intervention in selected urban slums and a pre-vocational skills training scheme
                              for older ROSC students.

                              The proposed project would consist of the following components.

                              Component 1: Increasing Equitable Access
                              The objective of this component is to reduce number of out-of-school children in the under-served areas through provision of access to formal
                              primary education with Grants to Learning Centers and Education Allowances to eligible students. This component comprises: (a) LC
                              establishment and management, (b) Education allowances, and (c) ROSC Pilot in Urban Slums. The activities under LC establishment include
                              identification and mobilization of targeted communities, formation of CMCs, selection of eligible students, recruitment of qualified teachers, and
                              approval of LC establishment applications. The Education Allowances, intended to attract out-of-school children to enroll in LCs and retain them
                              through the primary cycle, would be provided to the students enrolled in ROSC LCs. ROSC Pilot in selected urban areas will finance LC type of
                              intervention in urban slums, and voucher program for children working as domestic workers (child domestics).

                              Component 2: Enhancing Education Quality
                              The objective of this component is to improve retention in and completion of primary education cycle through (a) teacher development, (b)
                              classroom support, and (c) pre-vocational skills training for eligible ROSC students. Activities financed under teacher development sub-component
                              would include initial foundation training, annual refresher training, and subject-based training with focus on English and Mathematics. Under
                              classroom support sub-component, Assistant Upazila Education Officers (AUEOs), nearby primary school head-teachers (HTs) and upazila TCs
                              would be mobilized to provide academic guidance to LC teachers on the use of subject plans, teaching-learning materials, and continuous student
                              assessments. Pre-vocational skills training pilot sub-component aims to support ROSC students who have completed at least grade 3 but are aged
                              15 and above. Under the pilot, the project ROSCU would provide vouchers to 5,000 eligible students to participate in market responsive trade
                              courses.

                              Component 3: Improving project management and capacity
                              The objectives of this component are to establish an effective project implementation structure and enhance project implementation capacity
                              through mobilization of communities and involvement of capable partner agencies to deliver quality primary education to out-of-school children.
                              This component comprises: (a) project management and capacity building, and (b) social awareness and advocacy.

                                                                                                                                                                        Page 1 of 4
                               Component 4: Monitoring and Evaluation
                               The objective of this component is to establish an effective monitoring and evaluation system to monitor inputs, processes and outputs, and assess
                               the impact in relation to the stated project development objectives. This component comprises (a) monitoring of inputs, process and outputs, (b)
                               learning assessment pilots, and (c) impact evaluation of ROSC interventions. Key monitoring activities include: preparation of database; validation
                               of LCs; trimester monitoring of LCs based on self-reported monitoring forms; and sample-based monitoring exercises such as educational
                               compliance verification and public expenditure tracking survey. Use of ICT such as SMS monitoring and data validation through smart phones
Public Disclosure Copy




                               would be a significant new feature. Learning assessment pilot would support administration of two rounds of student learning assessments for
                               grades 3 and 5. Impact evaluation aims to assess the impact of ROSC interventions on schooling outcomes.

                               4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                               The proposed ROSC II project would be implemented in 130 upazilas of the country including 30 upazilas that ongoing ROSC continues to
                               support. 100 new upazilas would be selected based on the human opportunity index (HOI) which combines the school participation rate among
                               basic school aged children and the distribution of schooling opportunity in each upazilas. It will also be extended to selected urban slums on a pilot
                               basis. Since the environmental safeguard measures worked well for the first ROSC, it will be continued in the ROSCII as well. The main
                               safeguard concern for ROSC-II, as was the case for ROSC, will be the availability of safe drinking water and sanitation facility.

                               5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                               Sabah Moyeen (SASDS)
                               Nadia Sharmin (SASDI)

                               6. Safeguard Policies                            Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                               Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01              Yes             To ensure safe drinking water and healthy sanitation system, the LC venue should
                                                                                                be ensured with water sealed hygienic latrines. To avoid any major environmental
                                                                                                impact, All the LCs to be funded under the ROSC II will be subjected to an
                                                                                                environmental screening during selection in order to prevent any significant
                                                                                                negative environmental impacts.
                               Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                      No
                               Forests OP/BP 4.36                               No
                               Pest Management OP 4.09                          No
                               Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11           No
                               Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                    Yes             Since a final selection of the upazilas has not been done, there is a possibility that
                                                                                                areas where IP populations live may be chosen. A Social Inclusion and
                                                                                                Management Framework will be prepared which will include an Indigenous
                                                                                                Peoples Planning Framework with additional inclusion and gender aspects.
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12              No              No private land acquisition or displacement of people from public lands or any
                                                                                                adverse impacts on livelihoods is anticipated due to the project activities. Existing
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                public spaces or private spaces will be rented for the establishment of the new
                                                                                                learning centers. Therefore OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement is not triggered for
                                                                                                this project.
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                        No
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP        No
                               7.50
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60            No


                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any potential l arge scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                   The program will support mainly three types of activities which may trigger environmental issues. These are: i) Establishment of LCs, ii)
                                  Maintenance of LCs; and iii) Water supply and sanitation provision. The project will not finance any new construction/renovation of LCs. LCs will
                                  be housed in a rental room under a contractual agreement with house owner for definite period of time. Since the project will not support
                                  construction of latrines or installation of any drinking water source, supply of safe drinking water and the provision of hygienic sanitation are the
                                  two vital challenges of the program.

                                  The project activities do not envisage any large scale, significant or irreversible environmental impact. The project was reviewed during
                                  preparation and designated as environmental Category B which is appropriate and consistent with the provisions of OP/BP 4.01. All the LCs to
                                  be funded under the ROSC II will be subjected to an environmental screening during selection in order to prevent any significant negative
                                  environmental impacts.

                                  Nonetheless, actual impacts will depend on the project activities and each of these will be subject to the environmental monitoring process
                                  reflected in the project's Environmental Management Framework (EMF) and which allows for the application of appropriate mitigating measures
                                  to eliminate adverse environmental impacts, or to reduce them to acceptable limits, as required.

                                  No private land acquisition or displacement of people from public lands or any adverse impacts on livelihoods is anticipated due to the project
                                  activities. The project will not finance any new construction/renovation of LCs to provide the above mentioned facilities. LCs will be housed in a
                                                                                                                                                                           Page 2 of 4
                           rental room under a contractual agreement with house owner for definite period of time. Special attention will be required to ensure safe
                           drinking water supply to the LCs. Upon screening of the upazilas, if Indigenous People are found in the project areas then site-specific IP Plans
                           will be prepared and disclosed according to the guidance provided in the Framework.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                             The typical environmental impacts related to the establishment of LC and water supply and sanitation issues are drinking water pollution, poor
                           sanitation system, inadequate lighting and ventilation, drainage congestion/water logging and unhygienic surrounding environment. The project
                           is not expected to create any significant or long-term adverse impact. if adequate attention is given during the LC venue/site selection and O&M
Public Disclosure Copy




                           phase to assess and mitigate risks.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                             Not Applicable
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                            and implement the measures described.
                             The implementing agency has prepared an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) for the proposed program. The EMF has explained
                           the procedure for the environmental screening, consultation, supervision, mitigation measures and monitoring procedures. Both the World Bank
                           policy guideline and the government environmental rules were considered in preparing the EMF.

                           The implementing agency will appoint a dedicated Environmental Focal Person at Assistant Director Level who will be responsible for ensuring
                           the completion of environmental screening/assessments during LC selection. S/He will supervise the implementation of the Environmental
                           Management Plan (EMP) and will ensure budgetary provision for conducting capacity building of the CMC/NGO in EMP implementation. The
                           implementing agency will hire a short term environment consultant for four months in a year who will be responsible for conducting
                           environmental screening/assessments during LC selection and preparation of half yearly environmental monitoring report on the
                           implementation status and quality of the EMP which will be shared with Bank. CMC and NGOs will be involved in EMP implementation. The
                           implementing agency will sign a memorandum of understanding with the Department of Public Health Engineering for annual water quality
                           testing of the program-funded drinking water sources for the LCs. Regular Third Party Monitoring will be conducted for ensuring proper
                           implementation of the EMP.

                           ROSCII will have a built-in compliance monitoring system which is expected to generate information on LC venues complying with
                           environmental safeguards such as water supply, sanitation facilities, ventilation and drainage system. ROSCU will use this information to
                           prepare the half yearly progress report on environmental management and will submit to the World Bank for review during the implementation
                           support missions. The World Bank will review the screening report, environmental management plan, monitoring reports on random basis and
                           will carry out field visit to cross-check.

                           The ROSC project has a unique Management Information System (MIS). The environmental mitigation and monitoring information along with
                           the third party monitoring information will be incorporated in existing EMIS.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                            on potentially affected people.
                            DPE (ROSCU) will implement the ROSC II project with support of partner agencies and through mobilization of communities. Community
                           Mobilizers (CMs) from Partner Organizations (POs) would support establishment of LCs and their operations during the first year of LC
                           establishment. On behalf of DPE, a consultant carried out the field visit of the existing ROSC I project sites as part of the EMF preparation. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                           consultant reviewed the existing documents in field, location of learning centers, water supply and sanitation facilities, discussed with all
                           relevant stakeholders and took their opinion how to improve the environmental practices in ROSC II. The EMF will be disclosed by DPE in their
                           website for public comments within 30 days. The disclosure notice will be published in the 2 daily national newspapers (one English and
                           another Bangla). In addition, the World Bank will publish this document in InfoShop.

                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                10-Jul-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                            11-Jul-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                             11-Jul-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                           Directors
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                10-Jul-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                            11-Jul-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                             11-Jul-2012
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                         disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                           Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                 Yes [     ]      No [    ]        NA [    ]


                                                                                                                                                                  Page 3 of 4
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                              If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and approved by    Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?              Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language      Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for   Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?              Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard    Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same        Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Task Team Leader:                    Dilip Parajuli
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:     Name: Sanjay Srivastava (RSA)                                            Date: 16-Jul-2012
                            Sector Manager:                      Name Amit Dar (SM)                                                       Date: 11-Jul-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                                               Page 4 of 4
