                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSC1414

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Oct-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Bangladesh                       Project ID:      P132634
                            Project Name:       Bangladesh Safety Net Systems for the Poorest Project (P132634)
                            Task Team           Iffath Anwar Sharif
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           15-May-2013                      Estimated        18-Jul-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      SASSP                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector:         Other social services (100%)
                            Theme:          Social safety nets (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                              0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                   300.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Total                                                                         300.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The objective of this proposed project is to improve the equity, efficiency, and transparency of key
                           social safety net programs to enable the poorest households to better cope with poverty and
                           vulnerability.
                           To meet its objective the project will focus on thefollowing three results areas:

                           (i) Better equity by focusing on more effective targeting mechanism. A National Household Poverty
                           Registry (NHPR) will be developed for the delivery of transfers made by DMRD’s programs, as well
                           as all other targeted services provided by other Ministries. In the interim all of DMRD’s programs
                           will harmonize their beneficiary identification procedures based on geographical, household and
                           gender level targeting mechanisms.
                         (ii) Increased administrative efficiency of these programs such that program level implementation is
                         simplified and formalized. This will be done by consolidating and rationalizing operational
                         processes; including adequate field level monitoring personnel; developing clear guidelines for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         program implementation and a modern record keeping system based on a common IT platform. The
                         use of ICT will be utilized to simply processes, where applicable such as in the payments and
                         grievance redress mechanisms. These activities will be underpinned by a results-oriented Action
                         Plan for the implementation of DMRD’s programs to guide the management of this process.

                         (iii) Enhanced transparency in the implementation of these programs via the adoption of better
                         accountability measures. Program objectives and rules, particularly payment mechanisms, will be
                         well-publicized. Key stakeholders at the local level such as local government and administration
                         officials will be involved for extensive outreach as well as for facilitating local level implementation.
                         Grievance redress and appeal processes will be included, as well as a framework for strengthening
                         the monitoring and evaluation of the programs, including third party monitoring and robust impact
                         evaluations.
                         C. Project Description
                         The proposed project will take the form of “Results-based? investment loan covering the four
                         thematic areas of (i) improved management; (ii) improved equity; (iii) better administrative capacity,
                         and (iii) increased transparency over a period of four years. In recent years the GoB has been
                         allocating about USD 600 million annually to the key safety net programs – EGPP, TR, FFW, GR
                         and VGF - implemented by the DMRD. The proposed project is expected to support about 15 percent
                         of these expenditures over the course of the project period. Thus the total project cost amounts to a
                         Credit of USD 360 million out which it has been proposed that the International Development
                         Association (IDA) will support USD 300 through a Specific Investment Loan (SIL).

                         Project components: The proposed project would consist of three components with one operating on
                         a results-based financing. The various activities under each of these components amount to
                         approximately US$ 360 million over four years (FY 14 – FY 18), which would represent about 15
Public Disclosure Copy




                         percent of the total GoB allocations of about USD 600 million for these programs annually or USD
                         2,400 million over four years. The tentative components of the Project follow the design of EGPP in
                         that there are one main program component and two distinct TA components. These are described
                         briefly in the following:

                         Component 1: Main Program Component (total estimated cost is US$240 million)
                         Under this component the project will finance a portion of the consolidated expenditures of the
                         EGPP (from January 2014 onwards), VGF, GR, TR and FFW from FY14 to FY 18 to support the
                         innovations to these programs though the four results areas based on DLIs. IDA support will be in
                         the form of financing transfer costs (wages, cash and food). This component would support the
                         reforms to these programs through the four results areas. The IDA Credit would flow into the
                         Consolidated Fund and then onward to the DMRD. Thus this component can be viewed as a
                         component that reimburses the GoB for results.

                         Component 2: Operational Support Component – DMRD (total estimated cost is US$50 million)
                         While DMRD implements some of the largest safety net programs, it has a very limited budget with
                         which to implement and monitor these programs. The objective of this component is to strengthen
                         DMRD’s institutional capacity, and thus can be seen as a financing instrument for the inputs needed
                         to achieve the results under component 1. Activities financed under this component include the
                         development of an action plan for the reform of these programs; improve program monitoring via the
                         training of existing staff as well as hiring additional staff where applicable; strengthen program
                         management with the help of a common program MIS, and enhance institutional and technical
                         capacity DMRD’s local offices to implement all key activities of the respective program cycles,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         including the selection and verification of eligible beneficiaries, registration of selected beneficiaries,
                         managing payments, implementing a grievance system, and using an MIS system that supports all
                         these programs.

                         The component will also support the establishment of a Grievance Redress System (GRS) featuring a
                         publicly accessible grievance database to resolve and track complaints including targeting errors,
                         payment irregularities, fraud and corruption. The component will also help develop an MIS that will
                         cover all the steps in the operations of the four programs – TR, GR, FFW and VGF – and ensure that
                         the MIS developed under EGPP is also linked to this common DMRD program MIS. The GRS will
                         be one of the modules of this MIS.

                         This component will further strengthen the monitoring and evaluation of the DMRD programs with a
                         view to building DMRD’s capacity in these areas as a step towards a more systematic system of
                         evidence-based policy and planning. While DMRD does focus on evidenced based policy making,
                         currently these activities are conducted on an ad hoc basis and are poorly funded. IDA resources will
                         be used to assist in the design and implementation of (i) the regular monitoring of the programs on
                         among other things the DLIs such that the means of DLI verification are embedded in the M&E
                         design; (ii) a spot check methodology to systematically monitor DMRD programs using third parties
                         that will produce the information required for informed and timely policy decisions and adjustments
                         to program design (as has been the experience with EGPP); (iii) design a methodologically rigorous
                         impact evaluation of the programs on the basis of which GoB and the public would have evidence of
                         program impact.

                         An un-allocated amount of USD 5 million is proposed for meeting any price contingencies during the
                         implementation of this component. During the implementation of EGPP, a key challenge with the
                         Operation Support Component was the price fluctuations in goods and services that were scheduled
Public Disclosure Copy




                         to procured using IDA resources.

                         Component 3: Operational Support Component – BBS (total estimated cost is US$70 million)
                         The objective of this component is to support the Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics in the development
                         of the National Household Poverty Registry that will be used to better target the poor in DMRD
                         programs as well as other key safety net programs implemented by other Government agencies. The
                         NHPR consists of a set of uniform, objective and transparent criteria to select the poor, thereby
                         reducing the overall costs and errors associated with targeting. This Registry will also help in the
                         impro ving the coordination, efficiency and effectiveness of all PSSNs. The rules, procedures, and
                         methodology are currently being defined. The steps involved in this process include the development
                         of the software for questionnaire design, data scanning, and database management; public
                         information campaign; training for enumerators; data collection using a Proxy Means Test (PMT)
                         methodology ; quality control of the data collected; and monitoring of the overall process. This
                         component will finance the following: (i) household assessment of about 37 million households; (ii)
                         development and implementation of a MIS for the NHPR which will support all the steps in the
                         targeting mechanism including data collection, quality control procedures, and validation routines,
                         processing, estimation of the PMT, and selection of poor households; and (iii) spot checks to assess
                         the implementation of the targeting mechanism by third parties. The component will also strengthen
                         the capacity of BBS staff to maintain this database.
                           With the help of Bank TA resources, and in coordination with DMRD, BBS is currently planning the
                           implementation of a test phase for developing this standardized targeting mechanism in selected
                           Upazilas of Manikganj and Tangail districts. This test phase will cover about 137,000 households in
Public Disclosure Copy




                           both rural and urban areas. The data collection (including GPS coordinates) is expected to begin in
                           November 2012. The database developed during the test phase will be used to assess the targeting
                           performance on all DMRD programs operating in these two areas. Spots checks and process
                           evaluation studies are planned to help inform the national roll out of these processes. An estimated
                           cost for this test phase is about USD 700,000, out of which BBS will be contributing USD 315,000.
                           The remaining balance is expected to be financed under DFID’s Policy Fund. A response to a
                           pending application is expected from DFID by early October 2012.

                           Given that using the NHPR to targeting beneficiaries of DMRD programs constitutes one of the
                           DLIs, component 3 can also be seen as a financing instrument for the inputs needed to achieve the
                           results under component 1. An un-allocated amount of USD 5 million is proposed for meeting any
                           price contingencies during the implementation of this component.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the            safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           In terms of coverage, SMARt will be implemented nationwide. However the exact locations of the
                           sub-projects to be implemented under the project cannot be determined at this stage.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Ministry of Food & Disaster Management has experience implementing the Bank funded EGPP
                           project. An Environmental Management Framework (EMF) and Social Management Framework
                           (SMF) have been prepared for EGPP. The schemes under the current project where Bank safeguards
                           policies will be most relevant are similar or identical in nature and scale to those implemented under
                           EGPP. The Bank has held several training sessions with EGPP staff and field level officers.
                           Therefore there is reasonable understanding of Bank safeguards polices at the Ministry. The Ministry
                           needs further capacity development and requires dedicated staff/consultant to oversee the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           environmental and social issues of the proposed project. The Bank will undertake training new staff
                           recruited for the project. Although Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics (BBS) does not have experience
                           on Bank safeguard policies, Component 3 will not trigger any safeguard policies due to its technical
                           assistance nature.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi (SASDI)
                           Sabah Moyeen (SASDS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              Environmental Category: B Partial Assessment
                           BP 4.01
                                                                                The project will be implemented nationwide,
                                                                                however locations of the sub-projects are not
                                                                                known at this stage. Detailed design of the sub-
                                                                                projects that will be required for carrying out
                                                                                site-specific environmental and social
                                                                                screening/assessment is likely to be available
                                                                 during project implementation only, but the
                                                                 system to support the process of environmental
                                                                 review and clearance will be defined through an
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 Environmental Management Framework (EMF)
                                                                 and Social Management Framework (SMF).

                                                                 Some of the DMRD programs (EGPP, TR and
                                                                 FFW) under Component 1 involve earthworks
                                                                 including road construction, landfill for
                                                                 community institutions, etc. and the nature of
                                                                 these the sub-projects may lead to negative
                                                                 environmental impact. Sub-projects may also
                                                                 have adverse environmental impacts if they are
                                                                 not properly designed or executed, or mitigation
                                                                 measures are not implemented. However, most
                                                                 of the environmental impacts are expected to be
                                                                 insignificant, localized and reversible.
                                                                 Components 2 and 3 are technical assistance
                                                                 support and no environmental and social issues
                                                                 are expected.

                                                                 The Environmental Management Framework
                                                                 (EMF) and Social Management Framework
                                                                 (SMF) prepared for EGPP will be reviewed and
                                                                 revised for the proposed project based on a field
                                                                 assessment of the EGPP. The framework will
                                                                 help to identify and assess the potential impacts
                                                                 under different sub-projects of the proposed
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 project. Each type of sub-project component
                                                                 will be screened for potential environmental and
                                                                 social impacts, and if required, further
                                                                 assessment will be carried out. Considering the
                                                                 number of small scale sub-projects, the
                                                                 implementing agency will involve independent
                                                                 consultant (third party) to monitor the
                                                                 environmental screening and implementation of
                                                                 environmental mitigation plan at least the 5% of
                                                                 the sub-projects.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   The project will be implemented nationwide.
                                                                 Since the location of the sub-projects is not
                                                                                                                                 known at this stage, there is a possibility of
                                                                                                                                 triggering OP 4.10 should the sub-projects be
                                                                                                                                 implemented in tribal areas or areas where
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 indigenous peoples are present. An Indigenous
                                                                                                                                 Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) will be
                                                                                                                                 included as part of the Environmental and
                                                                                                                                 Social Management Framework (ESMF). The
                                                                                                                                 IPPF will guide the preparation of Indigenous
                                                                                                                                 Peoples Plans for sub-projects as and when
                                                                                                                                 required.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           The Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)
                                 4.12                                                                                            Policy may be triggered by the proposed project
                                                                                                                                 because activities under the expected sub-
                                                                                                                                 projects (road- building and repair, building new
                                                                                                                                 embankments and/or repairing existing ones
                                                                                                                                 etc.) may require land acquisition resulting in
                                                                                                                                 temporary or permanent loss of land, crops, and
                                                                                                                                 other means of income generation. As the
                                                                                                                                 project will be implemented nation-wide, but
                                                                                                                                 the exact location of the sub-project sites are not
                                                                                                                                 known at this stage, project implementer(s) will
                                                                                                                                 need to prepare a Land Acquisition and
                                                                                                                                 Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) as part
                                                                                                                                 of the ESMF, laying out the key principles of
                                                                                                                                 the World Bank’s OP 4.12 and a strategy to
                                                                                                                                 fulfill the policy’s requirements that is mutually
                                                                                                                                 agreed upon. Specific Social Impact
                                                                                                                                 Assessments (SIA) and Resettlement Action
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 Plans (RAP), if needed, will have to be prepared
                                                                                                                                 during project implementation for each
                                                                                                                                 component where the specific sub-project site
                                                                                                                                 can be identified.

                                                                                                                                 The approved and disclosed ESMF prepared for
                                                                                                                                 the EGPP can be used as a basis for preparing
                                                                                                                                 one for the current project, given the similarity
                                                                                                                                 in the nature and scope of physical activities
                                                                                                                                 (schemes) under sub-projects. The screening
                                                                                                                                 formats can also be updated and used.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                           A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Mar-2013
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Public Disclosure Copy




                             The Environmental Management Framework (EMF) and Social Management Framework (SMF)
                             prepared for EGPP will be reviewed and revised for the proposed project based on a field
                             assessment of the EGPP. Time frame is estimated between 1-2 months.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:     Name: Iffath Anwar Sharif

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Sanjay Srivastava (RSA)                      Date: 24-Oct-2012
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Pablo Gottret (SM)                           Date: 21-Oct-2012
Public Disclosure Copy
