                                                                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                               APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA84
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Jul-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        Haiti                                     Project ID:                       P127203
                              Project Name:                   Rebuilding Energy Infrastructure and Access (P127203)
                              Task Team Leader:               Karen Bazex
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 16-Jul-2012                                     Estimated Board Date:             25-Sep-2012
                              Managing Unit:                  LCSEG                                     Lending Instrument:               Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                         General energy sector (100%)
                              Theme:                          Infrastructure services for private sector development (60%), Rural services and infrastructure (35%), Other public
                                                              sector governanc e (5%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                          Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                             0.00
                                   IDA Grant                                                                                                                     90.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                         90.00
                              Environmental Category:         B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              The objectives of the proposed Project are to (a) strengthen energy policy and planning capacity, (b) to improve the sustainability and resilience of
                              the electricity sector and to restore and expand access to reliable electricity services, and (c) provide financial assistance to the electricity sector in
                              case of an emergency.

                              3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                              The proposed Project represents a key element of a new and significantly expanded program of engagement that involves multi-donor actions
                              through investment financing, budgetary support, capacity building and dialogue. The Project consists of three main components, scheduled to be
                              completed within a 5-year period (September 2012- September 2017).

                              Component 1: Sector Institutional Strengthening and Energy Access (IDA USD12.5 million). Under the responsibility of the MTPTEC , this
                              component would finance: (i) the provision of technical assistance and the purchase of office equipment and operating expenses to strengthen
                              Government’s oversight capacity in the sector and improve governance; and (ii) the purchase and installation of equipment, services and related
                              expenses to establish offgrid electricity delivery models.

                              1.1. Institutional Strengthening and Governance Enhancement (IDA USD4.6 million). This sub-component would help strengthen institutional
                              framework, enhance governance – including readiness for post disaster response - and transparency and strengthen Project implementation
                              capacity.

                              1.1.1      Government: This activity would help develop and staff the current Energy Cell , through the hiring of external experts to support the
                              Cell on specific technical issues (such as the development of regulatory framework, the preparation of procurement packages for new PPAs etc.),
                              the provision of training to the Cell and the organization of workshops on technical and safeguards issues. The component aims to strengthen
                              capacity for the Cell to be able to perform key sector oversight functions, in particular: (i) develop and implement the energy policy; (ii) establish a
                              planning framework and action plan; (iii) develop and enforce a new sector regulatory and service delivery framework supporting private
                              investments in the sector, contributing to economic development; (iv) provide technical advice, establish and ensure respect of standards; and (v)
                              monitor the implementation of activities carried out by the public and private sectors.

                              1.1.2. Consumers and Civil Society. This sub-component would strengthen understanding of and dialogue on energy sector issues, among
                              consumers, energy service providers, and the general public, and thereby would enhance transparency in the sector. Through this activity, the
                              Energy Cell would launch inter alia outreach activities and public dissemination campaigns to familiarize consumers and civil society with the
                              Government’s energy program and to increase awareness and participation on energy sector issues.

                              1.1.3. Project Management. This sub-component would finance fiduciary consultants and training to support the management of the Project. Two
                              additional fiduciary staff would be included in the existing PREPSEL’s Project Coordination Unit (PCU) to provide the necessary support to Project
                              activities.

                              1.2. Offgrid electricity access (IDA USD7.9 million). Given the extremely low access rates in the province, and the fact that EDH does not have the

                                                                                                                                                                             Page 1 of 6
                         capacity, or the financial resources to expand its services outside of urban and semi urban areas close to the grid, it is necessary to develop
                         sustainable offgrid mechanisms to provide electricity to unserved areas of the country. This subcomponent would finance consultants to define
                         appropriate mechanisms, establish a framework and train the MTPTEC staff for the supervision of the activities to be developed. New electricity
                         connections using off-grid solutions would be financed, including through public solar lighting, solar home systems and/or mini grids and, if
                         needed, solution for rapid responses (solar lanterns, for instance). These activities would be implemented by third parties, such as, for instance,
                         the private sector, NGOs and/or community organizations. The number of Project sites would be limited to ensure a maximum number of
                         beneficiaries. They would be selected taking into account activities carried out under other IDA-financed Projects (ongoing and under preparation)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         as well as other development projects.

                         Component 2: EDH Performance Enhancement and Infrastructure Rehabilitation and Expansion (IDA USD77.5 million). Managed by EDH, this
                         component would finance: (i) the provision of technical assistance and purchase of related equipment and services for EDH to improve its
                         performance; and (ii) the purchase and installation of equipment and services to rehabilitate and expand access to reliable electricity services in
                         Port-au-Prince and in other parts of the country. In addition to increasing access to reliable electricity services, this sub component would
                         contribute to a decrease in EDH very high technical and non-technical losses, an increase in bill collection and an improvement in the quality of the
                         services, and hence support economic and social development.

                         2.1. EDH performance enhancement (IDA USD14.2 million). This sub-component would finance, inter alia: (i) a new management structure for
                         EDH; (ii) consultants and firms to support EDH on specific technical and commercial issues, such as: the commercial and financial experts
                         currently supporting EDH management, engineering firms to prepare feasibility studies for the grid rehabilitation and extension work, and the
                         rehabilitation of the small Drouet hydro electricity plants, and consultants to help EDH improve resilience and readiness for quick response to
                         natural disasters; (iii) miscellaneous investments to allow for the sustainable operation of the new billing system financed under PREPSEL; and (iv)
                         an external financial audit of EDH accounts.

                         2.2. Grid rehabilitation and access expansion (IDA USD63.3 million). This sub component would help improve quality of services to existing EDH
                         customers, and expand access to electricity services in and outside of Port au Prince. The activity would benefit approximately 68,000 existing
                         customers and 22,000 new customers. Sub projects were selected out of a list of priority investments prepared by EDH and TetraTech technical
                         teams, and would complement grid rehabilitation works in Port au Prince financed by USAID and IDB. Selection criteria include: investment
                         priority, economic viability, expected environmental/social impacts and synergies with other Donor-financed investment activities.

                         2.2.1. Systems. This activity would finance the expansion of the remote metering system to large clients of EDH and the extension of the
                         commercial management system to the whole country.

                         2.2.2. Grid rehabilitation and access expansion in Port-au-Prince). This activity would include: (i) the rehabilitation of 4 out of 32 circuits and the
                         metering equipment comprised in these circuits in the metropolitan area; and (ii) new residential connections to EDH’s distribution network through
                         densification and/or grid extension.

                         2.2.3. Grid rehabilitation and access expansion outside of Port-au-Prince. This activity would include: (i) rehabilitation of EDH’s distribution
                         networks and installation of metering equipment in secondary centers (Cap Haitien and Petit/Grand Goave); (ii) rehabilitation of a micro
                         hydroelectric plant (2MW) in Drouet; and (iii) establishment of new connections to EDH’s networks through grid extension and/or densification, in
                         and around secondary centers (including in the Artibonite Valley).

                         Component 3: Emergency response (IDA 0 million). Under the responsibility of the Government energy unit, this component would finance: (a)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         emergency recovery and rehabilitation works; and/or (b) the purchase of emergency lighting equipment (including flood lamps, solar lanterns etc);
                         and (c) technical assistance (including hiring of consultants) to support an emergency response. Funds from the other components would be
                         reallocated to this component in such an eventuality.

                         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         The project geographical scope is Haiti: (a) The institutional and capacity enhancement activities (sub components 1.1 and 2.1) are expected to
                         benefit the country as a whole,                                 (b) grid operation activities (sub component 2.2.1) will be carried out in the capital
                         Port au Prince and its surroundings, (c) grid access expansion and extension investments (sub component 2.2.2) will be carried out in secondary
                         urban centers and rural areas surrounding them, and (d) offgrid electrification activities will be carried out throughout the country, with the specific
                         locations to be determined during Project preparation and implementation.

                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                         Nyaneba E. Nkrumah (LCSEN)
                         Peter F. B. A. Lafere (LCSSO)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                            Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)




                                                                                                                                                                      Page 2 of 6
                         Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01      Yes   In this project, grid rehabilitation and extension, expansion of the power distribution
                                                                        network and grid densification activities could potentially have negative
                                                                        environmental and/or social impacts. Negative environmental impacts may be
                                                                        related to the removal of vegetation and a few trees from the right of way, waste/
                                                                        debris removal and disposal, worker and fire safety, soil removal and erosion,
                                                                        increased levels of dust and noise, oil spill or leakage from machinery or
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        transformers, etc.

                                                                        Social impacts may include land acquisition and minor resettlement. Despite this,
                                                                        the environmental and social impact of the project is expected to be limited, as
                                                                        EDH indicated that one of the defining criteria for the identification of grid
                                                                        extensions and rehabilitations works will be the use of existing rights of ways and
                                                                        public roads. EDH will also work in coordination with urban planning authorities to
                                                                        ensure that social impacts are well assessed and limited.

                                                                         Given that this project is not being prepared under O.P. 8.0 and some work sites
                                                                        will be known only during Project implementation, an ESMF has been completed
                                                                        and will be disclosed prior to appraisal. The ESMF outlines the negative impacts,
                                                                        proposes possible mitigation measures, and outlines a screening mechanism for
                                                                        sub-projects. An EMP was also prepared for the Mirebalais transmission line
                                                                        because this activity was clearly identified at preparation. Other EMPs will also be
                                                                        developed during implementation as precise transmission line sections become
                                                                        more clearly identified. The EMP documents prepared for individual sub projects
                                                                        will describe measures that will be put into place to ensure safe disposal of any
                                                                        potential hazardous materials from the demolition of existing transmission lines,
                                                                        including discarded transformers or other hazardous materials associated with
                                                                        transmission or distribution. While the project does not finance any equipment
                                                                        containing PCBs, it is possible that old PCB containing transformers will have to be
                                                                        removed and discarded. The ESMF and EMP will contain measures to: i) assess
                                                                        the presence of PCB’s prior to the removal of existing electrical equipment (e.g.,
                                                                        transformers and capacitors) , ii) detail measures for safe removal, handling,
                                                                        transport and disposal of these materials consistent with UNEP and World Bank
                                                                        Group guidelines as well as any pertinent national laws, and iii) include capacity-
                                                                        building measures as necessary in regard to environmental management of
                                                                        PCB’s. Any site specific issues, such as project location characteristics, or any
                                                                        unique site specific measure to be taken in order to minimize any negative
                                                                        environmental impact would be prepared as an addendum (e.g., if Emergency
                                                                        Preparedness and Response Plans are necessary). The ESMF and EMP will be
                                                                        disclosed prior to appraisal.

                                                                        The ESMF identified lack of capacity in the MTPTEC and EDH to manage
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        environmental and social safeguards as an important constraint and the Project
                                                                        will provide capacity building support to address this issue, through the
                                                                        organization of workshops and the hiring of a consultant to support MTPTEC and
                                                                        EDH in the implementation of safeguard policies. The ESMF details the type of
                                                                        training and capacity building that EDH and MTPTEC will undergo to ensure that
                                                                        there is adequate monitoring, reporting and supervision. Capacity building will also
                                                                        be provided during Project preparation; in particular, a workshop will be carried out
                                                                        in Port au Prince to introduce MTPTEC and EDH to Bank safeguard policies, with
                                                                        the support of the Bank social and environmental units under trust fund financing.
                                                                        In addition, the consultants who will be hired to help the Government prepare the
                                                                        safeguards documents during preparation will work in collaboration with MTPTC
                                                                        and EDH, providing training as needed.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04              No    The project will not convert or degrade natural habitats as defined under the policy.
                                                                        Although a few trees in the right of way may have to be removed, site visits
                                                                        showed that these trees are few and mostly planted by landowners/users for
                                                                        economic purposes. Compensation structures for any tree or crop loss is detailed
                                                                        in the RPF.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                       No    There is large scale deforestation in Haiti and the project will not intervene in any
                                                                        forested areas. The few trees that may be in the right of way are mainly economic
                                                                        and shade trees planted by land owners and users. Some of these may have to be
                                                                        cut down to allow for poles and transmission lines. As mentioned earlier, the RPF
                                                                        will compensate for these losses and every effort will be made to reduce tree
                                                                        losses. Where trees can be pruned instead of uprooted, this method will be used.
                                                                        This provision will also be elaborated in the contract documents.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09                  No    EDH confirmed that no herbicide or other chemical control measures are used to
                                                                        control vegetarian growth in the transmissions’ Right of Way.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   No    It is expected that the proposed project will not involve any sites with archeological,
                                                                        paleontological, historical, religious or other area of unique natural value as
                                                                        defined under the policy. However, as part of the general EMSF to be developed
                                                                        for the project, chance finds procedures would be included.


                                                                                                                                                   Page 3 of 6
                               Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                  No               There is no indication of the presence of indigenous people as defined under OP
                                                                                               4.100
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12            Yes              The grid and power transmission extension and rehabilitation works may cause
                                                                                               displacement of farms, and/or people, although this is expected to be minor. A
                                                                                               Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), laying out the applicable policies and
                                                                                               guidelines has been prepared and will be disclosed in the infoshop prior to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               appraisal. The RPF includes: (i) principles, review of policy regulations; (ii)
                                                                                               institutional arrangements, roles and competences; (iii) consultations disclosure
                                                                                               and grievance redress mechanisms; (iv) monitoring and reporting process.
                                                                                               Resettlement Action Plans will be prepared to assess potential impacts and
                                                                                               disclosed when needed. All relevant safeguards policies and guidelines will
                                                                                               continue to be discussed with the Ministry of Public Works and EDH (Implementing
                                                                                               Entities) during implementation.
                                                                                               For the connection between Mirebalais and Verettes, an abbreviated resettlement
                                                                                               action plan (RAP) was developed to ensure compensation to the 14 people that
                                                                                               would be affected by the project. This plan, including compensation alternatives,
                                                                                               was consulted with the communities and the beneficiaries themselves.
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                      Yes              The Bank will not finance a new dam. However, it may finance the turbine system
                                                                                               of an existing dam. Doing so will require the dam to perform reliably to garner the
                                                                                               full benefit of the Bank's investment. The safety of dam O.P is triggered since
                                                                                               repairs to the dam would make it fully functional again and because any pre-
                                                                                               existing dam structural problems could render the Bank funded investment futile if
                                                                                               an assessment of the dam is not made. There may also be legacy issues to
                                                                                               address. In this case, the Bank requires that the borrower arrange for one or more
                                                                                               independent dam specialists to (a) inspect and evaluate the safety status of the
                                                                                               existing dam and its performance history; (b) review and evaluate the owner's
                                                                                               operation and maintenance procedures; and (c) provide a written report of findings
                                                                                               and recommendations for any remedial work or safety-related measures
                                                                                               necessary. Much of this will be done under a feasibility study that is financed by
                                                                                               the project. The feasibility study will assess the state of the dam, its history, any
                                                                                               legacy issues (environment and social), the state of the turbine system, cost
                                                                                               required to repair and other technical issues.
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP      No               N/A
                               7.50
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60          No               N/A


                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any potential l arge scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                   Grid rehabilitation and extension has an irreversible impact on the visual landscape, given that these are permanent structures to carry
                                 electricity. Irreversible impacts also include an increase in the electro-magnetic fields in the area, although these are relatively low for normal
                                 lines and well below international standards for EMF exposure. Sites for Power stations, sub-stations and towers, which produce higher EMFs,
                                 will be screened to ensure that stations and towers are sited away from settlements. Potential impacts and environmental management
                                 measures associated with transformers that may have PCB’s will also be considered in the project ESMF including any capacity-building to
                                 ensure human health and safety as well as to mitigate any potential short or long-term environmental impacts consistent with any pertinent
                                 national laws, World Bank group standards, and international conventions.
                               2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                                   An ESMF, EMP, RPF and RAP have been prepared for this project. In this project, grid rehabilitation and extension, expansion of the power
                                 transmission network and grid densification activities could potentially have negative environmental and/or social impacts. Negative
                                 environmental impacts may be related to waste/debris removal and disposal, worker and fire safety, soil removal and erosion, increased levels
                                 of dust and noise, oil spill or leakage from machinery or transformers, and removal of vegetation and trees from the right of way in order to
                                 create clearance for the transmission poles and lines, etc. Social impacts may include land acquisition, minor resettlement, and loss of
                                 economic trees and agricultural products for communities that have farmed in the right of way or in the path of the transmission line. The
                                 safeguard documents outline the process to screen and mitigate these negative impacts as well as the process for compensation. In every
                                 case, there will be an effort for the selected contractor to apply mitigation measures and to minimize losses, particularly the loss of trees and
                                 land, by using existing rights of way and even within these areas, to minimize these impacts. In terms of positive impacts, the transmission
                                 access expansion activities as well as repair to existing stations and lines should help stimulate social and economic development, particularly
                                 in regions where lack of access has hindered economic growth.
                               3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                                   The project examined various sitings for expansion (and repair) of transmission and distribution lines. One alternative included transmission
                                 lines through Port au Prince. The assessment of this option showed that the social costs to this alternative were very high because many
                                 settlements had been built around existing transmission lines and in some cases the transmission line was within the property wall of a
                                 resident. Given the resettlement that would be involved (significant) and other issues (land tenure, etc), this alternative was not supported and
                                 another geographic location was selected.

                                 The subprojects to be financed under the Project are demand-driven and therefore not all investments will be defined before appraisal. The


                                                                                                                                                                         Page 4 of 6
                           screening criteria for sub-projects will include social and environmental dimensions to ensure that sub-project alternatives with high
                           environmental and social (primarily resettlement, but not exclusively) impacts are not financed.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                            and implement the measures described.
                             Consultants, with assistance from the borrower, have prepared an ESMF for the project, an EMP and RAP for a section of the distribution line
                           that is known (Mirabelle) and a RPF for the project. The Project's environmental and social impact is expected to be limited. EDH indicated that
                           one of the defining criteria for the identification of grid extensions and rehabilitations works will be the use of existing rights of ways and public
Public Disclosure Copy




                           roads. In addition, the length of grid extensions lines is not expected to be greater than 90kms. EDH will also work in coordination with urban
                           planning authorities to ensure that environmental and social impacts are well assessed and limited.

                           Although EDH has, with the assistance of IADB, established an environmental and social unit, this unit has no environmental experience and
                           no experience with projects. IADB has offered limited training on safeguards and some members of this team have attended these sessions.
                           However, lack of capacity in the MTPTC and EDH to manage environmental and social safeguards is an important constraint that the project
                           will continue to address. The project will recruit a competent consultant (regionally or internationally if local experience does not exist) and he/
                           she will support MTPTEC and EDH in the implementation of the safeguard policies, while providing some training to the environment and social
                           unit at EDH. In addition, a workshop will be carried out in Port au Prince to introduce MTPTEC and EDH to Bank safeguard policies, with the
                           support of the Bank social and environmental units under trust fund financing. Finally, the consultants who will be hired to help the Government
                           prepare the safeguards documents during preparation will also work in collaboration with MTPTEC and EDH, providing training as needed.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                            on potentially affected people.
                            There has been extensive consultation with stakeholders during the preparation of the ESMF, EMP and RPF. In particular, there were focal
                           groups with potentially affected people including women, youth, representatives of electricity management groups and mayors. A short survey
                           was also implemented to determine how the project site selection impacted local communities. In addition, governmentofficials from the
                           Ministry of Public Works (MTPTEC), Bureau des Mines et de l'Energie, Ministry of the Economy and Finances, EDH, etc were consulted.
                           Documentation and pictures from these meetings as well as the survey used can be found in the project's ESMF. The ESMF, EMP and RPF
                           will be disclosed on MEF and the Bank websites and at in designated public areas in the project locations.

                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                  30-Jul-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                              31-Jul-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                               31-Jul-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                           Directors
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                  30-Jul-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                              31-Jul-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                               31-Jul-2012
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                         disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                           Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                   Yes [     ]       No [    ]        NA [    ]

                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                           If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the           Yes [     ]       No [    ]        NA [    ]
                           plan?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                           Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements been made                    Yes [     ]       No [    ]        NA [    ]
                           for public awareness and training?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                           Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?                   Yes [     ]       No [    ]        NA [    ]

                           Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language           Yes [     ]       No [    ]        NA [    ]
                           that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                           Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for        Yes [     ]       No [    ]        NA [    ]
                           the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                           Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?                   Yes [     ]       No [    ]        NA [    ]


                                                                                                                                                                     Page 5 of 6
                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard   Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same       Yes [   ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. APPROVALS

                            Task Team Leader:                   Karen Bazex
                            Approved By:
                            Sector Manager:                     Name Malcolm Cosgrove-Davies (SM)                                        Date: 27-Jul-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                                              Page 6 of 6
