                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                  Report No.: ISDSC540

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Sep-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Cameroon                         Project ID:       P128534
                            Project Name:       Cameroon Social Safety Nets (P128534)
                            Task Team           Carlo Del Ninno
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           26-Nov-2012                      Estimated         14-Mar-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      AFTSW                            Lending           Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector:             Other social services (60%), Public administration- Other social services (30%),
                                                General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (1 0%)
                            Theme:              Social safety nets (80%), Nutrition and food security (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                              Financing Source                                                              Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                              0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                    50.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Total                                                                          50.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective (PDO) is to build the foundations for an effective safety net
                           system in Cameroon to improve access of poor and vulnerable people to targeted safety nets.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed project will be implemented using a Specific Investment Loan (SIL) for a period of X
                           years starting in FY13. The project is expected to be financed by an IDA credit of US$50.00 million.

                           The proposed operation reflects the main recommendations from the sector work carried out by the
                           government, the Bank, and other development partners. One key recommendation of the analytical
                           work was to establish targeted cash transfers and a public works program as the cornerstones of a
                           broad national social safety net. Laying the foundations for a safety net system would facilitate the
                         possibility of shifting from small-scale ad hoc interventions and universal subsidies to a set of
                         coordinated targeted programs for reducing poverty and making economic growth more equitable.
                         While the project will mainly focus on establishing effective safety net programs in poor rural areas
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of the four northernmost provinces of Cameroon, the inclusion of large urban areas may also be
                         considered. Another key recommendation of the feasibility study was the establishment of a
                         coordinating unit in charge of policy setting and supervision of safety net interventions.

                         The project will achieve the PDO by: i) designing and implementing the main building blocks of an
                         national safety net, such as a cash transfer program, and ii) assist the borrower in establishing
                         mechanisms for coordinating existing safety net programs and improving their poverty targeting. To
                         this end, the project will have 3 components:

                         Component 1: Cash transfer program.
                         This component will support the development and implementation of a cash transfer program to
                         serve as one of the cornerstones of the social safety net. The cash transfers will help poor and
                         vulnerable groups by increasing household income initially for an extended period of 24 months. The
                         targeted groups may include chronic poor and/or food insecure households, households with young
                         children, and young mothers. In addition, providing regular payments may help households invest in
                         human capital or other productive household assets. The imposition of conditionalities is difficult in
                         contexts without universally accessible basic services but simple moral contracts may be used with
                         beneficiary families to encourage investment in health care and nutrition. The component will
                         finance cash transfer to beneficiary households as well as technical assistance and administrative
                         costs for developing and implementing the program. With the technical assistance of the Bank, the
                         government will finance and undertake a pilot cash transfer program in parallel with project
                         preparation. The design of the pilot will be based on the recommendations from the feasibility study
                         which outlined key design parameters for the activities in the proposed project. For instance it
                         recommended a benefit level of FCFA15,000 per month per household and a combination of proxy
                         means and community based targeting. The project will support the scaling up of the cash transfer
                         program taking advantage of the experiences of the pilot.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2: Public works program pilot.
                         This component will develop and pilot a labor intensive public works program (HIMO) aimed to
                         address the seasonal/transitional nature of poverty. The program is meant to complement the cash
                         transfer programs during particular hard times and help vulnerable households cope with shocks
                         especially during the slack agricultural season from February to May, when agricultural activities are
                         reduced. The component will finance small community level projects which create valuable public
                         goods (such as rural road maintenance, reforestation activities, small irrigation systems, hillside
                         terracing, etc.). Details of how the particular sub-projects will be selected will be developed during
                         preparation. Available unskilled local labor will be selected to work on these projects at wage rates
                         equal or less than current wage rates for similar unskilled labor in the same localities. The salaries
                         earned by the workers of the public works will help to smooth household income during this
                         especially difficult season. The program will primarily use the wage level as a method of self-
                         targeting poor households, complemented by other direct methods if necessary. The component will
                         finance wages and as well as inputs, technical assistance, and administrative costs for the pilot.
                         The development and piloting of the public works component will be phased in after the cash transfer
                         program is in place, in order to facilitate its introduction and the coordination between the two
                         programs. The scope of the public works pilot will be determined during preparation. Moreover, the
                         link between the public works and cash transfer programs at geographical and implementation level
                         will be further developed during project preparation.
                         Component 3: Lay the foundations for a coordinated safety net system.
                         This component will assist the borrower in developing mechanisms for coordinating existing safety
Public Disclosure Copy




                         net programs and develop systems that can be used for making existing safety net programs, such as
                         school feeding and nutritional programs, better targeted to the poor and vulnerable. The component
                         will also support the management of the overall project.

                         First, component 3 will include activities to strengthen institutions for coordinating, implementing,
                         and monitoring government social safety net programs. The component would finance technical
                         assistance, capacity building, and inputs geared at building administrative systems for beneficiary
                         identification, targeting and payment, as well as for monitoring and evaluation, coordination, and
                         governance arrangements for a safety net system. The overall policy guidance will be guaranteed by
                         an inter-ministerial steering committee on social protection. One important aspect of the new safety
                         net system will be the capacity to expand to respond to shocks. The expansion can be achieved by: a)
                         adjusting the level of transfer of current beneficiaries; b) expanding the cash transfer program to
                         additional beneficiaries, albeit for shorter period of time; and c) providing additional opportunities to
                         public work activities.

                         Secondly, this component will contribute to financing project management, coordination, and
                         monitoring and evaluation activities related to the first two project components.
                         Given limited capacity, the proposed operation will ensure the most feasible design and
                         implementation requirements by sequencing design, piloting and implementation of the cash transfer
                         and public work programs. Starting with the cash transfer program, in parallel to the project
                         preparation the government will undertake and finance a pilot with the technical support of the Bank.
                         The design of the pilot will be based on the findings from the feasibility study as detailed above. The
                         project will then support the scaled up cash transfer program on the experiences of the pilot. Based
                         on the pace of implementation of the cash transfer program, the current project will support a small
                         pilot of the public works program. A full timeline of how the program design, piloting and
                         implementation will be sequenced and supported during the project preparation and implementation
Public Disclosure Copy




                         phases will be further developed.

                         The implementation of the project will rely, wherever possible, on existing administrative structures.
                         Because of the inter-sectoral nature of safety net programs, it is essential that the coordination and
                         management unit be placed under a strong and influential ministry with a mandate for coordination.
                         This would also ensure adequate short term implementation capacity as well as ensuring a long run
                         institutional home for coordinated social protection programs. Following the recommendation of the
                         feasibility study, the Ministry of Economy, Planning and Regional Development (MINEPAT), with
                         its strong capacity and broad institutional mandate would be the home for project oversight and
                         central management. First, the MINEPAT chair an inter-ministerial steering committee on social
                         protection that will provide overall policy guidance. Second, within the MINEPAT, the Technical
                         Committee for Monitoring (CTS), a technical unit with a long history of coordinating and
                         supervision of programs across ministries, would provide oversight to a project management team
                         that will also manage safety nets in the government. The CTS would also put in place a smaller
                         technical team for piloting the cash transfer program. Project preparation will further develop the
                         institutional arrangements for implementation. For instance, the management unit may delegate the
                         responsibility for implementation of different social safety net programs to relevant agencies or
                         ministries (such as Ministry of Agriculture)

                         Project preparation will focus on the key design features of the program and the main program
                           implementation processes that will include: Identification of potential beneficiaries, targeting,
                           registration, payments, reconciliation, complaint mechanisms. Program processes will rely on strong
                           management and control mechanisms to be put in place.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the            safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project is classified as Category B (Partial Assessment) where there are no major adverse
                           environmental or social impacts anticipated. While the specific locations of the public works small
                           investments (under Component 2) remain unknown, and should be defined during the preparation,
                           there may be potential environmental and social impacts associated with construction of the small
                           works. However, these impacts are likely to be minimal to moderate. Nonetheless, and for that
                           purpose, the Government will prepare, prior to appraisal, the relevant safeguards instruments in
                           accordance with OP4.01 (Environmental Assessment) and OP4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement).
                           OP4.10 (Indigenous Peoples) is also triggered even though it remains uncertain if some of the
                           activities under Components 1 and 2 would affect some Indigenous Peoples (e.g. Pygmies).

                           An ESMF and RPF will be prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed before appraisal. If it is
                           determined that Indigenous Peoples are in the project area, an IPPF will also be prepared, consulted
                           upon, and disclosed before appraisal.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The country has continued to build its capacity on environmental and social safeguards management
                           during implementation of several World Bank financed projects. Globally the capacity of the existing
                           project implementing Unit in Cameroon has improved in safeguardsmanagement. The Ministry of
                           Planning which will be in charge to implement the project is familiar with World Bank safeguards
                           policies. An institutional capacity assessment will be carried out during project preparation.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Maria Concepcion J. Cruz (AFTCS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (AFTN3)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The project will finance small public works,
                           BP 4.01                                              including, rural road maintenance, reforestation
                                                                                activities, small irrigation systems, and hillside
                                                                                terracing. While the environmental and social
                                                                                impacts are expected to be minimal to moderate,
                                                                                an ESMF has been prepared to identify potential
                                                                                impacts and propose mitigation measures for
                                                                                project activities. It also includes a screening
                                                                                mechanism to guide the preparation of
                                                                                environmental and social management plans.
                                                                                ESMPs will be prepared as and when necessary
                                                                                during implementation.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         TBD              The project may effect natural habitats. If so,
                                                                                potential impacts and mitigation measures will
                                                                                be included in the ESMF.
                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                TBD                           The project may involve substantial
                                                                                                                                 reforestation. (TBC before appraisal)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           TBD                           The project may involve the use of pest
                                                                                                                                 management protocols and techniques.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   TBD                           The project may affect physical cultural
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         resources. (TBC before appraisal)
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     Yes                           The project is likely to take place in areas where
                                                                                                                                 Indigenous Peoples are present. If so, an IPPF
                                                                                                                                 will be prepared before appraisal.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           The project is unlikely to involve land
                                 4.12                                                                                            acquisition/involuntary resettlement and/or
                                                                                                                                 possible restrictions of access to resources and
                                                                                                                                 livelihoods. However, an RPF is being prepared
                                                                                                                                 that will guide the management of such
                                                                                                                                 situations should they arise during project
                                                                                                                                 implementation. RAPs/ARAPs and/or Process
                                                                                                                                 Frameworks will be prepared as and when
                                                                                                                                 necessary during implementation.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project does not involve dams.

                                 Projects on International                                         TBD                           The project may involve international aquifers
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            or waterways. If so, a riparian notification will
                                                                                                                                 be prepared.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project does not take place in disputed
                                 7.60                                                                                            areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
Public Disclosure Copy




                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Sep-2012
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      An ESMF and RPF will be prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed before appraisal. Once it is
                                      confirmed that Indigenous Peoples are in the project area, an IPPF will also be prepared, consulted
                                      upon, and disclosed before appraisal.

                                      Terms of reference for consultants in charge of safeguard-related studies will be completed in May
                                      15, 2012 and consultants hired by June 30, 2012.
                                      Relevant environmental and social framework instruments will be completed by September 30,
                                      2012.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Carlo Del Ninno

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                                          Date: 29-Sep-2012
                                 Coordinator:


                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Sector Manager:   Name: Lynne D. Sherburne-Benz (SM)   Date: 14-Sep-2012
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy
