                                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                  CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                          Report No.: ISDSC3329

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed:
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:                                        Project ID:
                            Project Name:
                            Task Team
                            Leader:
                            Estimated                                       Estimated
                            Appraisal Date:                                 Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:                                  Lending
                                                                            Instrument:

                            Sector(s):
                            Theme(s):
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     22.88                 Total Bank Financing:     10.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                            Financing Gap:             0.00
                              Financing Source                                                    Amount
                              Borrower                                                              0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                10.00
                              Free-standing TFs for ECA SD Sector Unit                             10.00
                              Global Environment Facility - Cofinancing Trust Funds                 2.88
                              Total                                                                22.88
                            Environmental
                            Category:
                            Is this a
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives


                           C. Project Description
                          ESP will build on and expand the success of the Albania NRDP. Under the NRDP, CFPMPs were
                         prepared (or updated) in 251 communes covering 775,511 ha of forest and pasture. Thirty communes
                         had integrated CMCPs (covering 85,000 ha) approved and under implementation. Additionally
Public Disclosure Copy




                         investments to sequester carbon were implemented in some 4,774 ha of degraded forest or bare-land
                         and sequestered 63,759 tons of CO2, between 2004-2010. While by 2018, an additional 140,000 tons
                         of carbon will be sequestered. It is estimated that NRDP supported interventions have reduced
                         erosion by 220,000 tons by project closure.

                         Review of the NRDP implementation has identified the following key lessons:
                         1.       Monitoring and Evaluation systems should be simple and focused. Natural resource
                         management projects are difficult to monitor and, to be effective any system needs to be as simple
                         and easily used by non-IT specialists as possible;
                         2.       GIS mapping for management plans is essential. Standardized digital mapping is essential
                         for the preparation of resource management plans. This is doubly important in Albania, where the
                         land registration office requires detailed maps for the registration process; and,
                         3.       Clarity of user rights is a pre-requisite for sustainability.

                         Although the progress under the NRDP was good, and the approaches of communal forest and
                         pasture management and also micro-catchment management have proved technically sound, there is
                         now the need to scale up and replicate the micro-catchment approach, but more importantly to ensure
                         financial sustainability of all the interventions through developing financial and business planning
                         capacity and providing access to new funding lines through both competitive grants and payments for
                         environmental services. The management plans prepared under the NRDP are for ten years and
                         require continued support to be implemented. Despite the success of the NRDP, there are still
                         significant areas of erosion, degradation and unsustainable land use practices. Without continued
                         support in the short to medium term, it is highly likely that many of the gains in improved
                         management of communal, rural natural resources would be reversed, due to the uncertain financial
                         sustainability for the communities and rural population. The ESP will identify means to secure
Public Disclosure Copy




                         funding for these essential operations in perpetuity (through acknowledging the land use rights and
                         tenure, and sharing the benefits of the sustainable land uses, through payments for environmental
                         services - e.g. sequestered carbon and damage avoided through reduced erosion, and precursors to
                         EU funding for Natura 2000 and agri-environment measures of the rural development program and
                         the LEADER approach, potentially from the Instrument of Pre-Accession and Rural Development
                         (IPARD)). (LEADER is a French acronym which stands for Links between actions of Rural
                         Development, and was designed as a separate axis of the EU Rural Development Program, aimed at
                         mobilizing and delivering rural development in rural communities through encouraging local and
                         innovative responses to rural development rather than through a fixed set of measures and has proven
                         to be an effective mechanism in driving local development).

                         Under the NRDP, support was given to build the capacity of forest user associations through
                         establishing a forest extension service within the District Forest Service (DFS). This training of both
                         the extension service (so their own staff can undertake their tasks but also as trainers of trainers), and
                         forest users and resource users is however incomplete, with much of the current training
                         requirements necessarily being undertaken by NGOs/companies. Additionally, the user associations
                         at present have had no experience of preparing business plans/competitive grant applications. ARDA
                         has, as yet, not developed the procedures for applying agri-environment measures, and staff will
                         require capacity building to be able to process these applications.
                         As noted above, one of the key lessons from the NRDP was that it is necessary to provide secure user
                         rights for the traditional users of the forest resources. The transfer of forest ownership to the
                         communes is complete in terms of the actual forest on the ground. But several communes are asking
Public Disclosure Copy




                         for more forest and pasture lands under their ownership thus re-enteri ng again in the official process
                         of approval of these additional areas. What has already been transferred is to all intents and purposes
                         irrevocable. However the registration of the transferred property with the Immovable Property
                         Registration Office (IPRO) i songoing. This is not a simple task as there are problems with
                         agreement of boundaries, overlapping and conflicting designated land uses, and the need for maps of
                         different scales and levels of information. It is anticipated that local governments will enter into a
                         long term agreement with the relevant user associations, where the rights to use and manage the
                         resources in accordance with an approved management plan are leased to the user associations.

                         The last forest inventory was completed in 2004. Since then there have been considerable changes
                         and there is a need to monitor land use change, forest growth, mortality and removals. At the same t
                         ime there is a requirement to report on both the forest condition and on carbon stocks internationally.
                         At the national level there is a need to establish effective monitoring systems for forest pasture and
                         water catchments.

                         NRDP was funded by an IDA credit (closed on June 30, 2011), a Swedish Trust Fund (closed on
                         May 1, 2011), and GEF Grant (closed on November 30, 2011). There is a fo llow on Swedish funded
                         hybrid Trust Fund of US$ 2.8 million Recipient Executed due to close on December 31, 2013) and
                         US$ 200,000 Bank Executed which helps the Government and the Bank prepare the ESP and also
                         scale up some activities supported under NRDP. Moreover, another grant supported by the Program
                         on Forests (PROFOR) on Innovative Financing for Sustainable Management in South west Balkans,
                         is under implementation (due to close on October 30, 2013) to undertake fundamental research into
                         the effects of different land uses on the sediment runoff, their impact on downstream water
                         infrastructure and to propose mechanisms for payments to land owners/managers to implement
                         management practices to reduce erosion.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The ESP will have three main components:
                         1.     Improved management planning and implementation in communal forest and pasture and
                         micro-catchments (through a competitive grants program);
                         2.     Payment for Environmental Services;
                         3.     Institutional and Implementation Support and Monitoring

                         ESP will build on and expand the success of the Albania NRDP. Under the NRDP, CFPMPs were
                         prepared (or updated) in some 240 communes covering 775,511 ha of forest and pasture. Thirty
                         communes had integrated CMCPs (covering 85,000 ha) approved and under implementation.
                         Additionally investments to sequester carbon were implemented in some 4,774 ha of degraded forest
                         or bare-land and sequestered 63,759 tons of CO2, between 2004-2010. While by 2018, an additional
                         140,000 tons of carbon will be sequestered. It is estimated that NRDP supported interventions have
                         reduced erosion by 220,000 tons by project closure.

                          Component 1: Improved management planning and implementation in communal forest and pasture
                         and micro-catchments, through the competitive grants program

                         This component will include participatory preparation and implementation of existing and new
                         CFPMPs and CMCPs in the areas transferred to communal ownership but not yet covered by
                         management plans, continued implementation of the current CFPMPs supported under NRDP, and
                         renewing the plans which expire during the project life span.

                         Most of the forests transferred to communes’ ownership were highly degraded and because the forest
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will take many years to mature, it will be some time before there are significant returns to the Forest
                         and Pasture Users ‘Associations (FPUAs) from wood products. Further investments are required to
                         continue plan implementation and to secure ongoing communal support. Although the communes
                         supported by the NRDP now understand the principles of sustainable forest management they lack
                         resources to continue implementation.

                         Types of activities to be implemented by the proposed projects would include: remedial forest
                         operations (e.g. coppicing, cleaning, re-spacing, enrichment planting, selective silvicultural
                         thinning); construction of anti-erosion measures such as check dams, gully rehabilitation, repair of
                         culverts and drains; and reduction of grazing pressure in pasture lands through construction of
                         watering points to allow use of alternative currently under-utilized pasture areas, planting of fodder
                         crops, artificial insemination etc. At the same time investments could be made into processing and
                         sale of the sustainable production of wood products such as poles, firewood, and non wood products
                         such as nuts, medicinal herbs, mushrooms, honey etc. It is important that the user associations
                         develop the capacity to add value to the production chain, i.e. to improve both the marketing of the
                         sustainable production but also where possible primary processing (e.g. honey, fruits, nuts, charcoal
                         etc. in the short term and wood and timber in the longer term). The implementation of CFPM plans
                         will also have carbon sequestration benefits, which are expected to be attractive to financing from the
                         private corporate sector, based on the experience and methodology developed under the CDM carbon
                         sequestration activities implemented under the NRDP.

                         Project funding for investments to implement the CFPMPs and the micro-catchment integrated
                         resource management plans will be provided through competitive grants, whereby the participants
                         and FPUAs will need to apply competitively for funding. This will entail the preparation of grant
                         applications including simplified business plans, which will demonstrate compliance with the
                         management plans’ objectives and prescriptions but also, and importantly, financial and business
Public Disclosure Copy




                         sustainability. The grants will be managed by ARDA and relevant technical bodies. Support will be
                         provided to the beneficiaries to help them prepare their applications including the simplified business
                         plans and to the relevant bodies managing the grants.

                         These project interventions will: reduce erosion and sediment runoff; increase the amount of carbon
                         held in the forest biomass (climate change mitigation); improve the sustainability o f forest
                         management (including better governance); increase the extent, range and quality of the habitats
                         available for biodiversity; and help address rural poverty in mountainous areas.

                         The project will place more emphasis in involving vulnerable groups, particularly women, in
                         planning and decision-making with respect to preparation and implementation of the CFPMPs and
                         MC plans. This will be achieved through increasing the emphasis of inclusion of women in the
                         setting up and training of user associations (included in component 3), and adding in proactive
                         selection criteria to favor women and vulnerable groups for the award of competitive grants. In the
                         medium term (i.e. post the project), it is anticipated that the user associations will be able to continue
                         to receive funding for agri-environment measures under IPARD, LEADER and future Natura 2000
                         schemes.

                         This component will provide institutional and technical support to strengthen the forest and pasture
                         extension service, ARDA and relevant technical bodies. The setting up of the competitive grants
                         scheme which will support the implementation of the activities identified in the CFPMPs and MCPs
                         will require: definition of the rules and procedures for the grants (compatible with the procedures for
                         IPARD), training of ARDA staff, forest extension service staff and training of the user associations
Public Disclosure Copy




                         in terms of business plan and grant application preparation.

                         Component 2: Payment for Environmental Services

                         This component will support the piloting of payment for environmental services schemes. It is
                         unlikely that the financial returns from investments in forest, pasture and watershed management
                         oriented agricultural land-use management will provide sufficient financial incentive for sustained
                         involvement of participating farmers and community members in the short to medium term. If,
                         however, their direct financial return is complemented by payments for the environmental services
                         that the sustainable management of upland resources provides to downstream users (and other
                         beneficiaries with and the up-land land managers), then the long term sustainability and short term
                         financial viability are much more likely. This calls for negotiations between the down-stre am
                         beneficiaries, such as power, irrigation and water companies , and other potential beneficiaries such
                         as the voluntary carbon market. Successful negotiations would require a research-based
                         quantification of the effects of different soil-conservation practices, such as cost/benefits to reduced
                         erosion on the life of dams. Initial research has now commenced as part of the PROFOR supported
                         work. The proposed project will replicate, monitor and verify the estimates of reduced soil erosion
                         and the impacts on downstream beneficiaries over a larger area, and will quantify the effects of
                         different soil-conservation practices as the basis for payments for soil and silt not entering into dams,
                         watercourses and irrigation infrastructure. The project will work with the down-stream users to
                         establish their willingness to pay for these services and to develop appropriate mechanisms. Initial
                         discussions with the local power producer indicate that they are extremely interested in investing in
                         methods to promote the life span and decrease the maintenance costs of their infrastructure whilst at
                         the same time reducing the likelihood of catastrophic failure. Other environmen tal services include
                         enhancement/maintenance of the landscape for touristic purposes.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Various payment methods will be investigated, such as: the direct economic settlement between the
                         up-land and down-stream parties; Government taxation of the beneficiaries and Government
                         provision of payments for improved sustainable upland management practices; and, direct investment
                         by the down-stream beneficiaries in the upper catchment areas (i.e. the power company, water
                         utilities or drainage boards providing communities directly with support to improve sustainability/
                         reduce the erosion of the upper catchments).

                         The environmental services from sequestered carbon under the NRDP, are being paid for through an
                         Emissions Reduction Purchase Agreement (ERPA) – a 'carbon offset contract that underlies the sale
                         and purchase of Certified Emissions Reductions from Clean Development Mechanism (CDM)
                         projects under the Kyoto Protocol’ – between Albania and the World Bank administered Bio-Carbon
                         Fund. The conditions for such formal carbon credit payments are constrained by CDM regulations;
                         for example carbon benefits could not be counted in land formally defined as forest after 1990, even
                         if the forest was severely degraded and improved forest management would lead to increased
                         biomass production. The ESP will investigate additional and alternative approaches to be made with
                         the informal (i.e. voluntary) carbon markets. It is envisaged that there could be an interest by the
                         European corporate private sector to buy Carbon Credits from Albania given the innovative poverty
                         alleviation, rural development approach already tested under the NRDP. The initial quantification of
                         sequestered carbon could be based on measured and validated experience of carbon sequestration
                         from the NRDP pilot activity in that the monitoring system for the Voluntary Carbon trading is likely
                         to be similar to that of the ERPA agreement. However, potentially all the forest management
                         activities under both the NRDP and ESP, have and will lead to increased carbon sequestration.
                         Additionally, improved and sustainable agricultural practices, i.e. establishment of orchards and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         vineyards in comparison to arable agriculture can also lead to reduction in emissions and
                         sequestration of carbon. Payments for these additional benefits will be further investigated.

                         In the design of this component, the sustainability of the payments for environmental services will be
                         taken into account. It is important that the services provided, (which are provided as a continuous
                         stream of benefits), are not limited to one off or time bound payments. Efforts will therefore be made
                         ensure the continuity of these payments.

                         Component 3: Institutional and Implementation Support and Monitoring

                         This component will provide institutional and technical support to strengthen the forest and pasture
                         extension service, ARDA and relevant technical bodies; to implement the new national forest
                         inventory, to establish the forestry management information system, and to strengthen the capacities
                         of the FPUAs and in the micro-catchment areas. This component will continue to support the
                         institutional change process already commenced during the NRDP, and will support the setting up of
                         transparent systems to enhance governance.

                         The transfer of f orests to the communes needs an effective Forest and Pasture Extension Service
                         and a functioning control system; thus continued support for capacity building through training of the
                         extension service and of the forestry staff of Communes is needed.

                         The ESP will also support the setting up prototype Local Action Groups (LAGs) along the lines of
                         the EU LEADER program, but specially direc ted to FPUAs for local capacity building and for
                         grants to members of FPUAs and micro-catchment groups to projects with positive effects on the
                         livelihood and environmental development in Communes included in the program (for
                         implementation of investments under component 1).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component will also provide implementation support to the implementing agencies and will
                         include: (a) provision of technical assistance, training, office equipment and vehicles, auditing, and
                         incremental operating costs in support of project management; (b) strengthening procurement and
                         financial management capacity at all levels; and (c) preparation and implementation of a
                         communications strategy to accompany the grant and piloting of establishment of Payment for
                         Environmental Services (PES) mecha nism. Project implementation will be mainstreamed into the
                         regular functions of the implementing Ministries.

                         The project will also support the establishment of a performance based Management Information
                         System (MIS) and arrange for data collection and reporting on key performance output and impact
                         indicators, through baseline surveys, participatory assessments and mid-term review and final
                         evaluation.

                         The NRDP significantly increased the awareness of those participating in the project. However, there
                         is a need to increase the outreach of the message of sound and sustainable management of resources.
                         At the same time there is a need to include other civil society organizations (in addition to the user
                         associations and their federal bodies) in the learning and participation process i.e. the association of
                         communes, environmental NGOs, and the general public i.e. schools, municipalities etc. The project
                         will therefore undertake public awareness raising activities including the maintenance and updating
                           of project website where project outputs can be viewed and downloaded. These outputs will be
                           linked to relevant government sites and will be produced in accordance with the donor visibility
                           guidelines.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                            The activities under component 1 will include participatory preparation and implementation of
                           existing and new CFPMPs and CMCPs in the areas transferred to communal ownership but not yet
                           covered by management plans, continued implementation of the current CFPMPs supported under
                           NRDP, and renewing the plans which expire during the project life span. in short, the Project
                           activities will be carried out within local communities, throughout Albania.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                            The Project will build on the implementation of the Natural Resources Development Project that
                           was already implemented in Albania. Nonetheless, one of the key risks identified in the project
                           includes the fact that with a large program reaching many communes, villages, FPUAs and
                           individuals it is cumbersome to implement and requires diligent management of the program
                           resources. Under the proposed approach, it is intended that ARDA will administer the grant program
                           implementation. The project will provide training and the necessary resources to ensure that ARDA
                           and its supporting technical bodies have the necessary capacity. This will also allow for future EU
                           support.

                           In addition, the NRDP has also been subject to annual environmental performance audits, that have
                           assessed the practicality and efficiency of the EMF screening mechanism and has reviewed impacts
                           on the ground in select locations. This practice of annual environmental performance auditing shall
                           continue for this project (grant scheme) as well.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             The grants scheme under component 1 will
                           BP 4.01                                             include targeted activities in the local
                                                                               communes including remedial forest operations,
                                                                               anti-erosion measures, reducing pressure on
                                                                               pasture lands, investments into processing and
                                                                               sale of forest products. The activities, especially
                                                                               the anti-erosion measures, including
                                                                               construction of check dams, gully rehabilitation,
                                                                               repair of culverts and drains will have some
                                                                               environmental impacts associated with them,
                                                                               including generation of dust and noise, waste
                                                                               management, aesthetic appearance of these
                                                                               interventions (fitting into the surroundings and
                                                                               use of naturally present materials). A screening
                                                                               mechanism will be in place through the
                                                             Environmental Management Framework (EMF)
                                                             document, with template Environmental
                                                             Management Plans for select 4-5 activities that
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             have also been the most common during the
                                                             previous, NRD project, in order to adequately
                                                             identify potential environmental impacts and
                                                             provide suitable mitigation measures.
                                                             An EMF has already been in place for the
                                                             previous (Natural Resources Development)
                                                             project and the subsequent SIDA Trust Fund on
                                                             Improved natural Resources management. The
                                                             original EMF will be revised based on practical
                                                             experience from the field and for the duration of
                                                             the project implementation, as defined in the
                                                             annual environmental performance audit reports
                                                             that have been conducted, and applied to this
                                                             Project as well. The Project will anticipate also
                                                             that all future activities, that would be financed
                                                             from the payments for environmental services,
                                                             shall also abide by the World Bank safeguard
                                                             policies.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   Project activities, especially under Component 1
                                                             are envisaged to be carried out in areas which
                                                             may include locations that are under some form
                                                             of protection regime. Special provisions will be
                                                             included in the EMF document to ensure
                                                             environmentally sound interventions are
                                                             implemented and that the impacts on habitats is
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             minimized.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes   Project activities include afforestation as well as
                                                             remedial forest operations (coppicing, cleaning,
                                                             re-spacing, enrichment planting, selective
                                                             silvicultural thinning, etc.) as well as processing
                                                             and sale of the sustainable production of wood
                                                             products, such as poles, firewood and non-
                                                             wooden forest products.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       Yes   Some of the erosion control measures may
                                                             include planting of fruit trees, or other
                                                             agricultural activities which may require use of
                                                             pest-control mechanisms. An Integrated Pest
                                                             Management Plan will be developed as part of
                                                             the EMF document to help promote use of
                                                             biological/environmental pest control
                                                             mechanisms and to help control the use of
                                                             chemical substances.
                                  Physical Cultural Resources OP/ No                                                             There are no anticipated works near protected
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         heritage or monument sites, nor will there be
                                                                                                                                 substantial excavation and earth-moving works.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                   Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                   No

                                  Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP No                                                              The Involuntary Resettlement policy is not
                                 4.12                                                                                            triggered because the project will continue to
                                                                                                                                 support the decentralization of the forests and
                                                                                                                                 pastures from the central government to local
                                                                                                                                 government, development of management plans
                                                                                                                                 and their implementing them. The management
                                                                                                                                 plans will be done in a participatory way
                                                                                                                                 through involvement of the communities as the
                                                                                                                                 traditional users of the pastures and forests. The
                                                                                                                                 project will not finance activities in private
                                                                                                                                 owned forests and pastures and nor there will be
                                                                                                                                 need for any seizure of private land.
                                   Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                       No                            There are no project sites that involves a dam or
                                                                                                                                 that are located downstream of a dam. In cases
                                                                                                                                 of potential irrigation systems, the relationship
                                                                                                                                 and dependency of such systems to a large
                                                                                                                                 reservoir dam or HPP dam will be further
                                                                                                                                 defined.
                                  Projects on International                                        TBD                           Status of this policy will be known pending
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            future discussions with the Client whether or not
                                                                                                                                 small-scale irrigation systems will be included
                                                                                                                                 in the Project, as almost all water bodies in
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 Albania are international waterways or their
                                                                                                                                 tributaries. The discussions will also clarify if
                                                                                                                                 such systems would mostly be rehabilitated or
                                                                                                                                 newly built.
                                  Projects in Disputed Areas OP/                                   No
                                 BP 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS : 16-Sep-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                       The EMF along with the template / sample EMPs will be completed, disclosed and with public
                                      consultations prior to Project Appraisal.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Drite Dade

                                 Approved By:



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Regional Safeguards Name:   Date:
                         Coordinator:
                         Sector Manager:     Name:   Date:
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy
