                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSA3425
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Apr-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 22-Mar-2013, 23-Apr-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Antigua and Barbuda                 Project ID:    P126791
                            Project Name:      Public and Social Sector Transformation Project (PSST) (P126791)
                            Task Team          Gaston Mariano Blanco
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          26-Mar-2013                         Estimated   30-May-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     LCSHS-DPT                           Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         General public administration sector (45%), Other social services (55%)
                            Theme(s):         Administrative and civil service reform (45%), Improving labor markets (20%),
                                              Poverty strategy, analysis and monitoring (12%), Socia l safety nets (23%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      10.00           Total Bank Financing:                    10.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                       Financing Gap:                             0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                       0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                         10.00
                              Total                                                                                         10.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           The objective of the Project is to assist the Borrower in: (i) strengthening its capacity in managing
                           public policies and the public service; (ii) improving the efficiency of social protection spending
                           through an integrated monitoring and targeting system; and (iii) improving the income and
                           employability of the vulnerable population through temporary employment and training programs.


                                                                         Page 1 of 8
                         3. Project Description
                         The five components are closely linked in the sense that Components 1 and 2 will provide technical
                         assistance to strengthen public sector management through creating systems for strategic policy
Public Disclosure Copy




                         management and a single and effectively managed public service. Closely linked to the Component
                         1, Component 3 aims to create conditions for an integrated social protection system through the
                         enhancement of the MOHSTCA’s capacity to design, implement and monitor social policies and
                         interventions. Component 4 will support the implementation of employment programs and services
                         to increase income and employability of vulnerable population. Component 5 covers project
                         management.

                         Component 1. Building effective institutions for strategic management of government policies (US
                         $1.06 million IBRD). The objective of this component is to enhance Government’s capacity to
                         improve the quality of decision-making and aligning policy decisions with GOAB’s strategic
                         planning documents. This will contribute to the NEST objective of better targeting public resources
                         through strengthened budget formulation, monitoring and reporting. Better prioritization and
                         coordination of government policies, as well as an ability to clearly articulate expected results and
                         link public expenditure planning with the policy framework is at the heart of government’s resource
                         management. The Project will support introducing foundations of a strategic policy and resources
                         management through: (i) developing policy analysis and coordination capacity in the Government’s
                         Office of the Cabinet; (ii) introducing enhanced procedures for development in GOAB ministries,
                         coordination, review and approval of policy and legislative proposals; and (iii) developing skills for
                         preparation of policy submissions in line with the evolving policy management framework. This
                         component is linked with Component 3 which also seeks to improve management of policy
                         implementation at the sector level with stronger role of the MOHSTCA in design, coordination and
                         oversight of policy implementation.

                         Component 2. Human Resource Management Modernization (US$2.31 million IBRD). The
                         objective of this Component is to achieve by the end of the Project an integrated public service
Public Disclosure Copy




                         employment regime underpinned by the revised Public Service Act and Regulations, an effective
                         public service management system, a comprehensive public service personnel information system
                         that is aligned with the payroll, effective human resource procedures that support enhanced
                         performance, and optimized staffing across the Government. This component will focus on two
                         related aspects, supported through two subcomponents. Subcomponent 2.1 will help create a single
                         and regularized public service through integration of non-established employees into a single public
                         service. This important reform will include: (i) developing a single public service register;
                         establishing a single public service position structure; (ii) revising the remuneration system to be
                         applied to the single service; (iii) developing and delivery of training program to support the
                         integration; and (iv)conducting a change management program. To make the single service reform
                         sustainable, significant transformation of the public service management should be implemented to
                         address the incentives present in the administration for creating public employment outside the
                         regular public service. Subcomponent 2.2 will support systemic legal and organizational changes in
                         the public service management, including: (i) modernizing central human resource management and
                         oversight function; decentralizing selected appointment-related procedures; (ii) introducing
                         performance evaluation of public servants; and (iii) strengthening human resource management
                         capacity in MDAs. Component 2 will provide consolidated public employment records for the Civil
                         Service Management module, implemented by the Government as part of the Free Balance system
                         upgrade, which would maintain reliable and transparent records of the government workforce for
                         better management of the public service.


                                                                      Page 2 of 8
                         Component 3. Improve the efficiency of social protection spending (US$1.21 million IBRD). The
                         primary objective of this component is to create conditions for an integrated social protection system
Public Disclosure Copy




                         through the enhancement of the MOHSTCA’s capacity to design, implement and monitor social
                         policies and interventions by: (i) creating a unified targeting system and a single registry for
                         beneficiaries; (ii) improving MOHSTCA leading and coordinating capacity. Under (i) the Project
                         will support the Government to launch the National Beneficiaries Management Information System
                         (NBMIS), to create a single beneficiaries database for social protection programs, and a unified
                         targeting mechanism across a wide range of social protection programs . This instrument will
                         improve the efficiency and efficacy of public spending on social protection programs by recertifying
                         existing beneficiaries and identifying eligible new ones using the NBMIS through a census of
                         potential beneficiaries and the development of a PMT targeting instrument. Under (ii) this project
                         will finance technical assistance, surveys, training and materials to enhance MOHSTCA’s capacity to
                         develop effective institutional arrangements for coordination and policy making, foster greater
                         governance and transparency in the social sectors and perform process evaluation of existing
                         program to feedback the policy decision.

                         Component 4. Support ALMPs (US$4.10 million IBRD).The primary objective of this component is
                         to increase the income and employability of low-income unemployed population between the ages of
                         17 to 50 years old affected by economic crisis. The current New Work Experience Program will be
                         gradually replaced by two complementary programs: a Temporary Employment Program (TEP), and
                         a Training Program (TP).The TEP will provide income support to the less experienced, low-income,
                         unemployed through temporary employment plus a life-skills training program, while the TP will
                         provide re-training and competence certification to the more experienced among the low-income
                         unemployed population. This approach will allow the Labor Department to provide employment
                         programs tailored to the employment needs of different groups of the vulnerable populations. The
                         approach will also give the Department flexibility in tailoring employment programs to economic
                         conditions. For example, the TEP can be expanded in times of crisis and contracted during better
                         economic conditions; while in contrast, the TP can be expanded during better economic conditions
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and scaled down in times of crisis. In terms of process, all TEP beneficiaries will have to comply
                         with workfare activities in the form of refurbishment or small new infrastructure, productive
                         activities, maintenance, and community services. The implementation of both programs, financed by
                         the Project, will benefit roughly1000 low-income unemployed people in the first three years of the
                         Project. To improve the efficiency in service delivery, the Project will also support the installation of
                         the One Stop Job Centre in a central location within the capital St. John’s. The Center will be
                         responsible for interviewing job seekers; providing job counseling registration to TP and TEP;
                         providing intermediation services; and making referrals to the competence certification system.
                         Additionally, the Project will support the operation of the certification of competences in the country
                         through the financing of technical assistance for better definition of operational procedures and
                         training of competences assessors. Finally, the Project will support the implementation of a tracking
                         survey for beneficiaries and the control group to assess the placement rate and the income level
                         resulting from the TEP intervention.

                         Component 5. Project Management (US$1.14 million IBRD).This component will support the
                         creation and operation of a Project Management Unit (PMU) under the Ministry of Finance. The
                         Project would provide financing to hire a project coordinator, a financial management specialist, a
                         procurement specialist, an HRM specialist and a communication specialist. Under the Project these
                         staff would receive appropriate technology, training, equipment and other required logistical support



                                                                       Page 3 of 8
                         for their jobs. This component would also finance the required annual financial audits and two
                         process evaluations during project implementation.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis (if known)
                         Antigua and Barbuda - The Project will be implemented country-wide.

                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Jose Vicente Zevallos (LCSSO)
                         Michael J. Darr (LCSEN)

                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes               The planned works and services that the project
                          BP 4.01                                            will finance will focus on relatively small sub-
                                                                             projects of community interest (please see below
                                                                             for examples). An Environmental Management
                                                                             Framework (EMF) was prepared by the GOAB. It
                                                                             provides guidance on classifying and evaluating
                                                                             proposed employment activities, using a typology
                                                                             that also will be part of the OM for sub-project
                                                                             screening, design, approval, implementation, and
                                                                             closing. The EMF describes negative
                                                                             environmental impacts that different types of sub-
                                                                             projects could cause and guides on respective
                                                                             management measures to prevent, mitigate or
                                                                             compensate them.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No                The project will not finance activities that would
                                                                             affect natural habitats as defined in OP 4.04.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No                The project will not finance activities that would
                                                                             affect forests or communities that depend on their
                                                                             services.
                          Pest Management OP 4.09            No                The project will not finance activities that would
                                                                             involve purchase or use of pesticides or other
                                                                             agricultural chemicals.
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No                The project will not finance activities that would
                          BP 4.11                                            affect physical cultural resources as defined in the
                                                                             introduction of OP 4.11. The EMF will be revised
                                                                             to include guidance for appropriate action to be
                                                                             taken in case any chance finds would occur
                                                                             during project implementation.
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No                The project will not finance activities that would
                                                                             affect indigenous people groups.
                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     No                The Borrower shall not carry out any Project
                          4.12                                               activities that would result in Resettlement. The
                                                                             Borrower, through MNSL, shall ensure that: (a)
                                                                             any land to be acquired, as part of Project



                                                                     Page 4 of 8
                                                                                implementation, is acquired on an informed
                                                                                consent for voluntary donation or a willing buyer
                                                                                and willing seller basis, all in a manner
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                acceptable to the Bank, including in accordance
                                                                                with the provisions in theEMF; and (b) prior to
                                                                                such acquisition of land, furnish evidence
                                                                                acceptable to the Bank that the requirements set
                                                                                out in sub-paragraph (a) have been satisfied.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No               The project will not finance any type of dams or
                                                                                activities that would depend on existing dams.
                            Projects on International        No                  The project will not finance activities that would
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                affect international waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  There are no disputed areas within the project
                            7.60                                                area.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The project is classified as Category B given the small-scale, temporary, and reversible impacts
                              that could result from construction sub-projects carried-out primarily with manual labor by up to
                              15 workers.

                             In order to comply with the OP 4.01, an EMF was prepared by the end of February 2013 and
                             disclosed in-country in March 2013. The EMF includes a description of the project’s eligible
                             activities and includes a negative list on those activities that, because of their nature or potential
Public Disclosure Copy




                             impacts, will not be supported as reflected in the safeguards table above. In addition, the EMF
                             describes the relevant legal and institutional framework as well as the institutional arrangements
                             for project implementation and its environmental management. The Environment Division (ED) of
                             the Ministry of Agriculture, Lands, Housing and the Environment (MALHE) will be responsible to
                             manage the environmental issues. The Labour Department Technical Unit (LDTU), responsible of
                             the implementation of the workfare component of the project, will coordinate the participation of
                             the ED during the sub-projects’ cycle. The project will support staffing increases of LDTU, for
                             which TORs will include environmental expertise to ensure effective screening and EMP
                             implementation.

                             The sub-projects’ cycle, in regard to environmental and social management, evolves as follows:
                             1.      Orientation and support to Local Organizations (LOs) (for the project, LOs are NGOs or
                             Statutory Bodies ) by the technical coordinator of the project and a representative of the
                             Environmental Division of the Ministry of Agriculture, Lands, Housing and the Environment for
                             proposal preparation, including environmental and social screening checklist and proposed
                             mitigation measures. At this stage, any potential involuntary resettlement would be reviewed and
                             screened out.
                             2.      Sub-project proposal review and approval includes technical, institutional, environmental
                             and financial viability.
                             3.      Project implementation phase: LDTU will visit each sub-project at least twice during its


                                                                        Page 5 of 8
                           execution. The LDTU, in coordination with the ED, will review the technical aspects of the sub-
                           project and environmental issues through a compliance checklist. Relevant environmental
                           information obtained during the project cycle of sub-projects will be included in the monitoring
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and evaluation system of the project, and would inform the feasibility to implementing the project
                           in other areas of the country.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             The program is not expected to have any potential large scale issues or irreversible impacts as no
                           major works are contemplated. Typical works anticipated will relate to improvements to existing
                           infrastructure on a small scale. Screening processes to evaluate and management measures to
                           implement sub-projects to assure the proper application of safeguard considerations are detailed in
                           the EMF and will be included in the OM as described above. Positive potential impacts can be
                           expected from the presentation and selection of environmental sub-projects aimed at promoting
                           conservation and sustainable use of natural resources and improving environmental conditions of
                           the population.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             To avoid or minimize potential adverse impacts of sub-projects, the chosen strategy is to restrict
                           the scope of proposals to be presented in competitive selection processes. Besides simplifying
                           evaluation, this will also imply diminishing potential negative environmental impacts, since
                           complex-to-evaluate sub-projects have been excluded through the negative list.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             Five basic measures comprise the borrower’s strategy to address the safeguards policies: (a) the
                           preparation of an EMF that will be reviewed before appraisal and revised as needed; (b) providing
                           an oversight and consultation role by the Environmental Division of the Government as chief
                           technical body to manage the environmental issues; (c) the provision of induction courses for
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Local Organizations in charge of sub-projects implementation to train them in the process of sub-
                           project proposal presentation to ensure inclusion of adequate environmental and health and safety
                           measures and/or equipment; (d) training for teams of workers in regard to environmental
                           management and health and safety; and (e) a detailed OM that includes guidelines based on the
                           EMF to be followed during the project cycle.

                          The induction course for LOs will provide a detailed training to present proposals. The induction
                          course will be provided by the technical coordinator of the project and a representative of the
                          Environmental Division. The course will provide an overview of the institutional and legal
                          framework that regulates the activities to be undertaken in the sub-projects as reported in the EMF,
                          which will guide the evaluation of the proposals. In the case of presentation of proposals with
                          potential adverse impacts, they will be highlighted and special attention will be paid to the
                          complementary pieces of information to be attached to the presentation, such as suggested
                          mitigation measures by the implementing institution.

                          The principal aspects taken into account within the EMF are:
                          A.      Sub-projects eligibility criteria: Given the characteristics of the program, with regard to
                          the profile of the beneficiaries and the objectives of contribution to the improvement of their
                          income and employability, the sub-projects should meet the following guidelines:
                          1.      Be of community interest.


                                                                      Page 6 of 8
                           2.       Generate public benefits.
                           3.       Be fully executed in six (6) months.
                           4.       Components and activities should be adequate to ensure assignment of no more than
Public Disclosure Copy




                           fifteen (15) and no less than ten (10) beneficiary workers.
                           5.       Be of low complexity, that is they (i) should not require specialized structural designs; (ii)
                           should not require other specialized studies e.g. seismology, etc.; and (iii) should not require
                           sophisticated mechanisms for implementation, in which beneficiaries cannot participate.
                           6.       Projects whose construction and/or development involves the intensive use of unskilled
                           labor.
                           The sub-project typologies defined and their scope or accepted maximum dimensions are
                           presented in the EMF and OM. This has been done to ensure that only projects with low negative
                           impacts will be supported.
                           B.       Local Legal Framework: In Antigua and Barbuda, the existing legislative framework
                           consists of several pieces of legislation governing various aspects of the environment. Most are
                           intended to address the country’s environmental problems and meet commitments to the Multi-
                           Lateral Environmental Agreements. Institutional arrangements are such that in several key areas of
                           natural resource usage, the legislation is designed to give power to agencies that are the major
                           resource users to regulate themselves. The legislation does not provide any criteria e.g.
                           sustainability or environmental protection, by which the resources should be exploited. The
                           compendium of legislation can be found in Appendix A of the EMF.

                           The EMF was disclosed within the country on March 22, 2013 as well as in InfoShop on March
                           22, 2013, and any revised version of it will be equally disclosed during project implementation as
                           necessary.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The main stakeholders are the non-profit seeking Local Organizations such as NGOs and
                           Statutory Bodies responsible for presenting sub-project proposals to develop community-oriented
Public Disclosure Copy




                           works or services. The LOs in particular will be key stakeholders for which the above mentioned
                           induction courses will be designed for. This will ensure that local conditions, potential nuisances,
                           and other environmental and social impacts will be communicated effectively and considered in
                           sub-project design and environmental management plans. The induction course plus the public
                           availability of the EMF are also mechanisms to make the safeguard policies readily available for
                           stakeholders.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      20-Mar-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   22-Mar-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Antigua and Barbuda                                              22-Mar-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.

                                                                       Page 7 of 8
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Gaston Mariano Blanco
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Janet K. Entwistle (SM)                      Date: 23-Apr-2013




                                                                       Page 8 of 8
