                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC3458

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Jul-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 21-Jul-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          China                            Project ID:      P132621
                            Project Name:     Yunnan Highway Asset Management Project (P132621)
                            Task Team         Xiaoke Zhai
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         20-Mar-2014                      Estimated        17-Sep-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    EASCS                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (75%), Sub-national government
                                              administration (25%)
                            Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (65%), Managing for
                                              development results (25%), Natural disaster management (1 0%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    300.00                    Total Bank Financing:        150.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                               Financing Gap:                 0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                    150.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                       150.00
                              Total                                                                       300.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve Yunnan’s trunk highway asset management
                           capacity and provide a better level of service to trunk highway users.
                           C. Project Description
                           1.     The project is designed to help Yunnan address the sector challenges related to inadequate
                         maintenance, lack of emergency response system, and highway asset management. The project will
                         put in place an improved planning and budgeting process for maintenance, and enhance capacity of
                         the Highway Bureau to execute maintenance programs and respond to emergency in a timely and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         effective manner. The project will include three components:

                         Component A ─ Highway Asset Management Improvement

                         2.     The aim of the component is to modernize the existing highway asset management system,
                         optimize resource allocation strategies and decisions, reduce life-cycles costs of highway assets, and
                         improve user service. There are two sub-components:

                         3.       Sub-Component A1 – Establishing an Integrated Highway Assets Management System. The
                         proposed project will finance the development of an Integrated Highway Assets Management
                         System, which will include different management systems for pavement, bridge, tunnel, traffic
                         monitoring, emergency response, asset accounting, and office automation. The Integrated Highway
                         Asset Management system will allow the Yunnan Highway Bureau to develop a complete inventory
                         of its highway assets and collect condition and usage data. It will also provide the Highway Bureau
                         with an analytical tool for budgeting and decision making and predicting the consequence of funding
                         decisions. This will allow the Highway Bureau, DoT, and provincial leaders and policy makers to
                         objectively decide on maintenance budgeting and resource allocation. The main project activities will
                         include the procurement of software, hardware, installation, integration, initial database setup, and
                         consultant services for system installation, training and operation for the initial period.

                         4.        Sub-Component A2 ─ Supporting data collection for the system operation. The proposed
                         project will finance the procurement of automated data collection equipment, inspection equipment,
                         monitoring equipment, installation works and consultant services. It will establish data collection
                         facilities and mechanisms to systematically collect necessary data for the operation of the asset
                         management system.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component B -- Enhancing Highway Bureau Operational Capacities

                         5.       The aim of the component is to improve the capacity of Yunnan Highway Bureau and its
                         local offices to use effectively the new asset management system and improve their technical and
                         managerial skills in their new role. The project will also provide new equipment and improve the
                         maintenance stations to enhance the work quality and efficiency of the local maintenance bureaus in
                         carrying out recurrent maintenance and emergency response. Three sub-components are proposed as
                         below:

                         6.       Sub-Component B1 ─ Training staff. The aim of the sub-component is to develop a
                         comprehensive training program to update HB’s staff managerial knowledge and technical skills and
                         help them adapt to the new asset management system, learn how to maintain and operate the new
                         equipment, and master innovative maintenance technologies. It will support the preparation of
                         training needs assessment, and implementation of a multi-year Bureau-wide training program.

                         7.      Sub-Component B2 ─ Improving the facilities of Maintenance Stations and Emergency
                         Response Centers and Purchasing Maintenance Equipment. The aim of the sub-component is to
                         procure specialized maintenance equipment, emergency rescue equipment, maintenance machinery
                         and vehicles. It will also finance civil works to rehabilitate and/or build facilities for the local
                         maintenance bureaus that will be responsible for carrying out recurrent maintenance and emergency
                           response in their respective jurisdiction.

                           8.      Sub-Component B3 ─ Promoting cost-effective and innovative maintenance materials and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           technologies. The aim of the sub-component is to promote cost-effective and environmentally
                           friendly maintenance materials and technologies to reduce highway maintenance costs. The new
                           materials and technologies will be piloted during project implementation on selected highway
                           maintenance activities.

                           Component C ─ Strengthening Institutional Capacities

                           9.       The aim of the component is to enhance Yunnan Highway Bureau’s institutional capacities
                           to better manage the assets. It will fund study tours, thematic studies, and technical assistances on
                           highway asset evaluation and accounting as well as highway maintenance manual.

                           10.     Project Cost and Financing. The total cost is about US$300 million, of which IBRD will
                           finance US$150 million.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The Project will be located in Yunnan Province, one of the less-developed provinces in southwestern
                           China. Yunan has made a great effort in highway infrastructure development. However, it is facing
                           several difficulties in highway development and maintenance. The project is designed to improve
                           road asset management in the province, through establishing and strengthening road asset
                           management system and maintenance capacities, including financing building construction,
                           equipment provision and promotion of cost effective maintenance technologies at various road
                           management/maintenance agencies within the province.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Project Management Office (PMO), within the Provincial Highway Bureau, has experience in
Public Disclosure Copy




                           implementing ADB-financed project but is not familiar with the World Bank-financed projects. So
                           capacity strengthening is necessary through training internally and by theBank team on Bank
                           environmental and social safeguard policies. At the same time, the PMO will assign two dedicated
                           staff to coordinate the environmental and social issues during project preparation and
                           implementation. Given the PMO has limited safeguards related professional knowledge and skills,
                           qualified environmental and social consultants will be engaged to provide assistance in the project
                           preparation.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Songling Yao (EASCS)
                           Ning Yang (EASCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?     Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes            Physical activities of the project include
                           BP 4.01                                              rehabilitation and expansion of existing road
                                                                                maintenance stations and emergency response
                                                                                centers, construction of limited number of such
                                                                                facilities, and promotion of cost effective
                                                                maintenance technologies on existing highways.

                                                                Potential environmental impacts are mainly
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                associated with construction activities, such as
                                                                dust and noise, construction wastewater, social
                                                                disturbance. At operational stage, main
                                                                environmental impacts resulted from domestic
                                                                waste management and maintenance material
                                                                processing within these facilities and on roads.

                                                                OP4.01 policy is triggered. Considering the
                                                                nature of the construction activities, and the fact
                                                                that the anticipated impacts are site-specific, and
                                                                limited in scale, it is proposed to assign category
                                                                B to the project. An environmental code of
                                                                practice (ECOP) is suggested as the EA
                                                                instrument for the project. The ECOP will cover
                                                                both construction and operational stage, and
                                                                shall include effective measures to prevent and
                                                                mitigate potential negative impacts.

                                                                During preparation of the ECOP, at least one of
                                                                public consultation and information disclosure
                                                                shall be carried out. The full draft ECOP shall
                                                                be disclosed prior to appraisal.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No   Initial screening through field visit and
                                                                consultation with the client indicated that none
                                                                of the existing maintenance stations or
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                emergency response centers is located within
                                                                ecologically sensitive areas. The client indicated
                                                                new stations/centers will avoid suchsensitive
                                                                areas as well. The ECOP will include clear
                                                                provisions to make sure the project will not
                                                                affect critical natural habitats. The policy is not
                                                                triggered.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No   The project will not involve in any forests. The
                                                                policy is not triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No   The project will not result in procurement or use
                                                                of pesticides. The policy is not triggered.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No   Initial screening through field visit and
                         BP 4.11                                consultation with the client indicated that none
                                                                of the existing maintenance stations or
                                                                emergency response centers is located in the
                                                                vicinity of any physical cultural resources. The
                                                                client indicated new stations/centers will avoid
                                                                such resources as well. The ECOP will include
                                                                                                                                 clear provisions in this regards. The policy is
                                                                                                                                 not triggered.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     Yes                           Yunnan is well known as a multiracial province
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 with 51 ethnic minorities, accounting for one
                                                                                                                                 third of the total provincial population. The
                                                                                                                                 project will be located around the provinces, so
                                                                                                                                 potential impact on ethnic minority may exists
                                                                                                                                 and so an IPPF should be prepared; and further
                                                                                                                                 an IPP would be prepared if specific IP village/
                                                                                                                                 community is identified prior to project
                                                                                                                                 appraisal.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           On the resettlement aspect, a resettlement plan
                                 4.12                                                                                            will be developed to address all the identified
                                                                                                                                 land acquisition prior to project appraisal and a
                                                                                                                                 resettlement policy framework, as an annex to
                                                                                                                                 the RP, will be prepared to cover any impact in
                                                                                                                                 the project implementation, such as change of
                                                                                                                                 project site locations, new proposed project
                                                                                                                                 activities.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project will not involve in any dams. The
                                                                                                                                 policy is not triggered.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The project will not involve in any international
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            waterways. The policy is not triggered.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project will not involve in any disputed
                                 7.60                                                                                            areas. The policy is not triggered.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
Public Disclosure Copy




                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 21-Mar-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      During the preparation mission (tentatively scheduled in September 2013), the first draft EA
                                      report and RP reports prepared by the PMO will be reviewed by the Bank Team. Safeguard-related
                                      studies, which includes an environmental code of practice (ECOP), resettlement plan, resettlement
                                      policy framework IPPF (an IPP would be further prepared if specific IP village/community is
                                      identified), will be completed by March 21, 2014.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Xiaoke Zhai

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name:                                                                                                                      Date:
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Mark R. Lundell (SM)                                                                                                 Date: 21-Jul-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
