                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                   Report No.: ISDSA1273
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Oct-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Jordan                              Project ID:    P127702
                            Project Name:      JO: ODS III - HCFC Phase-out Project (P127702)
                            Task Team          Tracy Hart
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          15-Nov-2012                         Estimated   31-Jan-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     MNSEN                               Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector:            Petrochemicals and fertilizers (90%), Central government administration (10%)
                            Theme:             Environmental policies and institutions (50%), Pollution management and
                                               environmental health (50%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                               Financing Source                                                               Amount
                              Borrower                                                                          0.00
                              Montreal Protocol Investment Fund                                                 3.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Total                                                                             3.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective is to support Jordan in its overall efforts to meet its first Montreal
                           Protocol HCFC phase-out obligations of (i) a freeze of HCFC consumption at baseline levels by
                           2013; and (ii) 10% reduction from the baseline level by 2015 through industry conversions to
                           alternative technology which also result in net climate benefits.
                            3. Project Description
                           The proposed project, consisting of a “sector plan? for HCFC phase-out in air-conditioning
                           manufacturing is to contribute to the estimated 20 ODP tonnes in phase-out needed for Jordan while
                           minimizing the longer-term impact on the climate and ozone layer (i.e. reducing the amount of future
                           equipment requiring HCFC-22 servicing). In addition, the project will reintroduce a standing line of
                           MLF assistance that is dedicated specifically to strengthening the focal point for the Montreal


                                                                         Page 1 of 9
                         Protocol in Jordan: the national ozone unit in the Ministry of Environment (MoE).

                         Thus, given the similar objectives and scope of the proposed project with those under the ongoing
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Jordan ODS II Project (P049706), it is proposed that new project arrangements build upon the
                         existing infrastructure and capacity established in MoE to deliver the required assistance to
                         beneficiaries and stakeholders. In that sense, the proposed project can be considered to be a
                         continuation of the previous one and will consequently include a combination of investment,
                         technical assistance, and policy and regulatory interventions which will be carried out in tandem to
                         assure sustainable HCFC phase-out while enabling Jordan to manage its overall ODS program.

                         Funding from the MLF for sector plans follows a performance-based, programmatic approach. The
                         advantages of this approach are flexibility given to the country to utilize the funding in the most
                         effective manner and to reprogram funding as needs evolve; the inclusion of a regulatory and policy
                         framework and technical assistance to create an enabling environment; long-term funding
                         commitment by donors that allows the government to secure buy-in for phase-out from an otherwise
                         reluctant private sector; and, the guarantee provided to the MLF of continued phase-out through
                         independent verification audits of HCFC import data. Funding is thus released to the World Bank in
                         tranches upon the country’s achievements of agreed consumption targets.

                         Component 1: Investment in HCFC Consumption Reductions (US$1,923,850)

                         Investments will be made in residential AC manufacturers in Jordan and complement the already
                         approved Petra project. This component therefore includes coordination of conversions of six
                         enterprises: one under UNIDO, three under this project, and two, which are not eligible for MLF
                         financing, will convert on their own in compliance with future Government regulatory actions to ban
                         HCFC-based manufacturing. The conversion entails a change in HCFC-22-based technology to, what
                         is considered by industry as currently the only commercially viable alternative technology on the
                         market, HFC-410A. The three project enterprises will receive funding for new manufacturing
                         equipment and technology and for operating costs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2: Technical Assistance (TA) Activities, Policies and AC Sector Plan Management (US
                         $417,300)

                         To support implementation of investment interventions under the project, assistance will be provided
                         for technical experts who will support beneficiaries to prepare project proposals and equipment
                         specifications, project completion reports, and to complete the conversions (technical support). It will
                         also include support to increase technical capacity of local authorities in order to allow them to
                         monitor and enforce HCFC-related policies for new and existing industrial installations, including
                         customs officers in order to ensure effective contro lof HCFC imports and products containing
                         HCFCs.

                         A demonstration activity that targets partly the servicing sector will also be introduced. This TA
                         activity will provide training to service technicians to employ good practice in servicing HCFC-22
                         air-conditi oning units to avoid excess leakage over time, to retrofit AC units to alternative
                         refrigerants and, to be prepared for handling alternative refrigerants ranging from HFCs to natural
                         refrigerants, in anticipation of evolving technologies worldwide.

                         The projectwill put a special focus on strengthening Jordan’s capacity to implement energy
                         conservation and energy efficiency in the residential air-conditioning sector by reaching out to the

                                                                       Page 2 of 9
                         MEMR, National Energy Research Center and related agencies to ensure there is complementarity
                         and synchronization of initiatives on EE for the sector. In addition, through the sector plan,
                         additional TA will be pursued to help the sector including non-eligible enterprises improve and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         optimize energy performance of components and the entire system to achieve EERs that meet the
                         country’s new performance requirements for “A? grade products.

                         An import quota system to curb the supply of HCFCs will be established by January 1, 2013 through
                         support to Jordan’s overall HPMP which is managed by UNIDO. Under the proposed project Jordan
                         will receive support to establish a policy structure that ensures HCFC phase-out in its priority sector,
                         residential air-conditioning, is permanent and sustainable, and to promote the transfer and
                         dissemination of suitable substitute technologies. This includes the introduction of a ban on the use
                         of HCFC-22 in manufacturing AC as well as a ban on imports of HCFC-22-based AC units by the
                         end of 2016. The project focal point in MoE will also work with relevant agencies to pursue
                         regulations regarding minimum energy efficiency standards to complement Jordan’s new AC
                         appliance labeling system and the work being undertaken with USAID and other donors. In addition,
                         the NOU will work with agencies to promote the uptake of more efficient air-conditioning and
                         stimulate local manufacturers to compete on EE.

                         The project will provide support to the focal point, the National Ozone Unit (NOU) within MoE so
                         that it may build a dedicated project team responsible for AC sector plan implementation. The staff
                         and consultants in the NOU will manage activities related to the implementation of investments and
                         TA activities, and ensure that MLF and World Bank policies regarding financial management, use of
                         funds and procurement are followed when implementing subprojects.

                         Component 3: Institutional Strengthening (US$441,999)

                         Support will be provided to the Recipient through the NOU in the Ministry of Environment to
                         enhance the capacity of Government agencies to manage and address all ozone protection issues in
                         the country and to interact with the international ozone protection community. This will include
Public Disclosure Copy




                         assistance for coordinating the portfolio of MP projects (with the Bank, UNIDO and GIZ); for
                         awareness raising in industrial sectors and the general public; monitoring and reporting of annual
                         ODS consumption; regular participation in international and regional MP meetings; and facilitating
                         inter-agency coordination and policy and decision-making on ozone-related issues.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Project investments under Component 1 will take place in three industrial enterprises manufacturing
                         air conditioning (AC) equipment. Technical assistance and training under Component 2 will also
                         benefit two other such enterprises, as well as a sixth facility which is receiving investment under an
                         MLF/ UNIDO project. All project sites have been identified and visited by Bank staff several times.
                         The March 2012 mission reviewed the general standards of environmental management and worker
                         health and safety at the plants to be supported by the project and observed some potentially serious
                         issues of industrial hygiene and worker safety, including apparent lacks of personal protective
                         equipment and inadequate storage of chemicals and hazardous wastes. Subsequent visits to these
                         enterprises in September 2012 have shared these concerns, prepared mitigation plans and timetables
                         for environmental compliance.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Sanne Agnete Tikjoeb (MNSEN)


                                                                       Page 3 of 9
                         Amal Hijazi (MNSEN)

                         6. Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes            The project is expected to have a net positive
                         BP 4.01                                      impact on the global environment by reducing the
                                                                      use of HCFC-22, which is an ozone depleting
                                                                      substance (ODS) and also a greenhouse gas, with
                                                                      a global warming potential (GWP) of 1,810.
                                                                      While HCFCs have an impact on the global
                                                                      environment, they have limited adverse local
                                                                      impacts, as these chemicals are stable and not
                                                                      considered toxic or dangerous for human health
                                                                      or the local environment.

                                                                      Under the project, three industrial enterprises now
                                                                      manufacturing AC equipment would be supported
                                                                      to switch refrigerants from HCFC-22 to HFC
                                                                      (hydrofluorocarbon)-410A, which is not an ODS.
                                                                      However, HFCs are greenhouse gases -
                                                                      HFC-410A has a GWP of 2,100 CO2 eq., which
                                                                      is slightly higher than HCFC-22. Nevertheless,
                                                                      because the HFCs can be used in smaller
                                                                      volumes, due to their greater refrigerating
                                                                      capacity, and because the new equipment
                                                                      manufactured will use newer technology, which
                                                                      is more energy efficient, the project would result
                                                                      in a net reduction of global warming impact.
                                                                      Like HCFCs, HFCs are stable and not considered
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      toxic or dangerous for human health or the
                                                                      environment. Nonetheless, HFC-410A is a high-
                                                                      pressure gas which merits extra precaution in
                                                                      transportation, handling and storage, as there
                                                                      remain risks of asphyxiation from higher
                                                                      concentration of the refrigerant gases, especially
                                                                      in confined spaces.

                                                                      The project also presents potential negative
                                                                      environmental and social risks, especially with
                                                                      respect to the health and safety of workers in the
                                                                      project-supported plants, technicians servicing
                                                                      equipment produced in those plants, and possibly
                                                                      to the surrounding populations. These risks
                                                                      include: transporting heavy pieces of equipment;
                                                                      installing and testing such equipment; and,
                                                                      charging equipment with highly compressed
                                                                      gases. These risks would occur at both the
                                                                      manufacturing and servicing levels. All HCFCs
                                                                      and HFCs accidentally vented to the atmosphere


                                                              Page 4 of 9
                                 during such operations would pose threats of
                                 ozone depletion and/or global warming.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Jordan has a relatively good environmental
                                 protection framework with regulation on ozone
                                 depleting substances, including HCFCs, and other
                                 health and worker safety rules governing industry
                                 but additional mitigation measures may be
                                 necessary to ensure that enterprises are
                                 employing good practice in handling and
                                 manufacturing. The Recipient (through NOU
                                 staff) has prepared an Environmental and Social
                                 Impact Assessment (ESIA) and Environmental
                                 and Social Management Plan (ESMP). The
                                 ESIA/ESMP addresses the general standards of
                                 environmental management and worker health
                                 and safety at the plants to be supported by the
                                 project, as well as specific provisions for the safe
                                 transportation, storage and handling of the gases
                                 and other materials related to the project
                                 investments. In addition, capacity building and
                                 training of worker for the safe handling of
                                 equipment and materials would be an integral part
                                 of the project.

                                 The ESIA/ESMP includes consultation
                                 documentation and grievance mechanism details
                                 and has been disclosed in Jordan on the main
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 page of the Ministry of Environment web site
                                 (www.moenv.gov.jo).

                                 It is anticipated that each subproject ESMP would
                                 be modified as needed for the specific conditions
                                 in each recipient industrial plant and incorporated
                                 in the Sub-Grant Agreement for that firm. Such
                                 Sub-Grant Agreements would also require that
                                 the recipient firm remain in compliance with all
                                 applicable environmental and labor law permits.

                                 A potential legacy risk is posed by the CFCs
                                 recovered and stored from the ODS II Project,
                                 which amount to 3.58 tons. The Government of
                                 Jordan will continue to cover the costs of safely
                                 storing this recovered CFC (estimated to be $500
                                 a month at the national halon bank)through the
                                 institutional strengthening (IS) component of
                                 ODS II until a funding source can be identified to



                         Page 5 of 9
                                                                               cover the costs of transportation and destruction
                                                                               of the unwanted substances in another country
                                                                               with suitable facilities. There is a possibility that
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               this CFC is not disposed of prior to the closure of
                                                                               ODS II. In that case, the IS componen t in the
                                                                               new proposed project would pick up the cost of
                                                                               safe storage.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No                As the project activities will take place within
                                                                               existing industrial facilities, no impact on natural
                                                                               habitats is anticipated.
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No                For the same reason, no impact on forests is
                                                                               expected
                            Pest Management OP 4.09            No                The project does not include the procurement or
                                                                               use of pesticides.
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No                Project activities will take place within
                            BP 4.11                                            industrial facilities, and thus will have no impact
                                                                               on cultural resources.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No                The project is not located in an area with
                                                                               indigenous peoples.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     No                The involuntary resettlement policy will not be
                            4.12                                               triggered; the project will not entail any land
                                                                               acquisition or loss of access to resources. Social
                                                                               issues are defined as worker health and safety
                                                                               measures mentioned above in OP/BP 4.01.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No                The project does not depend on the safe
                                                                               functioning of dams and does not invest in dams.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International        No                  Project activities will have no impact on
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                               international waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  The project is not located in known areas of
                            7.60                                               territorial dispute.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential l arge scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The project will have a positive impact on the global environment by reducing the use of HCFCs,
                              which are ozone-depleting substances and greenhouse gases with a global warming potential
                              (GWP) ranging from several hundred to several thousand times that of CO2. While HCFCs have
                              an impact on the global environment, they have limited local impact as these chemicals are stable
                              and not considered toxic or otherwise dangerous for the environment.

                             The project will include investment activities with three AC manufacturers. No closure of these
                             enterprises is expected, but one enterprise (Abu Haltam) is currently building a new factory on the
                             same site.



                                                                       Page 6 of 9
                           HFC-410A has been selected as a refrigerant to replace HCFC-22. R-410A air conditioners (up
                           to 175 kW) are currently commercially available in the US, Asia and Europe. A significant portion
                           of the duct-free products sold in Japan and Europe now use R-410A as the preferred refrigerant.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Approximately 8% of the US Ducted Residential Market in 2004 used R-410A as the refrigerant.
                           After 1 January 2010, air conditioners sold in the US Ducted Residential market will
                           predominately utilize R-410A as the HCFC-22 replacement.

                           System pressures with this blend are approximately 50 percent higher than with HCFC-22. System
                           designers have addressed the higher operating pressures of R-410A through design changes such
                           as heavier wall compressor shells, pressure vessels (accumulators, receivers, filter driers etc.), heat
                           exchangers and refrigerant tubing.

                           The Environmental Health and Safety Guidelines (EHS) serve as a technical reference. The EHS
                           Guidelines have general and industry-specific examples of Good International Industry Practice
                           (GIIP), as defined in IFC's Performance Standard 3 on Pollution Prevention and Abatement. The
                           EHS Guidelines contain the performance levels and measures that are normally acceptable to the
                           World Bank Group and are generally considered to be achievable in new facilities at reasonable
                           costs by existing technology.

                           When host country regulations differ from the levels and measures presented in the EHS
                           Guidelines, projects are expected to achieve whichever is more stringent. If less stringent levels or
                           measures are appropriate in view of specific project circumstances, a full and detailed justification
                           for any proposed alternatives is needed as part of the site-specific environmental assessment. This
                           justification should demonstrate that the choice for any alternate performance levels is protective
                           of human health and the environment. In this ESMP, relevant guidelines from the World Bank
                           Group EHS guidelines are incorporated into mitigation measures.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
Public Disclosure Copy




                             There are no indirect, cumulative, or long-term impacts caused by the project.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             The technology choices for Phase 1 are well proven and robust, which would be feasible from a
                           technical or economic point of view. And they are all “low? GWP options. Continuing with the
                           use of HCFCs is not an option for Jordan due to its obligations under the Montreal Protocol.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             An Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) has been prepared by the Borrower to
                           guide foam enterprises to address all of the issues noted above relating to environmental or OHS
                           risks. The ESMP was prepared following relevant national legal documents, the Bank’s OP 4.01
                           and The World Bank Group OHS guidelines. The World Bank has reviewed and found acceptable
                           the ESMP.
                           Some of the most typical mitigation measures are the following: (i) proper chemical storage; (ii)
                           good practice of chemical handling; specifically, careful handling to avoid uncontrolled reactions
                           and conditions resulting in fire and explosion and careful handling to avoid inhalation and skin
                           contact resulting in eye, respiratory system and skin irritation and respiratory sensitization; (iii)
                           Communication and training workers about the potential risks; (iv) Preparation of appropriate
                           emergency preparedness and response measures; (v) use of proper labor safety devices; (vi) use of


                                                                       Page 7 of 9
                           efficient and adequate extraction ventilation; (vii) conduct a safety audit at each production
                           workshop before production start-up; and (viii) put in place appropriate measures for solid waste
                           collection as per legal requirements
Public Disclosure Copy




                           of the Government of Jordan (if not already completed).

                           Each participating enterprise in the project will be legally required to follow the environmental
                           and safety provisions of the ESMP. The ESMP describes the measures that will be taken by the
                           project implementing agency, the MOE/NOU, to supervise monitoring of compliance and to
                           ensure enforcement. The World Bank has evaluated the capacity of both MOE/NOU, the joint
                           monitoring agencies of the GOJ with oversight for manufacturing and labor inspections and that of
                           the A/C production companies, each of the three of which has been visited by technical specialists.
                           The project management unit falls under the National Ozone Unit set up in MOE. This Unit has
                           been implementing for 15 years a similar project so they are very familiar with relevant World
                           Bank and GoJ requirements. Their capacity has been evaluated and appropriate training on
                           safeguards has been carried out under the current project. The A/C production companies have
                           good operational procedures in place and are in compliance with good-practice occupational,
                           health and safety measures as well as with environmental requirements. However, an audit of the
                           production facility will be carried out before A/C production start-up using HFC-410A and they
                           will also be legally required to follow the OHS and environmental requirements of the ESMP. The
                           project will support training and capacity building for the foam enterprises in these areas as
                           specified in more detail in the ESMP.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Because there are no likely impacts of the A/C production enterprises that extend beyond the
                           plant itself, the stakeholders from an environmental perspective are the enterprises themselves and
                           their labor force.

                           Stakeholders have been consulted on the content and approach of the environmental management
Public Disclosure Copy




                           plan during a series of technical meetings and workshops in September 2011, March 2012, and
                           September 2012. Participants included MOE/NOU representatives, the enterprises themselves,
                           representatives from local governments, and environmental and social experts from the Bank, both
                           staff and consultants. The feedback from stakeholders was only on very technical points and has
                           been incorporated in the final ESMP.

                           The project would not result in any reduction of employment or wages; in fact, there is a growing
                           market in Jordan for producing AC equipment for domestic sale as well as for export to other
                           countries in the Middle East. Other countries in the Middle East are also tightening their ODS
                           protocols, including on imports. There is no retraining needed in this change in protocol and no
                           change in the type or ratio of labor used in the manufacturing. No adverse social impacts are
                           expected. For a more thorough macroeconomic analysis of effects of technology switching, see
                           the economic and financial section of the Project Appraisal Document.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                        04-Oct-2012
                          Date of "in-country" disclosure                                    09-Oct-2012
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                     10-Oct-2012


                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                              For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                              Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                            N/A
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
                           ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Tracy Hart
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (RSA)                       Date: 15-Oct-2012
                            Coordinator:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Hoonae Kim (SM)                                 Date: 10-Oct-2012




                                                                       Page 9 of 9
