INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA935
b  Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Jun-2012
0
1 1. BASIC INFORMATION
U)    1. Basic Project Data
0
0
.U,
Q      Country:               Senegal                      Project ID:             P125565
.      Project Name:         Electricity Sector Support Project (P125565)
Task Team Leader:      Stephan Claude Frederic G
Estimated Appraisal Date: 05-Dec-2011               Estimated Board Date:   17-Jul-2012
Managing Unit:        AFTEG                         Lending Instrument:     Specific Investment Loan
Sector:               Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (85%), Public administration- Energy and mining (15%)
Theme:                 City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (46%), Infrastructure services for private sector development (46%),
Rural services an d infrastructure (8%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Financing Source                                                                      Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                       8.50
International Development Association (IDA)                                             85.00
Total                                                                                    93.50
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Is this a Repeater project? No
2. Project Objectives
The project development objectives are to contribute to (i) reducing SENELEC's technical and commercial losses; and (ii) improving the reliability
of electricity services in selected areas focusing primarily on Greater Dakar.
3. Project Description
The proposed project whose cost is estimated at about US$ 88 million (including IDA: US$ 80 million and Government: US$8 million) will include
0
the following components:
Component 1: Upgrading and modernization of the transmission and distribution network: (IDA US$38.5 million and GoS U$4.5 million - excluding
o     contingencies). The upgrading and modernization of the transmission and distribution network component includes: (i) the upgrading, rehabilitation
or replacement of existing transmission lines and substations in the Interconnected Network of the Recipient's territory; (ii) the upgrading of the
distribution network from 6.6 kV to 30kV from at least two selected substations in Greater Dakar; (iii) the installation of at least 15 remotely
a     controlled MV/LV distribution substations in Greater Dakar; (iv) the extension and densification of the distribution network in Greater Dakar; and (v)
the Extension of the Interconnected Network to reach isolated secondary consumption centers of the Recipient's territory.
Component 2: Improve SENELEC's commercial performance (IDA US$30.0 million and GoS US$3.0 million - excluding contingencies). This
component aims at improving SENELEC's commercial performance by reducing the cost of billing, increasing bill collection and reducing
commercial losses through a reduction in arrears. This component includes: (i) the installation of about 150,000 STS compliant Split Pre-paid
Meters in the Recipient's territory; (ii) Installation of about 10,000 electronic Smart Meters and of a remote meter reading system in the Recipient's
territory; and (iii) the installation of a new electricity customer management system for SENELEC.
Component 3. Long-term strategic outlook (IDA US$ 8.25 million - excluding contingencies). This component will carry out studies to assist the
Government in developing a medium to long term strategy for its energy sector, such studies to analyze options for: (i) energy diversification (into
coal, gas, renewable energies and regional integration); (ii) energy sector governance (by strengthening of the energy sector's efficiency,
transparency and accountability) and private sector participation; and (iii) financial restructuring of SENELEC and a review of electricity tariffs.
Component 4. Project implementation, Communication and Monitoring and Evaluation: (IDA US$3.0 million - GoS US$0.5 million - excluding
contingencies). This component will provide financing for Project coordination, supervision, financial management, communication and outreach,
procurement, supervision of implementation of the ESMF and RPF, monitoring and evaluation of the Project, including through the provision of
technical assistance, Training, goods and audit services.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)
The specific sub-project locations have been only generally identified.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Page 1 of 3


﻿Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTCS)
Maman-Sani Issa (AFTN1)
6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered?  Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01  Yes
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No
Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No
a      Pest Management OP 4.09            No
U,     Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11  No
0
U) Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No
o      Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12  Yes
-O     Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP  No
7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60  No
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any potential I arge scale,
significant andlor irreversible impacts:
The proposed project includes small transmission and distribution lines and substations. The specific locations for these investments, which
will be selected within the overall T&D investment program, have yet to be confirmed. Although the potential environmental and social impacts
of these infrastructure investments are expected to be limited, they could result in involuntary resettlements and/or entitlement to compensation
and thus require appropriate mitigation.
In light of the above, there are two Bank Safeguard policies applicable to this operation: Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01) and Involuntary
Resettlement (OP 4.12). Since the specific sub-project locations are not yet known, an Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF), together with a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), have been prepared and disclosed in-country on December 12th, 2011 and at
the Bank's InfoShop on the same date. Both the ESMF and the RPF have been cleared by the Bank. Relevant provisions from the two sets of
safeguard documents will be reflected in the Project Implementation Manual (PIM).
Once the T&D investments to be financed under component 1 have been decided upon by the GoS and SENELEC, ESIA/EMPs and RAPs will
be prepared to in a manner satisfactory to IDA and disclosed. Eventual payments of compensation (to be financed by SENELEC) will be
completed prior to the start of the works of the affected activity. The studies will be conducted in compliance with Bank and national safeguard
policies.
>N     2. Describe any potential indirect andlor long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
0L
0         The potential environmental impacts associated with the project (Component 1) are: (a) the effects on existing land use; (b) aesthetic impact
U        on the surroundings; (c) increased erosion and interference with local drainage patterns; (d) increased access and its associated effects (from
the transmission and distribution lines themselves or from construction and maintenance of access roads); (e) hazard of electrical shock and
U)      strike to birds during construction. However, in all cases the impacts of the project are expected to be minor, temporary, readily mitigated and
0
U~       in most cases easily reversible.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
The proposed Transmission and Distribution Investments are necessary to increase access to electricity and improve service reliability in the
targeted areas. There are no realistic alternatives to expand electricity services in the targeted areas: promoting distributed power generation
0..     instead of grid reinforcement and densification would cause electricity services to be unaffordable for a large part of the population and result in
local pollution from the use of individual diesel gen-sets.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
and implement the measures described.
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) have been prepared and
disclosed. These documents establish the process and provide guidelines to plan for and implement the physical activities. The frameworks
also provide for compliance with the relevant existing environmental rules and regulations applicable in Senegal and the World Bank guidelines.
The environmental assessment process described in the Framework includes: (a) an initial environmental screening, including public
consultations; (b) an assessment of whether the particular activity under review will generate environmental impacts; and (c) if environmental
impacts are expected, an Environmental and Social Management Plan to ensure that adequate implementation arrangements are in place.
Similarly, in the Resettlement Policy Framework, the process for determining the need for Resettlement Action Plans or compensation plans
and principles and procedures to be followed in preparing and implementing them are spelt out.
The GoS has in place legislation for payment of compensation and resettlement procedures that are in line with the World Bank's policies. The
Ministry of Environment (ME), which is the lead agency responsible for coordinating planning and implementation of land acquisition and
resettlement, has the expertise to assess resettlement plans in line with the Bank's resettlement procedures. , and the ME, in conjunction with
other GoS stakeholders, will have the responsibility for reviewing the Resettlement Policy Plan that may be needed and its implementation.
Land Acquisitions, if any, will be financed and executed by the GoS according to existing legislation.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
on potentially affected people.
Page 2 of 3


﻿SENELEC through its engineering consultant shall have the direct responsibility for monitoring the implementation of the ESMF of the project.
The ESMF contains reporting requirements and these will be included in the consultant's quarterly progress reports.
Data regarding land acquisition will be available in the Resettlement Action Plan, should it be needed. This will include the list of people
affected and the rates of compensation that they will be paid prior to commencement of the works.
Data collection will be included in the engineering consultant's Terms of Reference. The data will be used during implementation to: (i) verify
that people have been paid compensation for assets lost or land acquired prior to the commencement of works, as per World Bank and GoS
policies; and, (ii) to ensure that the contractors are complying with the ESMF.
0.       SENELEC will submit to the Bank: (i) the quarterly engineering consultant reports; and (ii) semi-annual progress reports in a form and
0        substance acceptable to the Bank.
a)       Grievances: The mechanisms for redressing grievances was presented and explained in the initial consultations, described above, and will be
discussed again once the affected people, if any, have been identified. The GoS has in place a grievance mechanism that allows people to file
U)       complaints with the Courts and make appeals to higher Courts. Monitoring. It is the responsibility of the GoS to make an assessment to
determine that the objectives of the RPF have been achieved. The GoS, through SENELEC will undertake internal monitoring of the project's
progress. In addition, the World Bank will assess the implementation of the RPF and other associated activities during implementation support.
Q
U
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
0..    Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                    17-Nov-2011
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                12-Dec-2011
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                 06-Jun-2012
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors
Resettlement Action PlanlFramework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                    17-Nov-2011
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                12-Dec-2011
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                 06-Jun-2012
If the project triggers the Pest Management andlor Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Auditior EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [
o.     OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
0
C)      If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the  Yes [ X ]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
a)       plan?
ci'    The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
0
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?  Yes [ x]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language  Yes [ X ]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for  Yes [ X ]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?  Yes [ X ]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard  Yes [ X ]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same  Yes [ X ]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?
Ill. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader:           Stephan Claude Frederic G
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                    Date: 11-Jun-2012
Sector Manager:             Name Lucio Monari (SM)                                    Date: 11-Jun-2012
Page 3 of 3


