                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC2394

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Apr-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 29-Apr-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Ecuador                         Project ID:      P143996
                            Project Name:     EC Manta Public Services Improvement Project (P143996)
                            Task Team         Oscar E. Alvarado
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         03-Jun-2013                     Estimated        30-Jul-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    LCSWS                           Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                              Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (60%), Urban Transport
                                              (40%)
                            Theme(s):         City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (90%), Water resource
                                              management (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    102.50                   Total Bank Financing:        100.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                              Financing Gap:                   0.00
                              Financing Source                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                    2.50
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                     100.00
                              Total                                                                     102.50
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives


                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed project would achieve the above mentioned objective through the implementation of
                           four components:
                         *Component 1: Investments in Water Supply and Sewerage. This component will support
                         infrastructure investments including: (i) water network expansion and rehabilitation; (ii) the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         construction of a water treatment plant; (iii) sewerage network expansion and rehabilitation,
                         including sewage pumping stations; and (iv) associated works supervision. The interventions will be
                         in support of the second phase of the Master Plan developed by the Manta Water Utility (Empresa
                         Pública Aguas de Manta, EPAM) to address service coverage deficiencies and deteriorating water
                         and sewage networks. Network expansion works will allow water supply coverage to increase from
                         79 to 97 percent, and sewerage collection coverage from 64 to 95 percent, at the end of the design
                         horizon. Water production would also be increased by 33 percent to respond to the city’s projected
                         demand for the next 10 years.

                         *Component 2: Investments in Road Improvement. This component will support infrastructure
                         investments including: (i) road improvement works; and (ii) associated works supervision. The road
                         works are divided into three main categories:
                         •        Urban streets upgrading, consisting in widening to include sidewalks and street furniture,
                         including upgraded bus stops and tree planting. Other principal arterials and collectors are included
                         in this component to provide more complete streets with attention to pedestrians. The project also
                         envisions incremental enhancements to public services along the par vial corridor (upgraded bus
                         stops) improved bus flows, through studying traffic patterns and possibly prioritizing public transport
                         flows;
                         •        Urban street resurfacing, including street paving and resurfacing of roads in poor conditions,
                         allowing for improved access to expand and improve the quality of public transport options,
                         including in lower-income neighborhoods;
                         •        Sidewalk construction and reconstruction, including the provision of pedestrian facilities,
                         with a concentration to the core urban center and the introduction and piloting of the “zona 30?
                         concept. The project envisions traffic calming as well as enhanced traffic regulation in this
                         commercial zone to reduce and manage speeds so as to minimize risks to non-motorized traffic
                         (pedestrians, cyclists).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         *Component 3: Institutional Strengthening. This component will support institutional strengthening
                         activities for EPAM, the Traffic Directorate and the Public Works Directorate of the Municipality of
                         Manta. These activities will include, in water and sanitation: (i) institutional strengthening of the
                         management of water and sanitation services by EPAM, including operational and commercial
                         efficiency, strategic planning and energy efficiency; (ii) the development of a household connections
                         program for both water and sewerage to increase water network efficiency and tariff collection, as
                         well as promote the health and environmental benefits of connecting to the network; (iii) the
                         elaboration of a water and sewage quality control program, including a monitoring plan, the
                         construction of laboratories to measure water and effluent quality, related equipment and training, as
                         well as technical assistance in improving the operation and maintenance of the existing wastewater
                         treatment plant; and (iv) the preparation of a water resources integrated management plan for EPAM.

                         The activities in transport will include institutional strengthening of: (i) the Traffic Directorate,
                         including updating the mobility plan and developing the road safety plan; and (ii) the Public Works
                         Directorate. The project will provide capacity building activities to enable an incremental shift to
                         integrated corridor management citywide so as to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of urban
                         transport options, in particular of public transport services, as well as safety aspects. In addition, the
                         project includes institutional strengthening activities to enable multi-year planning and programming
                         of road maintenance activities to allow preserving the overall road network in good or regular
                         condition. The project also envisions training for the staff of both directorates on technical matters
                         such as traffic analysis, urban transport planning, bridge inspections, road asset management, road
                         safety, emergency preparedness, and evacuation procedures, relevant M&E (such as for traffic
Public Disclosure Copy




                         safety), amongst others.

                         During preparation, the Project Team will further explore how to incorporate resilience to natural
                         disasters and climate change as well as gender aspects in the project scope and activities.

                         *Component 4: Project Administration. This component will finance costs associated with program
                         management, including project-related audits, monitoring and evaluation, equipment and training to
                         strengthen the project implementation unit, as well as individual consultants. It will include staff
                         support related to environmental and social management, including land acquisition and resettlement.
                         This component will also finance actions to promote positive environmental and social impacts
                         (benefits) such as a public communications campaign on sustainable water usage and a study on
                         sustainable beach management.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is located in the municipality of Manta, and mostly in the City of Manta. The project is
                         mainly urban or semi-urban, with a population of approximately 240,000. The water component
                         works will be mainly installation of water supply distribution pipes and wastewater collection pipes
                         in in existing streets in urban areas. The roads component will consist of mainly rehabilitation or
                         paving of existing urban streets. There are no environmentally protected areas in the project
                         locations. In terms of other resettlement impacts there are a few locations where land acquisition
                         (affecting 6 owners) and the displacement of 106 informal vendors will be necessary due to the
                         regeneration of Av Nov 4, Call 113, Calle Venezuela and Calle Interbarrial, and Calle Malecon. It
                         has been confirmed by the Municipality that the land acquisition and resettlement process has not yet
                         commenced. During the construction phase, it is also possible that the water and sanitation
                         construction works will result in the displacement of temporary structures used by vendors.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The Municipality of Manta will be responsible for ensuring implementation of environmental and
                         social management plans and has successful experience in implementing works similar to those in
                         the project.

                         Related to environmental, health and safety aspects, the Municipality and EPAM successfully
                         implemented Phase 1 of the Water Master Plan (Phase 2 of the plan is associated with this project).
                         The Municipality and EPAM ensure that the necessary environmental requirements are established in
                         the construction work contracts, and these contracts are monitored by an independent supervisor and
                         staff from the Municipality and EPAM. A third party environmental audit is also performed, per a
                         requirement in the Environmental License for the works in the Water Master Plan. The Municipal
                         Environmental Department also has successfully managed environmental aspects in various road
                         paving and related works in the city, as well as stream and drainage cleanup works.

                         The Municipality has experience in conducting resettlement, including the resettlement of 100
                         households from a floodplain as part of disaster risk management. The Community Development
                         Department also has a team of five specialists working on property legalization. The Cadaster and
                         Legal Department has experience in conducting a number of expropriations resulting in very few
                         complaints or court cases. However, the Municipality has no direct experience in applying the
                           Involuntary Resettlement Policy of the World Bank or other international financial institutions (IFIs),
                           and therefore will require technical assistance from the task team social development specialist.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           As part of the Bank’s review of the project (project preparation), the institutional capacity related to
                           environmental and social aspects will be assessed, including the staff /resource availability to meet
                           the project requirements.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Martin Henry Lenihan (LCSSO)
                           Carlos Vargas Bejarano (LCSEN)
                           Robert H. Montgomery (LCSEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes              The project team proposes an environmental
                           BP 4.01                                                category of B per OP/BP 4.01, as the sub-
                                                                                  projects involve relatively standard works with
                                                                                  no significant environmental or social impacts
                                                                                  and that can be readily prevented or mitigated
                                                                                  with standard measures.

                                                                                  The works under the water component (and all
                                                                                  those in the Water Master Plan), with the
                                                                                  exception of the new proposed water supply
                                                                                  treatment plant, have an existing Environmental
                                                                                  Impact Assessment (EIA) which was consulted
                                                                                  with the public and was approved by the
                                                                                  Ministry of Environment. The EIA includes an
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                  Environmental Management Plan (EMP) which
                                                                                  was successfully implemented during Phase 1 of
                                                                                  the Water Master Plan without any significant
                                                                                  environmental impacts. The EMP and its
                                                                                  implementation were subject to an
                                                                                  environmental audit, as part of the
                                                                                  Environmental License issued by the Ministry
                                                                                  of Environment, and some minor modifications
                                                                                  have been made for the Phase 2 works. The
                                                                                  team will assess the technical standards and
                                                                                  conformity of these documents with the Bank’s
                                                                                  safeguards policies. For the water supply
                                                                                  treatment plant, an Environmental Analysis
                                                                                  (EA) and EMP will be developed if the project
                                                                                  design and location are finalized prior to
                                                                                  appraisal, otherwise an Environmental
                                                                                  Management Framework (EMF) will be
                                                                                  developed. The EMF will be completed prior to
                                                                                  appraisal. An EA (including an EMP) was
                                                                 performed for the road/transport project works
                                                                 and an Environmental License issued by the
                                                                 Ministry of Environment.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No    Within the area of Project influence there are no
                                                                 forests, protected areas or related that will be
                                                                 affected by the Project. A few trees will be
                                                                 removed and either replanted or new ones
                                                                 planted associated with road regeneration
                                                                 works. These trees are located in the median of
                                                                 existing roads and do not include any species of
                                                                 significance. While based on existing
                                                                 information and based upon the relevant project
                                                                 aspects and characteristics, it appears that this
                                                                 policy would not be triggered, this will be
                                                                 confirmed during project preparation.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    There are no forests in the project area.

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The project will not involve the purchase or use
                                                                 of any significant quantities of pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    The EIA and EA performed for the Project
                         BP 4.11                                 works did not identify the presence of any
                                                                 physical culture resources in the Project area.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No    The project is located in an urban area that does
                                                                 not incorporate historically indigenous
                                                                 communities or their ancestral lands.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   The project transport investments will impact 1
                         4.12                                    commercial property (with two renters), will
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 partially impact another owner-operated
                                                                 commercial property, as well as 4 vacant lots.
                                                                 These investments will also result in the
                                                                 displacement of 106 informal street vendors.
                                                                 The client is preparing a resettlement action
                                                                 plan for these resettlement impacts. The client
                                                                 has also confirmed that the land expropriation
                                                                 and resettlement process has not commenced.
                                                                 The task team will continue to assess
                                                                 resettlement impacts during preparation,
                                                                 including those of related activities as per the
                                                                 requirements of OP 4.12. Any impacts that
                                                                 cannot be identified during preparation due
                                                                 uncertainty regarding footprint or location (e.g.
                                                                 temporary disruption of vendors by water-
                                                                 sanitation investments, borrow pits and disposal
                                                                 areas) will be addressed by means of a
                                                                 resettlement policy framework, as opposed to
                                                                 the Resettlement Action Plan.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 05-Apr-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The Bank will review the existing project-related environmental instruments (EIA and EMP for
                                      water component works and EA and EMP for road component works) and propose modifications
                                      as necessary. The Bank will also review the information disclosure and public consultation on
                                      these studies/plans, and request additional actions if needed. The Bank will require for the
                                      proposed new water supply treatment plant, either an EA and EMP if the project design and
                                      location are finalized prior to appraisal or an Environmental Management Framework to develop
                                      such study/plan in the future.

                                      A resettlement plan and resettlement policy framework are being prepared and should be
                                      completed and disclosed by the Municipality by the end of April allowing for a over one month of
                                      discussion prior to Appraisal. The resettlement policy framework will cover all project, and related
                                      activities, whose resettlement impact cannot be identified at the time of appraisal (such as borrow
                                      pits and disposal areas). The municipality has confirmed that land acquisition and resettlement has
                                      not commenced, and will not be initiated until the project and resettlement instruments have been
                                      approved.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Oscar E. Alvarado

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name:                                                                                                                      Date:
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Aurelio Menendez (SM)                                                                                                Date: 29-Apr-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
