                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC736

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Jul-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 23-Jul-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Bangladesh                       Project ID:      P129920
                            Project Name:      Bangladesh: Rural Electricity Transmission and Distribution Project (P129920)
                            Task Team          Zubair K.M. Sadeque
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          02-Dec-2013                      Estimated        27-Feb-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASDE                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        680.00                Total Bank Financing:         580.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                               Financing Gap:                   0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           100.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                  580.00
                              Total                                                                        680.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed project development objective is to improve the reliability and quality of supply of
                           electricity to rural consumers in Bangladesh through improvements in technical efficiency of the
                           rural distribution system.
                           C. Project Description
                           The primary purpose of the proposed Project is efficiency improvements but it will nonetheless
                           provide additional network capacity for new connections when additional power generation becomes
                         available as part of the efforts of the Government of Bangladesh (GOB) to remove generation
                         constraints. The proposed Project is expected to support the rehabilitation and augmentation needs
                         of the 33/11 kV network operated by the Palli Biddyut Samities (PBSs) under the Rural
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Electrification Board (REB), transmission enhancement needs of the Power Grid Company of
                         Bangladesh (PGCB), and capacity building of REB, the PBSs and PGCB as well as implementation
                         of the reform action plan for REB/PBSs. With the expansion in the 33/11 kV network operated by
                         the PBSs over the years, many distribution lines were extended long distances away from the
                         substations resulting in poor voltage profiles and high system losses, particularly where the load has
                         grown over time. PBSs are finding it difficult to serve some of the outlying areas due to the long
                         distances from grid substations. To address these problems a 33/11 kV network development study
                         was undertaken by an international consultant with support from local consultants under the IDA-
                         financed Rural Electrification and Renewable Energy Development (RERED) project. The study
                         identified the need for new 33/11 kV lines and substations. The study also developed a low-cost
                         design for 132/33 kV substations to be operated by PGCB to supply to the rural grid of the REB/
                         PBSs.

                         The proposed Project is expected to cover the 33/11 kV system designs that were identified in the
                         33/11 kV study including rehabilitation requirements identified by REB. The distribution system
                         expansion philosophy is based on the objectives of reducing losses, improving quality of supplies,
                         and increasing reliability of systems. This will require upgrading conductors, additional lines, new
                         substations as well as reinforcing existing substations. The proposed Project will also include a
                         transmission component by PGCB to address critical bottlenecks in the 132 kV network supplying
                         REB areas. PGCB has reservations for the full scale adoption of the proposed low-cost 132 kV
                         network design on the grounds of grid reliability and safety, but it agreed to pilot a low-cost 132 kV
                         line and substation, which is also expected to be supported under the proposed Project.

                         The following components are proposed:

                         A. Rural Grid Augmentation and Rehabilitation (US$512 million, IDA US$455 million): The
Public Disclosure Copy




                         proposed Project is expected to support the augmentation and rehabilitation needs of 37 PBSs in the
                         eastern part of Bangladesh (Dhaka, Chittagong, and Sylhet Divisions) . The proposed investment
                         will reduce systems losses while improving reliability and quality of supplies. The proposed
                         physical targets under the component are summarized below:

                         33 kV new line - 2,660 Kilometers
                         33 kV Line Upgradation - 907 Kilometers
                         11 kV new line - 2,368 Kilometers
                         New Substations - 110 Nos

                         B. Transmission enhancement (US$158 million, IDA US$115 million): The 33/11 kV network
                         development study identified a 13 grid (132/33 kV) substations that will be needed for the rural
                         distribution network in the project areas. Out of these 13 substations, 6 are included in the proposed
                         Project to be implemented by PGCB . One of these substations will be piloted as per the low-cost
                         design suggested under the study. PGCB has also identified a few priority investments in the 132 kV
                         network to remove the bottlenecks and cater to the growing load in the PBS areas, which will be
                         supported under the proposed Project. The proposed physical targets under the component are
                         summarized below:

                         132 kV new line - 108 Kilometers
                           Re-conductoring - 247 Kilometers
                           New Substations - 6 Nos.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           C. Technical Assistance Support to REB and PGCB (US$10 million): Various technical assistance
                           needs are envisaged- tariff study for ensuring financial sustainability of the PBSs, training and
                           capacity building activities for both REB and PGCB, identifying the scope of implementation of the
                           Geographic Information System (GIS), inventory management etc. This will also include
                           implementation support for the REB/PBS reform action plan. The technical assistance design is
                           expected to allow for the flexibility in extending support as and when needs arise.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The proposed Project is expected to cover the PBSs in the eastern part of Bangladesh (Dhaka,
                           Chittagong, and Sylhet divisions). The exact line routes and substations locations are not identified at
                           this stage. An Environmental and Social Monitoring Framework (ESMF) will be adopted by REB
                           and PGCB that will lay out the requirements for the environmental and social impact assessment
                           once the line routes and substation locations are identified. A few of the line routes and substation
                           locations may be identified during the ESMF preparation stage; site specific Environment
                           Management Plan (EMP) and Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for these will be developed as well
                           during the ESMP preparation stage.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           REB, the implementing agency for the distribution component, has a long history of implementing
                           Bank financed projects with the recently closed RERED project being the fourth one. REB has
                           developed its own environmental guidelines for screening/assessment of new operations with support
                           from the RERED project. In addition, REB/PBS officials are regularly trained on environmental
                           issues through the Training Directorate. The Timber Cell is assigned as environmental cell of REB
                           in addition to its regular activities. PGCB is now implementing the Bank-financed power
                           transmission component under the on-going Siddhirganj project. However, it does not have an in-
Public Disclosure Copy




                           house staff with appropriate qualifications on environment safeguards. It appoints outside
                           consultants for managing environmental safeguards. The proposed Project will help to strengthen the
                           capacity of both REB and PGCB on environment and social management.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi (SASDI)
                           Sabah Moyeen (SASDS)
                           Iqbal Ahmed (SASDI)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              Transmission and distribution schemes are
                           BP 4.01                                               generally considered as environmentally clean
                                                                                 and non-polluting in nature. Their impacts on
                                                                                 environment are normally restricted to rights of
                                                                                 way (ROW). Construction of new substation
                                                                                 may require rehabilitation of the old substations
                                                                                 and the key related environmental management
                                                                                 issue would be the collection and disposal of old
                                                                 transformers and capacitors. The environmental
                                                                 and social management framework (ESMF) will
                                                                 define the procedure for environmental and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 social screening/assessment for each subproject
                                                                 (exact routes and locations of the transmission/
                                                                 distribution lines and substations). Before
                                                                 approval of each subproject, environmental and
                                                                 social screening and assessment will be carried
                                                                 out with environmental management plan
                                                                 (EMP) and social management plan (SMP) that
                                                                 will include subproject specific mitigation and
                                                                 monitoring measures. EMP will be incorporated
                                                                 in the tender documents of work contracts. Site
                                                                 specific EMP and RAP will be prepared for any
                                                                 line routes and substation locations that may be
                                                                 identified during preparation of the ESMF.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes   Environmental issues during the construction
                                                                 phase of power transmission and distribution
                                                                 lines may include impacts on terrestrial and
                                                                 aquatic habitat. The possible impact on natural
                                                                 habitats will be addressed through subproject
                                                                 specific EMP.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   Since the routes are unknown at this stage, there
                         BP 4.11                                 is possibility that the transmission and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 distribution lines may pass through areas with
                                                                 physical cultural resources. Chance finds may
                                                                 be encountered and special precautions will
                                                                 need to be taken to avoid damaging cultural
                                                                 heritage sites and property.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   The transmission and distribution lines and
                                                                 substations may intervene in areas where
                                                                 indigenous people live (specific subproject
                                                                 locations will be determined during
                                                                 implementation). As such OP 4.10 has been
                                                                 triggered for the project. The ESMF will include
                                                                 an Ethnic/ Tribal Peoples Development
                                                                 Framework, based on which site specific Ethnic/
                                                                 Tribal Peoples Plan (ETPP) will be developed
                                                                 as and when required. The Framework will
                                                                 describe the screening/social assessment to be
                                                                 conducted for this purpose and include a
                                                                 screening template. The ETPP will be part of
                                                                 the Social Management Plan developed for each
                                                                                                                                 subproject, if the screening shows that it is
                                                                                                                                 required for that particular subproject.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           The addition of lines and establishment of new
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 4.12                                                                                            sub-stations will require land; this may be
                                                                                                                                 public or private land depending on the routing
                                                                                                                                 of the lines and requirements of the substation
                                                                                                                                 location. Thus OP 4.12 has been triggered for
                                                                                                                                 the project.
                                                                                                                                 The ESMF will include a Resettlement Policy
                                                                                                                                 Framework (RPF), based on which site specific
                                                                                                                                 Resettlement Actions Plans (RAPs) or
                                                                                                                                 Abbreviated RAPs will be developed for any
                                                                                                                                 subproject triggering private land acquisition,
                                                                                                                                 causing physical or economic displacement of
                                                                                                                                 people from public or private lands, affecting
                                                                                                                                 the livelihood of people/communities regardless
                                                                                                                                 of title. The RPF will be included in the SMP
                                                                                                                                 done for site specific subprojects where it is
                                                                                                                                 required. The SMF will also include a gender
                                                                                                                                 assessment framework and will address
                                                                                                                                 inclusion and accountability issues through all
                                                                                                                                 its recommended tools. The SMF will include a
                                                                                                                                 framework for grievance redress, institutional
                                                                                                                                 arrangements, disclosure process for the SMF
                                                                                                                                 and SMPs.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 14-Nov-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      An Environmental and Social Monitoring Framework (ESMF) will be adopted by REB and PGCB
                                      that will lay out the requirements for the environmental and social impact assessment once the line
                                      routes and substation locations are identified. This ESMF prepared work is expected to start in
                                      July 2013 and the acceptable draft report will be disclosed before the appraisal mission, which is
                                      planned on November 14, 2013. A few line routes and substation locations may be identified
                                      during the ESMP preparation, in which case, site specific Environment Management Plan (EMP)
                                      and Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be prepared for line routes/substations.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Zubair K.M. Sadeque



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Approved By:
                         Regional Safeguards Name:                     Date:
                         Coordinator:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sector Manager:     Name: Jyoti Shukla (SM)   Date: 23-Jul-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
