                                                                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                             APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA786
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Jun-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        Madagascar                               Project ID:                       P128831
                              Project Name:                   Madagascar-Irrigation and Watershed Management Project - PHRD (P128831)
                              Task Team Leader:               Achim Fock
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 08-Jun-2012                                    Estimated Board Date:             29-Jun-2012
                              Managing Unit:                  AFTAR                                    Lending Instrument:               Specific Investment Loan
                              Sector:                         Agricultural extension and research (40%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (35%), Irrigation and drainage
                                                              (15%), General agricul ture, fishing and forestry sector (10%)
                              Theme:                          Rural services and infrastructure (50%), Rural markets (40%), Rural policies and institutions (10%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                         Amount
                                   Borrower                                                                                                                     0.10
                                   Japan Policy and Human Resources Development Fund                                                                           12.66
                                   LOCAL BENEFICIARIES                                                                                                          2.29
                                   Total                                                                                                                       15.05
                              Environmental Category:         B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase rice productivity in selected irrigation sites and their surrounding watersheds.

                              3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                              The proposed Project is composed of four technical components and one project management component, as described below.

                              Component A: Development of Commercial Agriculture (about US$1.96 million; approximately 15.5 percent of the total). The objective of this
                              component is to lay the foundations for improved market access and sustainable intensification and diversification of irrigated and rainfed rice
                              production systems in the watersheds targeted by the Project. The Component has two sub-components. Sub-component (i) Support to
                              Agricultural Services will support the Government in improving access to markets and in the development of commercial agriculture value chains,
                              through the provision of services, works, equipment, training including in the following areas: (a) support to the development of commercial
                              agricultural supply chains, including market research and surveys, thematic studies, research and development of technologies for agricultural
                              intensification, support to beneficiaries in accessing financing, and promoting partnerships; (b) strengthening capacities of eligible beneficiaries; (c)
                              support to the Agricultural Service Centers (ACS); and (d) Support and advisory services for the implementation of technologies for agricultural
                              intensification and diversification, including implementation of agro-ecological and agro-forestry techniques. Sub-component (ii) Provision of
                              Demand-based Sub-project Matching Grants will support farmers, farmer organizations and other private stakeholders to carry out activities to
                              improve production and marketing along the rice value chains. The activities can include, for example, support to productive investments: the
                              introduction, dissemination and on-farm development of new agricultural production techniques; applied research; awareness raising and
                              demonstration campaigns; or the rehabilitation or development of quality rice seed production. It thereby addresses one of the biggest constraints
                              believed to be facing smallholder farmers and other private entrepreneurs, i.e. the perceived high risks associated with new technologies.

                              Component B: Irrigation Development (about US$4.93 million; approximately 38.9 percent of the total). The objective of this component is to lay
                              the foundations for improved management, maintenance and sustainability of irrigation services provision in selected small- to large-scale irrigation
                              schemes through targeted rehabilitation of irrigation infrastructure, capacity strengthening of stakeholders and clarification of roles and
                              responsibilities, and establishment of an appropriate incentive framework. The Component has two sub-components. Sub-component (i) Support
                              to Irrigation Development will support the MoA, WUAs, and the Regions and Communes within the Project Areas concerned in: (a) the preparation
                              of a Scheme Development Plan for Irrigation, if not yet available, and Performance Contracts (CPs); (b) the implementation of the relevant CPs,
                              including by supporting stakeholders during implementation of the CPs, through establishment and capacity strengthening of water user
                              associations, setting-up of sustainable O&M systems, annual evaluation of performance indicators, user satisfaction surveys, etc.; and (c) the
                              carrying out of studies on maintenance and operation costs and cyclone related damages. Sub-component (ii) Irrigation Investments will support
                              the MOA, WUAs, the Regions and Communes within the Project Areas concerned in: (a) the preparation of technical design studies, including
                              preparation of bidding documents; (b) the rehabilitation of irrigation and related infrastructure works agreed in the CPs; and (c) the supervision of
                              the works financed under (b) above.

                              Component C: Watershed Development (about US$1.53 million; approximately 12.1 percent of the total). The objectiv e of this component is to lay
                              the foundations for sustainable management of watersheds including irrigated and rainfed agriculture, and improved productivity of natural
                                                                                                                                                                           Page 1 of 5
                               resources. The Component has two sub-components. Sub-component (i) Planning and Capacity Building for Sustainable Watershed Development
                               will support: (a) the preparation of participatory plans for managing sub-watersheds; (b) the introduction and/or strengthening of communication
                               and negotiation platforms; (c) training and capacity strengthening of sustainable land management (SLM) groups; and (d) improvement of land
                               tenure security. Sub-component (ii) Sustainable Investments in Watersheds will support: (a) construction of strategic anti-erosion infrastructure
                               works through, among others, biological methods and technologies; and (b) provision of Sub-Projects Matching Grants to Sub-Project
                               Beneficiaries for carrying out of demand-driven improvements of the vegetation cover, including pastures and reforestation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                               Component D: Project Management (about US$1.64 million; approximately 13.0 percent of total). The objective of this component is to manage
                               and use resources in accordance with the Project's objectives and procedures and to evaluate its results. It has two sub-components. Sub-
                               component (i) Management of the Project will provide support to MoA and DRDRs to enable them to effectively carry out the overall Project
                               planning, quality oversight, procurement, financial management and monitoring of Project activities, including through the provision of training,
                               technical assistance, minor upgrading works, equipment, evaluation studies and incremental operating costs to MoA and DRDRs. Sub-component
                               (ii) Monitoring and Evaluation will provide support to MOA and to the DRDRs in the Project Areas in the management of information systems,
                               preparation of procedures for data collection and reporting, in order to: (a) carry out regular project monitoring and completion evaluations of
                               Project output and impact indicators; and (b) carry out surveys and participatory assessments, including those on regular user satisfaction.

                               Component E: Support for Rice Research and Development (about US$2.60 million; approximately 20.5 percent of total). The objective of this
                               component is to strengthen Madagascar's rice research system and strengthen the links between research and extension. It has three sub-
                               components. Sub-component (i) Improving Soil Chemical Analysis Capacity at FOFIFA will provide support to the national Soil Laboratory, to
                               provide soil mapping services and soil management advice to selected PN-BVPI areas. Sub-component (ii) Strengthening Basic Seed Production
                               Capacity in Rice will provide support to the national Rice Germplasm Center under the National Center for Applied Research in Rural Development
                               (Centre National de Recherche Applique au Dveloppement RuralFOFIFA) and several associated regional research stations and seed
                               multiplication farms in the areas targeted by BVPI. Sub-component (iii) Developing Rice Research and Extension Linkages will provide support to
                               researchers from FOFIFA and/or universities to conduct on-farm research, as well as to deliver extension services in selected BVPI sites.

                               4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                               This project design builds upon the ongoing national program BVPI (PN-BVPI) and will be implemented in selected irrigation sub-schemes in the
                               related watersheds. These sub-schemes are part of the larger irrigation schemes, of which some parts are already being targeted by the ongoing
                               national BVPI program. Components A, B and C, as well as a focus area of Component E will be implemented mainly in the specific sub-schemes
                               sectors and associated watersheds of the existing Marovoay, Itasy and Imamba-Ivakaka schemes and associated watersheds, respectively in
                               Boeney, Itasy and Alaotra-Mangoro Regions. Given the good state of irrigation management in Imamba-Ivakaka, there will be no rehabilitation
                               works expected in that specific site. The targeted areas include about 10,445 ha of potentially irrigated lands plus the associated watersheds. In
                               addition to the three sites, the Project will also support design studies of additional irrigation schemes in the existing Anony irrigation schemes of
                               Alaotra-Mangoro Region. Finally, it will tangibly contribute to the strengthening of the national rice research and development system.

                               5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                               Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTCS)
                               Paul-Jean Feno (AFTN1)

                               6. Safeguard Policies                           Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                               Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01             Yes
                               Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                     No
                               Forests OP/BP 4.36                              No
                               Pest Management OP 4.09                         Yes
                               Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11          No
                               Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                   No
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12             Yes
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                       Yes
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP       No
                               7.50
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60           No


                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any potential l arge scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                    The Project triggers four safeguards policies (OP 4.01, OP 4.09, OP4.12 and OP 4.37). The Recipient has prepared an Environmental and
                                  Social Management Framework (ESMF), a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), a Pest and Pesticides Management Plan (PPMP) and a
                                  Dam Safety Manual (DSM). These were disclosed both in-country and at the InfoShop prior to appraisal. At Concept Note stage, this Project
                                  was rated as an environmental and social Category-A project. However, during the pre-appraisal field mission, the safeguards team's in-depth
                                  assessment revealed that there was justification for downgrading the Project from EA Category A to EA Category B. The downgrading and the
                                  triggering of the above four safeguards policies is justified by the fact that Project-supported activities to be implemented under Components 1,
                                  2, and 3, as well as a portion of Component 5, will focus mainly on improving farmer rice productivity (i.e. rehabilitation of existing small
                                  irrigation infrastructures; replacement of hydraulic equipment / materials, watershed management program to reduce soil erosion or land
                                  degradation), concentrating mainly in specific sectors of the existing Marovoay, Itasy and Imamba-Ivakaka irrigation schemes and associated
                                  watersheds, respectively in Boeney, Itasy and Alaotra-Mangoro Regions. In light of the above, Government has updated the parent project
                                                                                                                                                                            Page 2 of 5
                         safeguards instruments, namely ESMF, PMP, RPF and Dam Safety Manual.

                         As stated above, overall, this proposed BVPI-PHRD will finance activities in Marovoay sectors 1, 2, 3, Ifanja North and Imamba-Ivakaka and
                         associated watersheds to improve farmer rice productivity in the project areas. These activities involve the rehabilitation of existing small
                         irrigation infrastructures; the replacement of hydraulic equipment, watershed management program to reduce soil erosion or land degradation.
                         Overall, it will impact positively the biophysical environmental since it will support watershed management (stabilizing/reducing soil erosion and
                         land degradation, reforestation within watershed impacting existing irrigation perimeters, promotion of agro-ecological production techniques,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         improvement of water availabilities within existing irrigation perimeters rehabilitated). Likely socio-environmental risks (loss of vegetation cover,
                         pollution contamination, etc.), health (pesticides/fertilizers contamination/poisoning; contamination of water quality; malaria proliferation; HIV
                         AIDs contamination) and safety (accidents on the work camps, etc.) may be associated with rehabilitation civil works, operation of facilities,
                         usage, storage/disposal and application of agrochemicals products, etc. Therefore, the Project has triggered the following four World Bank
                         safeguard policies.

                         OP 4.01 is triggered because the Project will support rehabilitation of irrigation-related infrastructure, investments in watershed development
                         and/or protection, and livestock production. The activities to be supported under the proposed project (mainly those related to improve rice
                         productivity in the existing irrigation perimeters rehabilitated specially, rehabilitation of existing small irrigation infrastructures, replacement of
                         old hydraulic equipment/materials, rehabilitation and cleaning out of existing irrigation/draining channels, disseminating of innovative agricultural
                         technical and subprojects to stabilize or reduce soil erosion/land degradation/watershed impacting irrigation perimeters) are expected to be
                         minimal, site specific and easily manageable; rather these are foreseen to have mostly positive environmental and social impacts, with both
                         environmental and social management measures fully integrated into the project design. Following the PCN stage, the Borrower has prepared
                         an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). The findings of the ESMF reveal that project activities, within Ifanja North and
                         Marovoay sector 1,2 and 3 will be implemented on already existing irrigation perimeters where civil works will be done mainly on small irrigation
                         infrastructures by replacing some old hydraulic equipment/materials. Moreover, the environmental and social profiles highlighted in the ESMF
                         and identified during the field visits and consultation with local farmers have concluded that because all the proposed rehabilitations works
                         would occur on already existing areas, therefore no Natural Habitats or important/sensitive biodiversity resources will be affected by the
                         proposed project activities. The only Protected area of Ankarafantsika is located upstream of the irrigation perimeters covered by the project,
                         and there are no mangrove forest close-by the targeted areas that could be affected by the anticipated project activities. Finally, the BVPI
                         PHRD grant operation will not support cutting down of forests or converting these into agricultural lands. Furthermore, the environmental and
                         social screening and scoping form used in the preparation of the ESMF identified that the selected irrigation perimeters of the project are
                         completely outside of any Natural Habitats and forests areas. The Project will also support design studies of additional irrigation schemes in the
                         existing Anony irrigation schemes (Imamba-Ivakaka) of Alaotra-Mangoro Region.
                         In addition to highlighting the potential impacts and/or risks and mitigation measures, the ESMF describes the institutional arrangements,
                         capacity building for various types and levels of stakeholders, budgeting and monitoring and evaluation mechanism to implement these
                         mitigation measures. Furthermore, the ESMF has also developed a simplified environmental and social screening form (ESSF) to be used by
                         the Environmental and Social Safeguard Specialist (ESSS) of the project as a checklist to effectively assess the viability of all proposed
                         subprojects under the PHRD grant. Finally, the ESMF includes an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) and has also made
                         provision to be used for the elaboration of site specific environmental and social impact assessment (ESIA) for all subprojects once their
                         physical footprints are known. Relevant ToR samples have been developed in the ESMF to guide the project ESSS. As for the future private
                         firms or contractors who will be awarded the contracts for the rehabilitation of hydro-agriculture related infrastructures in the selected perimeters
                         and valleys, separate Environmental and Social Clauses (ESC) to be factored in during project implementation will be developed as part of the
                         sites-specific ESIA along with their Environmental and Social Management Plan (Contractor ESCs). These ESCs would need to specific on
                         how the Contractors will tangibly handle core aspects of the social and environmental measures such as occupational health and safety/
Public Disclosure Copy




                         security measures, in compliance with IFC's Environmental, health and safety guidelines during rehabilitation works ; as well as how (i) to
                         effectively eliminate and manage both solid and liquid wastes; and (ii) to develop and deliver targeted training and sensitive awareness raising
                         programs to prevent HIV/AIDs infection on workers and local communities. Finally, the ESMF recommends also that Contractors should have a
                         valid official license to open and manage quarries/borrow pits including adequately rehabilitating them afterwards. Neighboring local
                         communities should be duly consulted prior to establishing these quarries and throughout during their management and rehabilitation for
                         closure. The ESMF's Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) has proposed relevant mitigation measures along with their
                         implementing costs have been integrated into the various project components. The above ESMF has been cleared by ASPEN, and, like the
                         others safeguards instruments, was publicly disclosed in-country on May 25, 2012 and and was received at the InfoShop on May 25, 2012,
                         prior to appraisal.

                         Pest Management (OP 4.09) is triggered mainly because of the likelihood of pesticides usages in the project targeted areas by farmers; though
                         BVPI PHRD will not purchase and distribute agrochemicals/chemical fertilizers and pesticides. It is likely that the project support to commercial
                         agriculture (comp. A) and its two subcomponents would encourage farmers groups to use more inorganic fertilizers and pesticides, known to be
                         less harmful to both the biophysical and human environments. To appropriately manage the health and environmental impacts of increa sed
                         use of processed pesticides, the Recipient has prepared a standalone Pest and Pesticide Management Plan (PPMP). It includes a number of
                         implementable guidelines/actions aiming at reducing/mitigating farmers groups/communities' (especially children/toddlers, elderly, women and
                         other vulnerable groups) exposure to pesticides used in agricultural production system and/or for malaria control. Moreover, this PPMP
                         disposes a set of training kits and envisages to further strengthening the technical capacity of Plant Protection Services at national, regional
                         and local levels with the overall objective of reinforcing the control of pesticide usage, improve the knowledge of various key stakeholders
                         (Farmers, local vendors, regional agricultural technicians such as extension-workers, etc) on the safe transportation, storage/disposal and
                         application of agrochemicals products. Finally, it recommends the application of an integrated pest management approach coupled with the
                         promotion of agro-ecological practices by the farmers' groups as well as the reinforcement of national legislation/policy, with the view of aligning
                         such regulation/policies with the regional ones. This PPMP has been cleared by ASPEN and then publicly disclosed in-country on May 25,
                         2012 and was received at the InfoShop on May 25, 2012, prior to appraisal.

                         Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) is triggered due to the proposed rehabilitation activities of hydro-agriculture infrastructures including
                         access roads to these irrigation plots as planned in component 1, 2, 3 ; all of which could result in some acquisition of lands, loss of income
                         revenues/socioeconomic assets and livelihoods support resources. As highlighted earlier, the Project activities would be implemented in
                         already existing agriculture lands; consequently, no physical displacement of people is anticipated, but rather some partial compensation due to
                         the temporary loss of assets or small pieces of lands during project implementation. As for now, since there is no clear determination of the
                         physical footprint of the project activities (i.e. small scale infrastructures to improve productivity, rural infrastructures and hydraulic equipment/
                         materials such as feeder roads, rehabilitation of existing irrigation/draining channels, etc.), the borrower has prepared a Resettlement Policy
                         Framework (RPF) to comply with OP/BP 4.12 policy requirements. Hence, the RPF (that includes details information on legal and institutional
                                                                                                                                                                       Page 3 of 5
                           framework, eligibility criteria, assets evaluating methods, implementation arrangements, grievances redress mechanism, resettlement budget
                           totally covered by the Government and monitoring and evaluation) sets forth the basic principles and prerogatives to be followed once (i) the
                           subprojects' footprints are known, and (ii) the need is been confirmed by the appliance of the Land Acquisition Screening Form (LASF) provided
                           in the RPF (Annex 4), such as the elaboration of detailed/abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans (RAP). This RPF has been cleared by ASPEN
                           and then publicly disclosed in-country on May 25, 2012 and was received at the InfoShop on May 25, 2012, prior to appraisal.

                           Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) is triggered because of the proposed rehabilitation of small irrigation infrastructures and the replacing of old
Public Disclosure Copy




                           hydraulic equipment/materials. The Project would not finance any new constructions or rehabilitation of large-scale irrigation facilities and dams
                           above 15 meters; but rather the construction of small check-dams to treat lavakas (gully erosion) and the rehabilitation of small works. A Dams
                           Safety Manual (DSM) has been prepared by the Recipient to harmonize and improve project operation in the existing irrigation perimeters to be
                           funded by the Project. The Dams Safety Manual provides basic characteristics on the type of dams, irrigation equipment, hydraulic materials,
                           and the forms of management of irrigation schemes, the institutional arrangement and the social and environmental clauses to be respected by
                           Construction companies during rehabilitation and exploitation of the above hydro-agriculture infrastructure. This updated DSM has been cleared
                           by ASPEN and then publicly disclosed both in-country on May 25, 2012 and was received at the InfoShop on May 25, 2012, prior to appraisal.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                             Project activities are expected to sustainably increase rice productivity in selected irrigation sites and their surrounding watersheds. The
                           project operation is limited to local level and without important/sensitive environmental areas in the project targeted zones. Its implementation is
                           not expected to result in any potential long-term or cumulative impacts. Because it will be implemented in already existing agriculture lands, and
                           its site specific negative impacts are rather minimal and localized, thus easily manageable; therefore it is rather believed that the project overall
                           outcome would be much more positive as they would tangibly contribute to the improvement of agriculture yields/productivity. Moreover, it will
                           increase in a more sustainable fashion the technical knowledge of targeted stakeholders, foster more ownership that would lead to more social
                           accountability, all of which would certainly lead to more sustainability of irrigation infrastructures.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                             The "no project alternative" would allow further deterioration of the irrigation schemes and the degradation of watersheds as well as
                           rehabilitated feeder roads with serious consequences or negative impacts on reducing poverty level and sustaining agriculture production for
                           food security. It leaves also the watersheds exposed to continued soil loss and degradation and the irrigation systems exposed to large
                           sediment loads which cumulative effects would seriously affect water availability in sections of the irrigation schemes.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                            and implement the measures described.
                             The BVPI National Coordination Unit (Cellule de Coordination-CelCo) of the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) is the implementing agency. It has
                           thus some proven experience managing Bank projects, though it would need some additional support to strengthen the technical capacity on
                           both social and environmental safeguards management. Recently, a full-time Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialist (ESSS) is
                           operational since nine months to strengthen environmental and social safeguards aspects under BVPI CelCo. The project ESSS will work
                           collaboratively with the National Office of Environment (ONE), the national authority responsible for environmental and social management and
                           also ensure compliance with national regulation and safeguards document reviews. Both the BVPI CelCo and the Bank recognize that in
                           general, the BVPI capacity in both environmental and social management is weak and needs further enhancement such as the last safeguards
                           training workshop organized by the BVPI IDA. In conjunction with this new project, both BVPI IDA and PHRD intend to undertake joint
                           additional social and environmental safeguards training workshop delivered by the World Bank project safeguards team to further ground both
                           the understanding and management of social and environmental safeguards policies and instruments. Rather than being a onetime exercise,
                           these safeguards training workshops will be iterative and open to other key stakeholders including beneficiary communities, private sector
Public Disclosure Copy




                           (Consultant firms...etc.) with the aim of reinforcing the grounding of public consultation and participation to foster more engagement, ownership
                           and social accountability for the sustainability of project implemented activities throughout the BVPI targeted areas.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                            on potentially affected people.
                             During the preparation of this Project, intensive public consultations and participation have been held with the farmers group in selected rice-
                           field irrigation perimeters. The main results of ESMF, PMP and RPF have been presented to the local community and discussed in Malagasy
                           language. All the safeguards documents (ESMF/ESMP, PPMP, RPF and DSM) have been disclosed simultaneously in the project areas on on
                           May 25, 2012 and were received at the InfoShop on May 25, 2012, prior to appraisal.

                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                30-Mar-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                            25-May-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                             25-May-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                           Directors
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                27-Mar-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                            25-May-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                             25-May-2012
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                             Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                                27-Mar-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                            25-May-2012

                                                                                                                                                                    Page 4 of 5
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                          25-May-2012
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                            disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                            C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                              Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?              Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                            OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                              If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or SM? Are            Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              PMP requirements included in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                              Management Specialist?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                              If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the      Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              plan?
                            OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                              Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements been made               Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              for public awareness and training?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?              Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language      Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for   Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?              Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard    Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same        Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Task Team Leader:                    Achim Fock
                            Approved By:
                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:     Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                          Date: 26-Jun-2012
                            Sector Manager:                      Name Michael Morris (SM)                                                   Date: 20-Jun-2012




                                                                                                                                                                 Page 5 of 5
