                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC3268

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-May-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 05-May-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Myanmar                         Project ID:      P143988
                            Project Name:      Electric Power Project (P143988)
                            Task Team          Dejan R. Ostojic
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          15-Jul-2013                     Estimated        26-Sep-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASTS                           Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Thermal Power Generation (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        140.00                Total Bank Financing:        140.00
                            Total Cofinancing:                               Financing Gap:                 0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                140.00
                              Total                                                                      140.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives


                           C. Project Description
                           Myanmar is facing large electricity shortages (about 20% of current demand) and high risk of
                           blackouts. The expansion of existing Gas Turbine (GT) stations through the installation of Combined
                           Cycle Gas Turbines (CCGTs) has been identified as the fastest way to increase efficiency of gas
                           utilization, increase generating capacity and reduce emissions. Myanmar Electric Power Enterprise
                         (MEPE) operates ten GTs and proposed four of them for the possible replacement of old and low-
                         efficiency GTs, including Thaton GT station which is currently considered the leading candidate for
                         possible IDA support.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         For the proposed Project, the following activities / components are envisaged:
                         •        The main component of the proposed project is the expansion of the existing 51 MW (total
                         installed capacity of 3 units) Thaton Gas Turbine (GT) station with a 120 MW Combined Cycle Gas
                         Turbine (CCGT) plant, consisting of two gas turbines and one steam turbine.
                         •        The CCGT plant will be implemented through a “supply and installation? contract including
                         engineering and project management services, supply of equipment, construction supervision,
                         testing, and commissioning. The contract may also include implementation of the environmental and
                         social management plan during the construction phase, insurance and maintenance support.
                         •        The project would include technical assistance in some of the following areas: (i) power
                         market reform and development of necessary secondary legislation and power sector regulations; (ii)
                         wholesale power market financial modeling and fiscal impact assessments to provide practical
                         feedback to policy makers and help define an optimal trajectory for the power market reforms; (iii)
                         electricity tariffs and energy pricing policy to support financial viability of the power sector, as well
                         as reduce investment risks in power generation projects; (iv) environmental and social protection
                         policies and guidelines for investments in the power sector; (v) implementation support, including for
                         safeguards; and (vi) development and implementation on National Electrification Program. The
                         details of the scope of the TA activities will be agreed with the government during project
                         preparation, in consultation with other development partners to ensure a coordinated approach in TA
                         and capacity building support.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Thaton GT station is located in a rural area approximately 5 km northeast of the township of
                         Thaton. Thaton township is the administrative center for Thaton District, which is within Mon State
                         of Myanmar.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Physically the land is a relatively flat coastal plain. Flooding of the site is not reported as an issue;
                         open drains carry away excess water to the surrounding fields in the rainy season. Land use
                         surrounding the GT station is agricultural with the exception of a tyre factory adjacent to the east side
                         of the site. A national road runs along the Project site at short distance (some 1,500m) and is an
                         important contributor to local noise levels. The closest habitation is some 500m from the site
                         perimeter fence. Both the proposed and the current plant operations do not use water e.g. for cooling
                         purposes and there are no perennial streams or rivers running through the site or close to the
                         immediate perimeter. All activities related to modernization and expansion will take place within the
                         power plant compound (‘brownfield development’) which is situated on government owned land.
                         This site has been in use for power generation since 1975 when the first two gas turbines were
                         commissioned at the Thatong GT station. Further characteristics of the surrounding area will be
                         analyzed based on the zone of influence to be determined as part of the Environmental and Social
                         Assessment (ESA) which has recently started as part of project preparation based upon a terms of
                         reference agreed upon with the client.

                         An initial socio-economic baseline survey has been carried out. An additional survey under the ESA
                         is currently being undertaken to provide more details on socioeconomic condition of the study area.
                         There are three villages surrounding the proposed project site. Occasional noise is heard in the
                         evening but people could not also distinguish clearly whether the noise all comes from the existing
                           turbine or the passing vehicles. The two immediate villages include Than Ban, and Kyar Pan. Both
                           villages lie about 1.5 km from the project site. Than Ban has a total household population of 100
                           households (400 persons) while Kyar Pan, 330 households (1500 persons). Another village, Nyaun
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Wyne, is located 2 km away from the project site, It is comprised of 252 households with varied
                           ethnic groups composed of Keren (1138 persons); Burmese (180 persons) and Pao (158 persons).
                           Gender aspects will be covered in the ESIA with particular focus on the effect of electricity access on
                           women and female-headed households.

                           Overall, it is not anticipated that any of these villages will be adversely affected by the project . No
                           land acquisition and no involuntary resettlement, loss of productive assets, loss of communal
                           properties, or cultural heritage is foreseen. The majority of the inhabitants are ethnic minorities of
                           varied types who have lived in the area for over 10 years. In Than Ban, the majority are Keren
                           (90%), while there is almost an even distribution among Keren (45%) and Pao (40%) in the village of
                           Kyar Pan. In Nyaun 80% belong to the Keren group.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           A lack of legal requirements and limited institutional capacity for ensuring effective safeguard
                           preparation and implementation in infrastructure projects is one of major hurdles for international
                           financial institutions and responsible investors in Myanmar. Whilethis issue is not limited to the
                           energy sector, new and large energy and power projects will be among the first to experience this
                           bottleneck. Addressing this constraint will require concerted efforts among several government
                           agencies to introduce and start implementing appropriate social and environmental protection
                           policies. A longer term initiative to build institutional capacity and provide adequate training is
                           needed. Initiatives to improve safeguard capacity should build upon the lessons learned from other
                           countries in the region and should ideally involve other key donors in Myanmar (e.g. ADB and
                           JICA). For the Project, identification of specific options for safeguard capacity building at the central
                           level such as within MOE, MOEP and MOECF will be limited to the extent that they are (directly or
                           indirectly) involved in project implementation and regulatory oversight and will be based on an
                           institutional development plan for this purpose.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           In addition to safeguards capacity building at the central level, the Project will also include activities
                           under its TA component to bring in international expertise to support project beneficiaries and
                           implementing agencies with project implementation and the strengthen oversight during the
                           operational phase of the project interventions. These efforts include the improvement of operational
                           standards of the gas-fired power plant, particularly in the field of integrating good health, safety and
                           environmental practices in daily operations.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Knut Opsal (EASER)
                           Frank Van Woerden (EASER)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes              The proposed project has been proposed as a
                           BP 4.01                                                category B project because all the physical work
                                                                                  will take place within the footprint of the
                                                                                  existing brownfield location. The project will
                                                                 substantially increase existing power generation
                                                                 capacity and will have positive impacts by
                                                                 reducing emissions and noise levels, while
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 improving reliability and quality of electricity
                                                                 supply in Thaton. The project will have
                                                                 minimum or negligible negative impacts on the
                                                                 environment. Many of the impacts are related to
                                                                 the existing operations. The project proposes to
                                                                 prepare an Environment Impact Assessment
                                                                 (EIA) and Environment Management Plan
                                                                 (EMP) to mitigate any potential impacts during
                                                                 construction and operation. Lack of institutional
                                                                 capacity for environmental and social protection
                                                                 will be addressed through the technical
                                                                 assistance component under the project. This
                                                                 will included support to develop and implement
                                                                 an Environment Management System (EMS) to
                                                                 address environmental, health and safety
                                                                 considerations of existing operations.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No    The Project site is in at an industrial
                                                                 (brownfield) site with that land use purpose for
                                                                 at least the last 30 years.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    The Project site is in at an industrial
                                                                 (brownfield) site with that land use purpose for
                                                                 at least the last 30 years.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    No cooling water use for power generation or
                                                                 other activities that would require the use of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    All construction and project activities will be
                         BP 4.11                                 within existing site. The Project site is in an
                                                                 industrial (brownfield) site with that land use
                                                                 purpose for at least the last 30 years.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     TBD   An initial screening for the presence of ethnic
                                                                 minorities in the project influence area that are
                                                                 covered by the Bank’s definition of ethnic
                                                                 minorities has been undertaken . Additional
                                                                 screening is required. An internationally
                                                                 recognized expert will be hired to help
                                                                 determine if ethnic minorities are present within
                                                                 the project’s area of influence.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No    The ongoing socio-economic study has
                         4.12                                    confirmed that there will be no displacement of
                                                                 households, land acquisition, loss of business
                                                                 establishments, productive assets, cultural
                                                                 heritage or livelihood.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            No relevant dams or impoundment structures
                                                                                                                                 present at the project site.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects on International                                         No                            The Project site is not adjacent to any
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            significant surface water, nor does the site have
                                                                                                                                 drainage to any surface water, and the intended
                                                                                                                                 investments would not result in particular
                                                                                                                                 wastewater discharges or use of cooling water.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project is not in a disputed area and is
                                 7.60                                                                                            wholly within the borders of Myanmar.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 10-Jun-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Tentative schedule of Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA) for project preparation:

                                      Field surveys            March 4 – 15
                                      Public consultations on the TORs           March 13 -15
                                      Inception report with field survey results April 2
                                      Draft environmental and socialassessment and other reports     May 8, 2013
                                      Consultations on draft reports               May 20-21
                                      Integration of comments from WB and client              May 24
                                      FINAL environmental and social assessment report and other reports         June 10
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Dejan R. Ostojic
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name:                                                                                                                      Date:
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Julia M. Fraser (SM)                                                                                                 Date: 05-May-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
