                                                                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                            APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA555
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-Mar-2012

                         I.   BASIC INFORMATION
                              1. Basic Project Data

                              Country:                        Africa                                  Project ID:                       P129565
                              Project Name:                   West Africa Agricultural Productivity Program 2A (P129565)
                              Task Team Leader:               Abdoulaye Toure
                              Estimated Appraisal Date: 13-Feb-2012                                   Estimated Board Date:             10-May-2012
                              Managing Unit:                  AFTAR                                   Lending Instrument:               Adaptable Program Loan
                              Sector:                         Agricultural extension and research (70%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (20%), Public administration-
                                                              Agriculture, fishing an d forestry (10%)
                              Theme:                          Rural services and infrastructure (30%), Regional integration (28%), Technology diffusion (27%), Rural policies and
                                                              institutions (10 %), Climate change (5%)
                              Financing (In USD Million)
                                   Financing Source                                                                                                       Amount
                                   BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                        15.00
                                   International Development Association (IDA)                                                                              180.00
                                   Total                                                                                                                    195.00
                              Environmental Category:         B - Partial Assessment
                              Is this a Repeater project? No

                              2. Project Objectives

                              A.           Proposed Development Objective(s)

                              The development objective of WAAPP-2A is to scale-up the generation, dissemination and adoption of improved technologies in the participating
                              countries# priority agricultural commodity areas that are aligned with the sub-region#s top agricultural commodity priorities, as outlined in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                              ECOWAP. In order to reach this objective, the Project will strengthen the regional cooperation in generation of technology, and scale-up
                              dissemination and training programs focused on regional and national priority commodities.

                              3. Project Description

                              The proposed WAAPP-2A development objective, components, results framework, outcome indicators, builds on the achievements of WAAPP-1A
                              and takes also into account lessons learned from the Eastern Africa Agricultural Productivity Program (EAAPP), and from the designs of
                              WAAPP-1B and WAAPP-1C. Key innovations in the design will be: (i) the detailed regional priority planning and enhanced technology exchange
                              mechanisms integrated in the WAAPP design; (iii) the enhanced R&D linkages and broader partnerships with sector stakeholders, including farmer
                              organizations and the private sector, for scaling-up technology dissemination and use; (iv) a detailed mandate and responsibilities of CORAF and
                              NCOS as facilitators of regional exchanges ; and (v) integration of WAAPP into national and regional agricultural investment programs.

                              Component 1: Enabling conditions for Regional Cooperation in Technology Generation, Exchange and Dissemination. Through this component the
                              Project will continue to support the strengthening of the mechanisms and procedures for generating, disseminating, and the exchange of improved
                              agricultural technologies, so as to allow participating countries to benefit fully from the regional cooperation in technology generation and
                              exchange. The component will build on the achievements of WAAPP-1A.

                              At regional level, CORAF will continue to closely collaborate with specialized ECOWAS services to: (i) finalize the application texts for harmonized
                              regional regulations and common procedures for genetic materials and agro-chemicals, facilitating exchanges between countries, including
                              regional information gathering and sharing systems; (ii) develop a regional framework for the application of intellectual property rights; and (iii) on
                              the basis of member country experiences, consolidate and promote sustainable financing mechanisms for R&D activities at national and regional
                              levels.

                              Component 2: Strengthening the National Centers of Specialization (NCOS). During this second phase of WAAPP, the Component 2 will support
                              the upgrading of the National Centers of Specialization (NCOS) into Regional Centers of Excellence (RCoE), focusing on drought-resistant cereals
                              in Senegal, rice in Mali and root and tuber crops in Ghana. At the regional level, research networks will be established with related national
                              commodity research teams in WAAPP countries, and technical support be sought from specialized CGIAR centers, as required. For each targeted
                              priority value chain, CORAF will support the NCOS for joint annual planning and monitoring of research activities to ensure alignment of regional
                              and national priorities and enhance technology exchanges. These annual workshops will ensure synergies and collaboration between participating
                              countries, facilitate networking and mobility of researchers working in the same field and avoid duplication.

                              Component 3: Support to Demand-driven Technology Generation, Dissemination and Adoption. Through this Component the Project will continue

                                                                                                                                                                          Page 1 of 5
                         to strengthen priority-focused demand-driven agricultural R&D and scale-up technology dissemination and training for targeted priority value
                         chains within participating countries. This component will be executed on the basis of an action plan that defines the national priorities and the
                         specific contribution of WAAPP in terms of (quantified) technology generation and dissemination activities.

                         This component will have three sub-components that are: (i) Subcomponent 3.1: Demand-driven Technology Generation. Through which the
                         Project will continue to strengthen priority focused transparent funding mechanisms for demand-driven R&D within the existing CARG scheme in
                         each of the participating countries; and (ii) Subcomponent 3.2: Support to accelerated adoption of released technologies through which the Project
Public Disclosure Copy




                         aims at speeding-up the adoption of released technologies to continue bridging the gap between farmers’ and researchers’ yields for the priority
                         commodities. The strategy consists of disseminating technologies developed under WAAPP and National research programs by strengthening of
                         technology delivery systems, in order to achieve large-scale sustainable impact (productivity increase) on the ground. And Subcomponent 3.3:
                         Facilitating access to improved genetic material. This sub-component will increase the availability of and producers' access to improved genetic
                         materials (seed, planting materials, fingerlings and animal breeds) for the identified priority value chains. The sub-component will provide support
                         to all key stakeholders along the chosen priority supply chains to scale up the production of breeder, foundation and certified seed, including
                         planting materials, fingerlings and animal stocks.

                         Component 4: Project Coordination, Management and Monitoring and Evaluation. This component will continue to strengthen the effective
                         coordination, management, M&E System, Social and Environmental dimensions (including safeguards) at the national and regional level. These
                         annual safeguards workshops will help systematize the synergies and collaboration between participating countries, particularly the Social and
                         Environmental Focal Points (SEFP), facilitate networking and mobility of project focal points and corresponding national agencies in charge of
                         social and environmental aspects to streamline safeguards compliance procedures.

                         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)

                         The project will cover Senegal, Mali and Ghana. It will provide a regional framework on the basis of which participating countries will collaborate
                         between them and with all other ECOWAS countries to implement national and regional agricultural strategies in the area of technology generation
                         and dissemination.

                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

                         Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTCS)
                         Africa Eshogba Olojoba (AFTEN)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                            Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01              Yes             WAAPP 2A is a Category-B project due to the fact that potential social and
                                                                                          environmental impacts are expected to be local, site-specific and easily
                                                                                          manageable. Because it is the second stage of the parent project (WAAPP 1A) the
                                                                                          phase 1 ESMF was updated to capture the context of the new orientations of
                                                                                          WAAPP 2A which follows the same line of intervention than WAAPP 1A, with a
                                                                                          focus on technology dissemination. The ESMF includes further provisions for
                                                                                          capacity strengthening at all levels, particularly for the Environmental and Social
                                                                                          Focal Points (ESFP) for the successful implementation of the project safeguards
                                                                                          measures, in compliance with national legislations and Bank safeguards policies.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                          Like the RPF and PMP, The ESMF underwent extensive public consultation and
                                                                                          participation that allowed capturing most of the stakeholders' views concerns,
                                                                                          reflected into the final draft documents, and thereafter cleared by both the World
                                                                                          Bank and CORAF. The ESMF, provide a, environmental and social screening form
                                                                                          (ESSF) to be applied to each subproject prior to its funding and implementation.
                                                                                          Together with the PMP and the RPF, the ESMF was then disclosed simultaneously
                                                                                          both in CORAF websites (in-country) and at the InfoShop on February 9, 2012
                                                                                          prior to appraisal.
                                                                                          Once the exact physical locations of future subproject activities are made known,
                                                                                          each country will prepare, with the technical support from both CORAF and the
                                                                                          World Bank, a site specific environmental and social impact assessment (ESIA)
                                                                                          commensurate to the ESMF and the policy principles and directives. Like the
                                                                                          ESMF, the ESIA, will undergo the same procedural approach for review and public
                                                                                          disclosure (both in-country and at the InfoShop) prior to its implementation.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                      No              The project is not supporting any agricultural sites near wetlands, mangroves or
                                                                                          other critical habitats. It is expected to be mainly implemented on existing
                                                                                          developed land.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                               No              The project is not supporting any extension of cropping area and therefore no
                                                                                          damage of forests is expected. It will develop its activities on land already under
                                                                                          exploitation.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09                          Yes             WAAPP-2 builds pretty much on WAAPP-1A, the first phase. The initial PMP was
                                                                                          updated and adapted to reflect WAAPP 2A interventions and set forth the basic
                                                                                          principles each member-country would follow to adequately handle the possible
                                                                                          usage of pesticides, especially during this second phase mostly focused in
                                                                                          dissemination of agriculture technologies. As a planning tool and mean for a
                                                                                          harmonious integration of the project in its biophysical and social environment and
                                                                                          as a way to maximize positive effects on the same environment in the sub-region.
                                                                                          The PMP was reviewed and cleared by both CORAF and World Bank, and then
                                                                                          disclosed simultaneously both in CORAF websites (in-country) on February 9,
                                                                                          2012 and at the InfoShop on February 13, 2012 prior to appraisal.


                                                                                                                                                                    Page 2 of 5
                               Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11         No               TThe project is not financing any infrastructure affecting Physical Cultural
                                                                                               Resources.
                               Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                  No               There are no Indigenous Peoples, as per the World Bank's policy definition, in the
                                                                                               targeted project area.
                               Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12            Yes              WAAPP-2A is a category-B project due to the fact that foreseen social and
                                                                                               environmental impacts are expected to be local, sites specific and easily
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               manageable. OP/BP 4.12 is triggered because of the expected land acquisition,
                                                                                               loss of assets or loss of access to livelihoods support means upon which local
                                                                                               beneficiary communities depend. To comply with WB OP/BP 4.12 policy principles
                                                                                               and guidelines, CORAF, as the regional implementing agency, has, on behalf of
                                                                                               the participating countries prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
                                                                                               applicable to each country on how to comply with the above mentioned land use/
                                                                                               right issues. The RPF underwent extensive public consultation and participation
                                                                                               that allowed capturing most of the stakeholders' views concerns, reflected into the
                                                                                               final draft documents, and thereafter cleared by both the World Bank and CORAF.
                                                                                               The RPF, Together with the PMP and the ESMF, the RPF was then disclosed
                                                                                               simultaneously both in CORAF websites (in-country) and at the InfoShop on
                                                                                               February 9, 2012 prior to project appraisal.
                                                                                               Once the exact physical locations of future subproject activities are made known,
                                                                                               each country will prepare, with the technical support from both CORAF and the
                                                                                               World Bank, a site specific Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) commensurate to the
                                                                                               RPF and the policy principles and directives. Like the RPF, the RAP, will undergo
                                                                                               the same procedural approach for review and public disclosure (both in-country
                                                                                               and at the InfoShop) prior to its implementation.
                               Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                      No               The project will involve no construction or rehabilitation of dams.
                               Projects on International Waterways OP/BP      No               The Project does not affect or involve international waterways.
                               7.50
                               Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60          No               The project will involve no activities in disputed areas.


                         II.   Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                               A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

                               1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential large scale,
                                  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                   Social (including Safeguards). WAAPP-2A is a Category B project which is expected not to have significant negative social impacts, since
                                 most of the foreseen impacts will be local, site specific and easily manageable. Project beneficiaries are mainly small-scale farmers who
                                 dominate African agriculture not only in local food production, but also production for regional and international markets - in which women play
                                 a critical role. The Project will work to ensure that the circumstances of small-scale farmers, particularly women, are accounted for in setting
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 priorities for the CARGS and implementing the research they finance. The grant schemes will require, for example, that bids for competitive
                                 grants clearly identify the farm population that will benefit from the research. Adaptive research will be conducted in farmers’ fields. Competitive
                                 grants to implement R&D will be open to producers’ organizations and agribusiness associations, inclusive of women and vulnerable groups,
                                 and not only to research organizations. The Project will work with development operations and public–private partnerships to promote
                                 producers’ use of technologies.
                                 The Involuntary Resettlement operational policy (OP/BP 4.12) is triggered because of the expected land acquisition, loss of assets or loss of
                                 access to livelihoods support means upon which local beneficiary communities depend. To comply with WB OP/BP 4.12 policy principles and
                                 guidelines, CORAF, as the regional implementing agency, on behalf of the participating countries has prepared a Resettlement Policy
                                 Framework (RPF) applicable to each country on how to comply with the above mentioned land use/right issues. Such an RPF was prepared in
                                 respect of national legislations and through series of extensive stakeholders consultation and participation workshops to ensure full capture of
                                 beneficiary communities and other key stakeholders' main ideas and messages that shows ownership and fosters social accountability. The
                                 RPF has also made tangible provision on grievance redress mechanism, participatory implementation arrangement and monitoring and
                                 evaluation, as well as an estimated budget and an social screening form as to how to determine whether or not there is a need for the recipient
                                 country to prepare a full/abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (RAP). In that regards, the RPF provides also an overall outline of a RAP which
                                 would be prepared for each site specific microproject during implementation once the specific location is been known. The RPF was reviewed
                                 during series of participatory stakeholder Workshop at both national ans sub-regional level and validated during a virtual workshop on February
                                 1st, 2012 under the leadership of both CORAF and World Bank. The RPF was cleared by ASPEN and ultimately disclosed both in CORAF
                                 websites and at the InfoShop on February 9, 2012 prior to appraisal. Finally, where appropriate, the corresponding site-specific RAP will be
                                 prepared by the recipient country, reviewed by both CORAF and the World Bank and systematically disclosed publicly both in-country and at
                                 the InfoShop.

                                 Environment (including Safeguards). WAAPP-2A was categorized and a B type project, which means that given the nature of proposed project
                                 activities, there implementation is expected to yield more positive than negative site specific environmental impacts through its support for
                                 agricultural technologies that promote better use of land and water resources, that are easily manageable. Potential environmental risks could
                                 include point and nonpoint pollution of water sources, other issues associated with the use of agricultural chemicals, and negative
                                 environmental impacts associated with the rehabilitation of irrigation or small-scale civil works on research stations. The project has triggered
                                 both the Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and the Pest Management (OP 4.09) operational policies which ultimately led to the
                                 elaboration of an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) because of the unknown context of proposed project activities
                                 physical location, and a Pest Management Plan (PMP) respectively. Both safeguards instruments, built in respect of national regulations and
                                 lessons learned during WAAPP 1A provide a list of measures to be followed by recipient countries with the view to avoid or minimize the
                                 potential negative impacts on both the natural and physical environment. Like for the RPF, the preparation of the ESMF and the PMP were
                                 done through series of extensive public consultation and participation workshops and the draft final were validated during a day-long virtual

                                                                                                                                                                          Page 3 of 5
                           workshop on February 1st, 2012. The two instruments (ESMF and PMP) were thereafter cleared by ASPEN and ultimately disclosed both in-
                           country and at the InfoShop on February 9 and 13, 2012, respectively.
                           Moreover, the ESMF provides a matrix called Social and Environmental Screening Form (ESSF) which is a binding process that all subprojects
                           must undergo to comply with safeguards requirements (i.e. determination of the subproject category based on the triggered policies, whether or
                           not to prepare soft or relatively detailed safeguards instruments, etc.).
                           Once the specific sites' physical locations are being known prior or during project implementation, each recipient country, under the guidance of
                           both CORAF and the World Bank, will prepare a site specific (abbreviated or detailed) Environmental and Social Impacts Assessment (ESIA) to
Public Disclosure Copy




                           further address environmental and social impacts. Like both the ESMF and the PMP, the ESIA will also be disclosed both in-country (and
                           CORAF website) and at the InfoShop prior to the implementation of the said activity.
                           So far, research on transgenic crops is neither explicitly planned nor excluded. If, during project implementation, it becomes part of the research
                           agenda supported under the Project, it will proceed with environmental and social safeguards requirements, such as the ESMF, consistent with
                           international good practice and the regulatory framework of the host country. In particular, such research must be done in accordance with the
                           obligation of each country under international treaties to which it is a party, including the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety. Potential adverse
                           environmental and social impacts associated with the NCoS activities will be of low intensity, minor, site specific, and handled under adequate
                           safeguards measures that would be jointly implemented by the project Environmental and Social Focal Points (ESFP) and representatives of
                           the existing national environmental and social agency in each country, along with some of the project beneficiaries.

                           The main substance of the ESMF, PMP and RPF will be captured and compiled into a Project Implementation Manual (PIM) that would serve
                           as the guiding tool to ensure tangible implementation of major social and environmental recommendations by national SEFP with the
                           cooperation of both CORAF and the World Bank.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area:
                            N/A
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
                            N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan
                            and implement the measures described.
                             This is a second phase of an APL. During the first phase a close supervision of the implementation of safeguard measures was conducted by
                           the social and environmental safeguards specialist of the Bank. In addition each country and CORAF appointed social and environmental
                           safeguards focal points (SEFP) in charge of supervising the implementation of the social and environmental safeguards mitigation measures. A
                           capacity building plan was also implemented including a regional training workshop in Dakar for all safeguard focal points. This initiative will
                           become a practice that would be reiterated this year and the years to come during the project lifecycle. The recent assessment indicates that
                           the project safeguards focal points have the required knowledge and are playing a key role in ensuring that safeguard measures are well
                           implemented. The parent project's ESMF and PMP have been updated and in addition the Borrower has prepared an RPF as recommended by
                           the review conducted during project preparation. All these documents include measures to ensure that safeguard requirements are complied
                           with. They were cleared and ultimately disclosed in-country and at the infoShop accordingly prior to appraisal.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis
                            on potentially affected people.
                             The stakeholders who were consulted during the preparation of the safeguard document are CORAF and the various agricultural, social,
                           environmental and health agencies as well as some NGOs and other civil society organizations of the three beneficiary countries (Senegal,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Ghana and Mali). Producers/processors and their organizations at the subregional level (ROPPA) and at the national level were also consulted.
                           A team of consultants recruited by CORAF organized field trips in each country to assess the range of impacts and discuss the safeguards
                           measures with various stakeholders and consequently include their concerns and views in the safeguards documents. In addition a regional
                           safeguard workshop was organized virtually on February 1st, 2012 to validate the draft documents. Recommendations from ASPEN and the
                           stakeholders’ workshop were reflected into the final drafts of the ESMP, RPF and PMP which ASPEN cleared thereafter. All three safeguards
                           instruments were then disclosed both in-country and at the InfoShop on February 9 and 13, respectively, prior to appraisal.

                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date

                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                           Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                              24-Jan-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                          09-Feb-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                           09-Feb-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
                           Directors
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                           Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                              24-Jan-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                          09-Feb-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                           09-Feb-2012
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                                           Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                              24-Jan-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                                          09-Feb-2012

                                                                                                                                                                  Page 4 of 5
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                          13-Feb-2012
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and
                            disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                            C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                              Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?              Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                            OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                              If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or SM? Are            Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              PMP requirements included in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                              Management Specialist?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                              If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager review the      Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                              Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?              Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language      Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                              Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for   Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?              Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]

                              Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard    Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                              Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same        Yes [     ]       No [   ]        NA [   ]
                              been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS

                            Task Team Leader:                    Abdoulaye Toure
                            Approved By:
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Regional Safeguards Coordinator:     Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                          Date: 06-Mar-2012
                            Sector Manager:                      Name Martien Van Nieuwkoop (SM)                                            Date: 27-Feb-2012




                                                                                                                                                                 Page 5 of 5
