                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC2340

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Mar-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 24-Mar-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Central Asia                     Project ID:      P132270
                            Project Name:      Central Asia Road Links - Kyrgyz Republic (P132270)
                            Task Team          Cordula Rastogi
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          06-Aug-2013                      Estimated        26-Nov-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSTR                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (90%), Public administration-
                                               Transportation (10%)
                            Theme(s):          Trade facilitation and market access (40%), Rural services and infrastructure
                                               (40%), Regional integration (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    150.00                     Total Bank Financing:         40.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                                Financing Gap:               105.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            5.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                  40.00

                              Total                                                                         45.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a     Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed Central Asia Road Links (CAR) program is the result of a collaborative effort initiated
                           by the respective governments in the Central Asia region. The development objective of the CAR
                           programs is to enhance transport connectivity and integration whiledeveloping sustainable and
                           efficient transport solutions. The program will achieve these objectives by (i) financing the upgrade
                         of priority road sections complementing the on-going CAREC program in transport; (ii)
                         implementing at pilot sites a set of measures to ensure sustainability and efficiency of the road
                         infrastructure investments (e.g., maintenance and safety); (iii) strengthening mechanisms of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         interaction between road users (trading community and local population) and public agencies
                         providing services; and (iv) developing a strategy and action plan with specific measures which
                         could further increase the efficient movement of goods and people across borders. The proposed
                         CAR program is expected to have substantial positive impacts on poverty reduction and economic
                         growth.

                         In line with the overall Project Development Objective (PDO) of the program, the development
                         objective of the first phase of the proposed Adjustable Program Lending (APL I) is to rehabilitate
                         priority road sections in Osh and Batken Oblasts (along the Osh-Batken-Isfana road) and improve
                         road operations and maintenance practices along the core road network. The road links once
                         rehabilitated will improve access along the only land transport connection between the main Kyrgyz
                         cities in the Ferghana valley to the rest of the country. It will also contribute significantly to lowering
                         the cost of transport of imports and exports in a corridor from and to China. Recent estimates show
                         that more than 550,000 tons of goods travel through the road corridor while traffic intensity is
                         greatest south of Osh city at about 6,000 vehicles per day and over 800 vehicles per day in and
                         around Isfana city. Most importantly, the recently updated feasibility study for the road sections in
                         Osh and Batken Oblast shows that the share of commercial vehicles (trucks) has doubled within the
                         last two years from about 10 percent to 20 percent of total traffic. Passenger traffic in cars and buses
                         represents the remainder.

                         The possibility of preparing simultaneously projects for each participating country in a matrix of
                         interdependent actions and investment does appear challenging. Still, the achievement of the overall
                         program objectives will be greatly aided by simultaneous standardization and harmonization of trans-
                         border road-related infrastructure, institutions and operations among countries. Taking this into
                         consideration, a regional or ‘horizontal’ APL structure provides important advantages and is the
                         preferred option as it will allow to implement the program with sequential entry of countries (as each
Public Disclosure Copy




                         becomes ready to enter). A horizontal APL is found to be more useful because it formally embeds the
                         objective of the program in a long-term framework and it enables to focus on the right issues,
                         prioritization and phasing of investments and policy dialogue. Given the geopolitics of the region, a
                         long-term commitment is politically important and could provide an efficient framework of
                         incentives of good performance.
                         C. Project Description
                         The Bank-financed proposed APL I will consist of the following components (estimated costs are
                         presented as net of all taxes and duties which are covered by the Government's co-financing and
                         represent about 20 percent of total project costs):

                         Component 1: Rehabilitation of Priority Road Sections in Osh and Batken Oblasts
                         The component will finance the provision of works and consultants’ services for the rehabilitation of
                         about 150 kilometers of priority road sections along and within close vicinity of the road linking Osh,
                         Batken, and Isfana cities with neighboring countries. The priority road sections will be located in
                         Osh and Batken Oblasts and are expected to include: Nookat Pass to Kyzyl Kiya, bypass around
                         Batken, Isfana city to border with Tajikistan as well as additional links to borders with neighboring
                         countries. The proposed road sections are expected to be built based on design standards of road
                         category III according to SNIP KR 32-01:2004 (carriageway width up to 15 meters, shoulder width is
                         up to 3,75 m). This includes services for construction supervision and physical and price
                         contingencies (estimated at about 20 percent). Estimated total cost: US$ 140 million.

                         Component 2: Improvement of Road Operations and Maintenance Practices
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component will finance the provision of goods, and consultants’ services for the improvement
                         of road operations and maintenance practices prolonging life cycle of newly rehabilitated road
                         sections and road structures. Multi-year road maintenance contracts (featuring performance
                         standards) with selected DEPs will be implemented along sections that were recently completed with
                         support from IFIs (e.g., Pulgon-Batken, Bishkek-Osh, Irkestam-SaryTash). This will require the
                         revision of existing legislation (such as procurement laws), support in drafting of bid documentation,
                         conducting the tender as well as supervising the implementation of the works. On-going work
                         financed by technical assistance grants from the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) and
                         the World Bank on road maintenance planning will complement the proposed component. In order to
                         support implementation of the recently adopted law on axle-load control according to which it is
                         prohibited for trucks with axle loads exceeding 100 tons to enter the country, this component will
                         review the existing framework and potentially finance scales that could be used along the road
                         corridor. Estimated total cost: US$5 million.

                         Component 3: Project Management, Implementation, and Strategic Plan Development
                         This component will finance the provision of goods, consultants’ services, training, operating costs,
                         including a financial audit to support project coordination, implementation and management.
                         Consulting services will also be procured to develop a strategic plan for cross-border trade
                         facilitation measures to be implemented in the medium to long-term along the Osh-Batken-Isfana
                         road, complementing existing initiatives by the ADB and others, such as the RIBS project which will
                         improve border-crossing points, logistics and customs procedures in the region. Estimated total cost:
                         US$5 million.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Project expected locations include:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         * Nookat Pass to Kyzyl Kiya,
                         * Batken bypass and link to border,
                         * Isfana city to border with Tajikistan.
                         Risks are limited to the typical impacts associated with road construction and rehabilitation projects.
                         The severity of potential impacts is moderate and mostly limited to the construction period: (i) air
                         pollution and noise from trucks and other construction machinery, and asphalt plants, (ii) soil
                         disturbance during earthmoving and material (gravel/sand/soil) extraction, and (iii) tree-cutting and
                         loss of vegetation, (iv) generation and disposal of construction and household (from construction
                         camps) solid waste, and (v) construction camp management (which will be temporary with only
                         minor and localized negative effects).
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The MoTC is responsible for the implementation of all transport and communications related
                         projects. MoTC and its IPIG have accumulated substantial knowledge on project management from
                         the implementation of projects financed by the World Bank and other development partners such as
                         the ADB, the Eurasian Development Bank (EDB), the European Bank for Reconstruction and
                         Development (EBRD), the delegation of the European Union (EU), the Islamic Development Bank
                         (IsDB) as well as China Exim Bank. IPIG which is responsible for fiduciary and safeguards related
                         functions of the project, including flow of funds, budgeting, internal control, accounting, contract
                         management, reporting and auditing has a good track record. IPIG is also responsible for the
                           collection of Project's performance indicators data and analysis of results, and implementation of
                           safeguards policies. An assessment will be undertaken as part of the preparation of the proposed
                           Project to review IPIG’s capacity to implement this additional Project. An IPIG staff have been
Public Disclosure Copy




                           assigned to update the environmental and social safeguards documentation and monitor compliance
                           with safeguards requirements during project implementation.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Alexei Slenzak (ECSEN)
                           Aly Zulficar Rahim (ECSSO)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes              Road rehabilitation will be undertaken within
                           BP 4.01                                             the existing right of way of the road and
                                                                               environmental impacts can be mitigated by
                                                                               good construction and housekeeping practices.
                                                                               The EIA and EMP have been prepared by the
                                                                               client.
                                                                               The following sections of the road were not
                                                                               covered by EIA:
                                                                               * Batken bypass and link to border,
                                                                               * Isfana city and link to border with Tajikistan
                                                                               The environmental documentation (EIA and
                                                                               EMP) will be updated and disclosed by MOTC
                                                                               and public hearings will be organized in specific
                                                                               project locations.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        TBD              The project EMP was prepared in July 2009.
                                                                               This EMP does not cover sections between
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               Isfana city and border with Tajikistan and
                                                                               bypass around Batken city. The project team
                                                                               jointly with IPIG will check whether there are
                                                                               protected areas or other important natural
                                                                               habitats in the areas of road alignment and if
                                                                               OP/BP 4.04 is triggered.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                 TBD

                           Pest Management OP 4.09            No

                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/    TBD
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No

                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     Yes              A Resettlement Policy Framework was prepared
                           4.12                                                by the client for the Bank-financed National
                                                                               Roads Rehabilitation Project, and re-disclosed
                                                                               on May 4, 2010 during processing of the
                                                                               Additional Financing for NRRP. The RPF was
                                                                                                                                 developed to accurately reflect potential
                                                                                                                                 resettlement impacts along the primary corridor
                                                                                                                                 proposed for financing under the new project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 The RPF thus is expected to remain largely
                                                                                                                                 valid and is expected to be comprehensive
                                                                                                                                 enough to deal with anticipated resettlement
                                                                                                                                 impacts and when necessary enable the
                                                                                                                                 preparation of site-specific Resettlement Action
                                                                                                                                 Plans when designs are finalized. Land
                                                                                                                                 acquisition is expected to be small-scale in
                                                                                                                                 nature with possible impacts on roadside
                                                                                                                                 vendors or kiosks, or potential acquisition of
                                                                                                                                 small uninhabited parcels of private land
                                                                                                                                 directly adjacent to road alignments if widening
                                                                                                                                 occurs.

                                                                                                                                 As the selection of segments is ongoing, the
                                                                                                                                 RPF will be reviewed and updated as required
                                                                                                                                 during preparation. This review will, in
                                                                                                                                 particular, assess any modifications to the RPF
                                                                                                                                 that might be necessitated by the inclusion of
                                                                                                                                 new proposed segments:
                                                                                                                                 Batken bypass and link to border with
                                                                                                                                 neighboring countries,
                                                                                                                                 Isfana city to border with Tajikistan.

                                                                                                                                 Any necessary revisions to the RPF will made
                                                                                                                                 before a final version is disclosed by MOTC in
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 conjunction with any necessary public
                                                                                                                                 consultation.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Aug-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The environmental documentation (EIA with EMP) will be updated and disclosed by MOTC and
                                      public hearings will be organized in specific project locations during preparation. The RPF will be
                                      reviewed and updated as required during preparation. This review will, in particular, assess any
                                      modifications to the RPF that might be necessitated by the inclusion of new proposed segments:
                         IV. APPROVALS



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Task Team Leader:   Name: Cordula Rastogi

                         Approved By:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)   Date: 24-Mar-2013
                         Coordinator:
                         Sector Manager:     Name: Juan Gaviria (SM)     Date: 15-Mar-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
