                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC2781

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Apr-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-May-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Senegal                          Project ID:      P129472
                            Project Name:       Senegal Health & Social Financing (P129472)
                            Task Team           Christophe Lemiere
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           10-Sep-2013                      Estimated        19-Dec-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      AFTHW                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Health (70%), Other social services (30%)
                            Theme(s):           Health system performance (60%), Nutrition and food security (20%), Social
                                                safety nets (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     40.00                      Total Bank Financing:          20.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                                 Financing Gap:                  0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                             0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                   20.00
                              Health Results-based Financing                                                20.00
                              Total                                                                         40.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The overall project objective is to improve health and nutritional outcomes among women and
                           children in regions among the poorest. To that end, the proposed Project Development Objective
                           (PDO) is, in selected regions, (i) to increase the utilization of maternal and child health and
                           nutritional services, especially among the poorest households and (ii) to improve the quality of these
                           services.
                         C. Project Description
                         Component 1. Result-Based Financing (RBF) for health and nutrition (IDA $6 million + HRITF $20
                         million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Through this component, the proposed program will channel funding to the Regional RBF
                         Management Committees (RMCs), which are already in place thanks to theexisting pilot. These
                         RMCs will make payments based on results achieved by health facilities and households. Payments
                         will be made by the RMCs to health facilities (PBF), NGOs/communities, and/or to households (cash
                         transfer, vouchers, and subsidies for paying health insurance premium to the poorest). Health
                         facilities can be Government-run or private not-for-profit. The local councils selected for the RBF
                         mechanism will be those in the most underserved areas in Senegal. The results to be achieved will be
                         based on a set of indicators. Local councils (“communes”) will be involved in deciding which
                         interventions (and therefore which indicator) should be incentivized, given the local context.

                         As in all RBF projects, indicators will be verified by an independent verification agent (IVA), with a
                         progressive transfer of this responsibility to local councils and community-based organizations
                         (CBOs).
                         Practically, verification of achieved indicators will be done by the IVA and the local councils.
                         Indicators will then be counter-verified by CBOs. This community-based counter-verification will be
                         carried out in (i) drawing from health facilities registries a random sample of patients’ names and (i i)
                         meeting these patients/mothers at home, to verify that they exist and that t hey obtained the services
                         reported by health facilities.

                         RMCs, local councils, NGOs and CBOs will also benefit from capacity building (see component 2)
                         to set up, implement and verify the RBF packages.

                         NB: Under this component 1, eligible expenditures will include services, small equipment, goods,
                         and salary top-ups for civil servants. Works are not eligible.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2. Enhancing capacities for results ($14 million)

                         Sub-component 2.1. Building capacity for accountability at local level ($8 million)

                         Through training and consulting services, this sub-component will mainly support RMCs and local
                         councils for setting up and implement the RBF mechanism ($2 million). It will also cover the costs of
                         the IVA and CBOs ($4 million) as well as the costs of the “enquete continue” ($2 million).

                         Sub-component 2.2. Building capacity for equity and efficiency in service delivery ($6 million)

                         With training, equipment, operating costs and consulting services, this sub-component will support
                         several efforts for building capacities at central level.

                         A first area of support will be the health insurance arm of the CAPSU. The objectives here are to
                         help the Government to set up a national entity that will be in charge of subsidizing the health
                         mutuals.

                         The sub-component will support the Hospital Directorate of the Ministry of Health (MoH) to:
                         •      roll out cost accounting and clinical coding systems in all hospitals,
                           •       design a simplified case-based payment system,
                           •       prepare of a new hospital bill (to re-allocate more control power to the MoH) and
                           •       develop regional hospital masterplans.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Finally, the sub-component will cover the operating costs of the Program Implementation Unit.

                           Tasks Estimated costs
                           Support to the CAPSU $2 million
                           Strengthening the capacity of the Hospital Directorate     $2 million
                           Operating costs of the PIU       $2 million
                           Total $6 million

                           NB: Under this component 2, eligible expenditures will include consulting services, training,
                           operating costs and small equipment. Works are not eligible.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Project locations are rural areas in Senegal. These areas will be selected during preparation. The
                           main criteria for selection will be the situation of maternal health and child nutrition indicators. The
                           regions with worst results on these indicators will be selected.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The proposed Project will mostly build on the existing project for supporting nutrition (P097181).
                           This nutrition project has not triggered any environmental safeguards.
                           Note also that, during the previous health project (P002369), environmental risks were managed in a
                           satisfactory way (see ICR).
                           In addition, the Government has already a Medical Wastes Management Plan, as well as adequate
                           regulation for managing biomedical waste.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Abdoul Ganyi Bachabi Alidou (AFTTR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/          No               The project will not support any investment
                           BP 4.01                                                (including civil works) that is likely to harm
                                                                                  natural environment. The subsidies and other
                                                                                  incentives in Component1 will certainly
                                                                                  increase the number of healthcare beneficiaries,
                                                                                  thus inducing an increase in medical waste
                                                                                  production by health facilities. However the
                                                                                  associated risks may be prevented through the
                                                                                  implementation of the National Medical Waste
                                                                                  Management Plan, an an adequate sensitization
                                                                                  of health workers as well as the setting of a
                                                                                  related indicator among the performance
                                                                                  indicators to be monitored.
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No
                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 03-Jun-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      N/A
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Christophe Lemiere
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name:                                                                                                                      Date:
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Trina S. Haque (SM)                                                                                                  Date: 10-May-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
