                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSC797

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 30-Jan-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Jul-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Vietnam                           Project ID:       P126507
                            Project Name:       Ho Chi Minh City Green Transport (P126507)
                            Task Team           Ajay Kumar
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           03-Jun-2014                       Estimated         21-Oct-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      EASVS                             Lending           Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          General transportation sector (80%), Public administration- Transportation
                                                (20%)
                            Theme(s):           Other urban development (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    187.99                        Total Bank Financing:         142.25
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Cofinancing:                                   Financing Gap:                  0.00
                              Financing Source                                                               Amount
                              Borrower                                                                         45.74
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                           142.25
                              Total                                                                           187.99
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase accessibility to job opportunities
                           and urban services for citizens residing in the south-western side of the city and other adjacent areas
                           to the project corridor, by providing an alternative that issafer, more secure, more efficient, integrated
                           with land development along the corridor and integrated with the proposed metro lines, and generates
                           fewer emissions.
                           C. Project Description
                         The proposed project comprises of two components:

                         a) Component 1: BRT Corridor Development. This component will finance the development of a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         demonstration BRT line on the Vo Van Kiet Highway (VVKH), with an estimated longitude of 25
                         km, adopting a sustainable transport approach that will integrate investments in: i) the rehabilitation
                         and improvement of road infrastructure on the VVKH, so as to support BRT operations; ii) the
                         construction of complementary BRT infrastructure, such as bus depots, terminals, stations, bicycle
                         and motorcycle parking facilities, etc; iii) the procurement of specially-designed alternative fuel
                         BRT buses; iv) the implementation of a broad range of intelligent transport systems (ITS), including
                         advanced traffic management systems (i.e. smart traffic signals, cameras, e-police, etc), and
                         advanced bus operation management systems (i.e. global positioning systems, communication
                         equipments, etc); and v) complementary non-motorized transport infrastructure to facilitate access to
                         the BRT services, such as pedestrian bridges and/or tunnels, bikeways, sidewalk improvements, etc.,
                         as well as public spaces like parks and plazas, and landscaping.

                         b) Component 2: Institutional Strengthening. This component will finance institutional strengthening
                         and capacity building activities essential to the successful implementation of the BRT line, and, more
                         broadly to improve transport and urban development planning in HCMC. The component will
                         include the development of: i) training programs for the MOCPT, the DOTPW and other relevant
                         government agencies in project management, urban transport planning and public transport
                         operation; ii) strategic support activities by technical experts on the operation of the BRT line; iii)
                         pre-feasibility study of the integration (fare, operational, physical) of the BRT line with other bus
                         services in the city and the future MRT lines; iv) comprehensive feasibility study on establishment of
                         a Public Transport Authority overseeing all public transport services in the HCMC metropolitan area;
                         v) policy guidelines to promote transit-oriented development along VVKH corridor; iv) pre-
                         feasibility study of public-private partnership (PPP) opportunities and additional financing
                         mechanisms for the expansion of BRT and MRT systems and development of complementary
                         facilities; and vi) pre-feasibility analyses of additional BRT lines and/or other follow-up investments.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The current estimation for total project cost is US$ 187,987,000, with Component 1 costing US
                         $182,987,000 and Component 2 costing US$ 5,000,000. The Bank’s contribution to the financing of
                         the project totals US$ 152,250,000, including an IBRD loan for 142,250,000 and a PPTAF grant for
                         US$10,000,000. The local counterpart’s contribution totals US$ 35,737,000. The estimation does not
                         include land acquisition and resettlement, which will be financed directly by HCMC government.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The BRT line proposed for financing locates on VVKH –an East-West Corridor runs in parallel to
                         the Tau Hu-Ben Nghe canal cutting across Ho Chi Minh City (HCMC). The project will be
                         implemented in HCMC. HCMC is located on the banks of the Saigon River, 60 km away from the
                         coast of the South China Sea and 1,760 km south of Hanoi. HCMC is the most populous city in
                         Vietnam, with over 7.3 million habitants in its city proper, and over 9 million habitants in its
                         metropolitan area. HCMC is also the largest economic development pole in the country, generating
                         roughly 20% of the national gross domestic product.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         Urban Civil Works Construction and Investment Management Board (UCCI) has been assigned as
                         the Project Management Unit (PMU) for the Project. UCCI has been a PMU for several donor-
                         funded or government own funded projects. Some PMU staff worked on a previous World Bank
                           funded urban transport project in HCMC. The PMU managed the land acquisition and resettlement
                           for the East-West corridor (VVKH) Project and the Water Environment Improvement Project, both
                           financed by JICA. The Compensation and Resettlement Department of UCCI has been in operation
Public Disclosure Copy




                           since 2000 and includes ten (10) staffs. The PMU also has four environmental engineers who worked
                           in the mentioned Water Environment Improvement Project but with only limited practical experience
                           in implementing environmental monitoring plans and supervising environmental mitigation measures
                           as many tasks were carried out by the consultants hired by the Project. With additional training
                           capacity building activities on environmental monitoring and supervision to be implemented during
                           project preparation and implementation, the PMU appears to be in a good position to take the
                           responsibility for this project. Further training on the Bank safeguard policies and requirements will
                           be provided to PMU’s staffs during project preparation and implementation.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Tuan Anh Le (EASVS)
                           Son Van Nguyen (EASVS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              Overall, the proposed Project will bring about
                           BP 4.01                                              long-term environmental benefits and positive
                                                                                impacts to the lives of the people in Ho Chi
                                                                                Minh City, reduce traffic safety risks and
                                                                                emissions from private vehicles. The city’s
                                                                                urban landscape will also be improved by
                                                                                “greening? investments provided by the Project.

                                                                                The Project will have some potential negative
                                                                                socio-environmental impacts associated with the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                rehabilitation and improvement of existing road
                                                                                infrastructure to support BRT operations, the
                                                                                construction of BRT infrastructure and other
                                                                                non-motorized transport infrastructure to
                                                                                facilitate access to the BRT services under
                                                                                Component 1 of the proposed project. The
                                                                                potential negative impacts of these civil works
                                                                                during construction are known including
                                                                                generation of noise, dust solid waste, traffic and
                                                                                social disturbance etc, at a moderate level.
                                                                                Increased noise level and traffic safety risks
                                                                                would be the main concerns during operation
                                                                                phase.

                                                                                As the negative impacts during construction are
                                                                                known, mostly localized and manageable while
                                                                                the impacts during operation phase would be
                                                                                mostly address through design solutions and
                                                                                operational rules, the Project is proposed to be
                                                            Environmental Category B.

                                                            An Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            Report will be prepared as part of project
                                                            preparation to cover potential adverse social and
                                                            environmental impacts arising from projects
                                                            investment activities, particularly those from
                                                            physical works under Component 1, during
                                                            construction and operation phases.

                                                            The EIA also includes an Environmental
                                                            Management Plan (EMP) to address the
                                                            potential impacts identified in the EIA. An
                                                            Environmental Code of Practice (ECOP) will be
                                                            prepared as a part of the EIA/EMP to address
                                                            generic impacts arising from construction
                                                            activities. Any investment activity with impacts
                                                            which are not adequately covered by the
                                                            ECOPs, the EIA/EMP will include site-specific
                                                            mitigation measures for those work activities.
                                                            The EIA will also include environmental and
                                                            social baseline information of the existing
                                                            situation at the project site, assessment of
                                                            project alternatives and the related
                                                            environmental impacts on communities, land
                                                            use, transport, and cumulative impact
                                                            assessment.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            TORs for Environmental Considerations in the
                                                            two pre-feasibility studies covered under
                                                            component 2 will also be included in the EMP.

                                                            The EIA/EMP will be subject to the Bank
                                                            review and no-objection, and also subject to
                                                            approval by HCMC Department of Natural
                                                            Resources and Environment (DONRE).

                                                            The environmental assessment process will
                                                            include extensive public consultation and
                                                            continued planning and outreach both during
                                                            project design and early preparation stage. EIA
                                                            and EMP will be disclosed at Infoshop and
                                                            project areas prior to Project appraisal.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No   The project is located in an existing urban area,
                                                            it will not cause degradation or conversion of
                                                            any known important natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    The project area is in urban and will not affect
                                                                 any forest.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    No pesticide or herbicide will be used in the
                                                                 project.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   The proposed investment is in District 1 as well
                         BP 4.11                                 as the canal’s banks and the VVK Boulevard
                                                                 known to host heritage buildings and historic
                                                                 neighborhoods. EA will include screening for
                                                                 Physical Cultural Resources (PCR) along the
                                                                 VVKH, and other project sites. Whether this
                                                                 policy is triggered will be confirmed at appraisal
                                                                 stage as part of the PCR study. EMP will
                                                                 address the potential impacts on PCR, if any.
                                                                 The provision for Chance Find procedure will
                                                                 also be included in the EMP and also as part of
                                                                 the biding documentation/technical
                                                                 specifications together with the mitigation plan
                                                                 during construction works.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No    The project will not affect any ethnic minority
                                                                 communities, as defined in OP 4.10, although
                                                                 individual households of indigenous origin may
                                                                 be residing in the project area. Since there are
                                                                 no ethnic minority present in the project area,
                                                                 OP 4.10 will not be triggered.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   The project would be mainly utilizing land of an
                         4.12                                    area recently acquired for infrastructure
                                                                 development. However, it is estimated that
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 additional land acquisition may be required,
                                                                 which will be determined by the technical
                                                                 design during the project preparation. A due
                                                                 diligence review will be conducted to assess the
                                                                 prior resettlement of non-Bank financed projects
                                                                 or components which are essential to the design
                                                                 or performance of the project to define
                                                                 potentially ‘linked’ projects. The due diligence,
                                                                 in addition to the preliminarily identified linked
                                                                 government owned projects at two ends of the
                                                                 route, includes the involuntary resettlement
                                                                 activities for the construction of the VVKH
                                                                 boulevard itself. The due diligence will include
                                                                 identification of any legacy, reputational or
                                                                 liability issues, and whether the borrower
                                                                 complied with national law. The review will
                                                                 also determine the level of compliance with the
                                                                 Bank OP 4.12, and proposed measures to be
                                                                 considered if remedy is needed. These measures
                                                                                                                                 would be included in the project Resettlement
                                                                                                                                 Action Plan (RAP or RAPs) prepared prior to
                                                                                                                                 project appraisal, and will be documented in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 due diligence section of the Project Appraisal
                                                                                                                                 Document (PAD). The project prior to appraisal
                                                                                                                                 will: (i) prepare a Resettlement Policy
                                                                                                                                 Framework with involuntary resettlement
                                                                                                                                 principles, design criteria, organizational
                                                                                                                                 arrangements and funding mechanisms to be
                                                                                                                                 considered during project implementation; (ii)
                                                                                                                                 ensure Bank’s assistance is provided for all
                                                                                                                                 Bank resettlement requirements for the
                                                                                                                                 planning and documentation of Resettlement
                                                                                                                                 Plans prepared, and its timely submission for
                                                                                                                                 the Bank’s approval.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project will not affect the safety of any
                                                                                                                                 dam, or depend on the safety of any existing
                                                                                                                                 dam.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The project will not affect any international
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            waterway.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project is not located in any disputed area.
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Oct-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      30 October 2013.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Ajay Kumar

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 08-Jul-2013
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Jennifer J. Sara (SM)                                                                                                Date: 11-Jul-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
