                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                   Report No.: ISDSA904
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Sep-2012
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Nicaragua                           Project ID:    P127088
                            Project Name:      Adaptation of Nicaraguas Water Supplies to Climate Change (P127088)
                            Task Team          Irina I. Klytchnikova
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          18-Jun-2012                         Estimated   13-Nov-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     LCSEN                               Lending     Technical Assistance Loan
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Focal Area:     Climate change
                            Sector:         General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%)
                            Theme:          Climate change (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                               Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                0.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                 6.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Total                                                                             6.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                           The Development Objective of the Project is to enhance climate resilience of investments made in
                           Nicaragua's rural water supply sector in order to cope with: (i) increasing climate variability; (ii)
                           expected adverse impacts of climate change in selected areas.
                            3. Project Description
                           The Adaptation Project will finance a program of climate adaptation measures in Nicaragua's water
                           supply and sanitation sector through the following three components: (i) pilot projects supporting
                           investments in supply- and demand-side measures to increase the resilience of drinking water
                           availability in vulnerable areas through supply-augmenting and demand-control measures, combined
                           with the protection of microwatersheds and water supply sources from climate-induced
                           vulnerabilities (droughts and floods); (ii) coastal wetland protection and reduction of vulnerability to


                                                                        Page 1 of 15
                         sea level rise in order to reduce climate-induced impacts on drinking water supplies in vulnerable
                         areas (Corn Island); and (iii) institutional strengthening for the integration of climate impacts in the
                         water supply and sanitation sector.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The pilot projects will be implemented in four municipalities--Juigalpa, Murra, San Ramon and San
                         Juan de Limay--which are at least partially within the following sub-basins, selected to represent
                         diverse socioeconomic and ecological conditions and the range climate change impacts (upland and
                         lowland regions in drought- or flood-prone zones): the Ro Mayales, Jicaro-Susucayan, Ro Upa-
                         Wuabule, and Ro Negro Sub-Basins.

                         Project Components
                         The Adaptation Project will support the following three components:

                         Component 1. Pilot Adaptation Initiatives to Enhance Climate Resilience in the Selected
                         Municipalities (US$3.6 million). This component will support integrated adaptation projects to be
                         implemented in four pilot municipalities (Juigalpa, Murra, San Ramon and San Juan de Limay). The
                         diversity of the local conditions will ensure that the implementation of the adaptation activities in
                         these pilot areas generates lessons learned that can be replicated on a broader scale through
                         subsequent adaptation investments.

                         (a)      Subcomponent 1.1. Demand- and supply-side measures to enhance climate resilience and
                         improve the efficiency of water use (US$1.6 million). This component will support: (i) water
                         harvesting, water storage, rehabilitation and construction of additional wells and aqueducts and the
                         associated household connections, and the development of alternative water sources in drought-prone
                         areas; (ii) introduction of approaches to strengthen the efficiency of water use and reduce climate
                         vulnerability of drinking water supplies (e.g., introduction of water-saving technologies, metering
                         and rational water-use campaigns); and (iii) investment in climate-resilient sanitation solutions
                         (improved traditional latrines better adapted to climate extremes in areas where increased climate
                         stress exacerbates pollution of water sources by latrines). The improved traditional latrines adapted
Public Disclosure Copy




                         to climate extremes may be an improved version of the ecological latrines widely used in Nicaragua.
                         Ecological latrines are currently one of the most common in situ rural sanitation technologies used in
                         Nicaragua. Basically they consist of a small toilet linked to a barrel that works as biodigester. After
                         this barrel, the effluent goes to a filtration trench where one part of the treated wastewater filters into
                         the ground and another part is used by plants over the filtration trench area. The Project may also
                         finance Ventilated Improved Pit (VIP) latrines with a range of superstructures and pour-flush toilets
                         with septic tanks. This component will also enhance the quality of life of women and children who
                         regularly spend several hours a day collecting water from distant, often polluted sources.

                         As established in the Grant Agreement, this Subcomponent will support the following activities to
                         reduce climate vulnerability of drinking water supplies in areas (within the Selected Municipalities)
                         to be selected in accordance with the criteria set forth in the Operational Manual: (i) the construction
                         and rehabilitation of water-related infrastructure, harvesting and storage systems including, inter
                         alia, wells, tanks, spring catchments, small reservoirs (excluding any dams) and aqueducts (including
                         the relating household connections), and the development of alternative water sources such as surface
                         and ground water basins; (ii) the installation of metering systems and the provision of training to
                         promote rational water-usage; and (iii) the construction of improved latrines based on the criteria set
                         forth in the Operational Manual.

                         (b)     Subcomponent 1.2. Protection of water sources and the use of economic instruments to

                                                                       Page 2 of 15
                         strengthen water supplies' resilience to climate variability and change (US$2 million). This
                         component will help strengthen the implementation of watershed and water source protection
                         measures by enhancing the resilience of water sources to climate change. This will include the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         implementation of a pilot program of Compensation for Environmental Services (CES) to protect
                         micro-watersheds, using a combination of institutional and economic incentives to promote changes
                         in agriculture production processes that would result in sustainable land uses for the protection of
                         water supply sources. The areas to be protected under this sub-component will be defined in the
                         Municipal-Level Climate Change Adaptation Plans (Planes Municipales de Adaptacin a Cambio
                         Climtico, PACCs) to be supported under Component 3. Compensation to landholders who adopt
                         land use practices that protect downstream water supplies from the impacts of climate change will be
                         financed by the Adaptation Project. The specific criteria for the selection of the pilot areas in which
                         such compensation will be offered will be described in the Operational Manual. The proposed
                         actions to protect microwatersheds under this component will not involve the restriction of local
                         communities' access to natural resources in legally designated parks and protected areas. This
                         condition is necessary in order to meet the Bank's Safeguard Policy requirements

                         As established in the Grant Agreement, this Subcomponent will support developing, carrying out and
                         monitoring, in areas (within the Selected Municipalities) to be selected in accordance with the
                         criteria set forth in the Operational Manual, initiatives to implement institutional and economic
                         incentives aimed at promoting the adoption of agroforestry and silvopastoral practices, all for
                         purposes of achieving an improved protection of water resources.

                         The PACCs, which will define the specific activities to be implemented at the community level, will
                         be prepared in an inclusive manner with all relevant stakeholders, including indigenous groups if
                         they are present, in any given pilot area. This instrument will promote the integration and
                         complementarity of the actions under subcomponents 1.1 and 1.2 (wherever technically justified),
                         thus enhancing the Project's impact.

                         Component 2. Coastal Wetland Protection and Reduction of Vulnerability to Sea Level Rise in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Municipality of Corn Islands) (US$0.9 million). This component will support the following activities
                         in the Atlantic Coast region of Nicaragua, specifically in the Corn Islands pilot municipality:

                         (a)      Subcomponent 2.1: Environmental protection and climate change adaptation program (US
                         $0.5 million): (i) implementation of a Wetland Protection and Mangrove Restoration Program to
                         reduce vulnerability to sea level rise, including such measures as mangrove and coastal zone
                         restoration; assessments of ecosystem response to climate variability; and, subject to further technical
                         studies and Environmental Impact Assessment, small coastal protection works to protect wetlands
                         and other coastal areas from storms and saline intrusion in wetlands, (ii) establishment of an
                         Environmental and Climate Change Monitoring Program including the monitoring of such
                         parameters as precipitation and temperature, and (iii) development of an education program on
                         adaptation to climate change and protection of the islands' natural capacity to withstand climate
                         pressures and protect its water sources. The proposed actions to rehabilitate wetlands under this
                         component will not involve the restriction of local communities' access to the wetlands. This
                         condition is necessary in order to meet the Bank's Safeguard Policy requirements

                         As established in the Grant Agreement, this Subcomponent will support the following activities in
                         areas (within the Municipality of Corn Island) to be selected in accordance with the criteria set forth
                         in the Operational Manual: (i) the implementation of a wetland protection and mangrove restoration
                         program to reduce vulnerability to sea level rise, which program shall include, inter alia, the carrying

                                                                      Page 3 of 15
                         out of: (a) assessments of ecosystem response to climate variability; and (b) small coastal protection
                         works to protect wetlands and other coastal areas from storms and saline intrusion in wetlands, based
                         on the criteria set forth in the Operational Manual; (ii) the establishment of an environmental and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         climate change monitoring program to keep track of parameters such as precipitation levels and
                         temperatures; and (iii) the development of education programs for local communities on climate
                         change adaptation measures.

                         (b)      Subcomponent 2.2: Strengthening climate resilience of water supply and sanitation systems
                         and water sources in Corn Islands (US$0.4 million): (i) implementation of a Groundwater Climate
                         Resilience Program, including investments in well constructio n and upgrading, that would be guided
                         by the Technical and Environmental Management Practices specified in the Operational Manual and
                         (ii) technical assessments of groundwater aquifers' hydrology and the additional pressures from
                         climate variability and the rising sea level.

                         As established in the Grant Agreement, this Subcomponent will support the following activities in
                         areas (within the Municipality of Corn Island) to be selected in accordance with the criteria set forth
                         in the Operational Manual: (i) the construction and upgrading of wells; (ii) the rehabilitation of water
                         supply infrastructure; and (iii) the provision of trainings and technical assistance to the
                         municipality's personnel to address climate risks.

                         Component 3. Institutional Strengthening, Project Management and Monitoring (US$1.5 million).
                         This component will strengthen institutional capacity and coordination mechanisms at national and
                         municipal levels to facilitate the integration of climate change adaptation into Nicaragua's water
                         supply and sanitation and water resources management sectors. It will support the move from the
                         current isolated and fragmented approach to planning and investments in water supply and sanitation
                         to a more coordinated, multisectoral and integrated approach based on the protection of critical
                         natural resources within the watershed. This approach is aimed at improving resilience to climate
                         variability and climate change. Key knowledge products, planning mechanisms and monitoring and
                         evaluation tools will be supported.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (a)      Subcomponent 3.1: Climate Change-Water Resources Knowledge Base (US$0.5 million).
                         This subcomponent will support water resources monitoring information system improvements and
                         specific technical studies to improve the planning of investments in the sector by taking account of
                         climate risks. The investments financed by the Adaptation Project will be additional to the
                         investment program by the National Water Authority with the support of the GIZ. Annex 2 provides
                         further details about the measures that the Adaptation Project will support in this area.

                         As established in the Grant Agreement, this Subcomponent will support: (i) the implementation, at
                         the national level, of an information system to monitor data relating to: (a) climate change, including,
                         inter alia, historical weather data, seasonal forecasts, and downscaled weather projections; and (b)
                         water resources, including, inter alia, surface and ground water levels and runoff in selected pilot
                         sites; (ii) the carrying out of hydrogeological studies to analyze, inter alia, the aquifer recharge, the
                         water transmission and discharge processes and the water usage in the Recipient's territory; and (iii)
                         the provision of technical assistance to ANA in relation with climate change adaptation issues.

                         (b)      Subcomponent 3.2: Climate Change Adaptation Institutional Capacity (US$0.6 million).
                         This subcomponent will strengthen the institutional capacity for climate change adaptation at the
                         national level, and in selected municipalities by developing the PACCs, aimed at integrating climate-
                         related risks and threats and other climate change considerations into broader multi-annual municipal

                                                                       Page 4 of 15
                         development plans and programs. The subcomponent will also provide support for training on
                         climate change adaptation to the CAPS (and other community-based water associations) in project
                         areas. In addition, the subcomponent will finance a baseline and impact evaluation studies to monitor
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the project and to identify lessons learned in the integration of climate change adaptation into water
                         supply and sanitation.

                         As established in the Grant Agreement, this Subcomponent will support: (i) the creation of PACCS
                         in the Participating Area; (ii) the implementation and provision of training programs on climate
                         change adaptation to the members of the CAPS and other community-based associations, based on
                         the criteria set forth in the Operational Manual; (iii) the carrying out of baseline and impact
                         evaluation studies in the Participating Area in order to assess the Project's results; and (iv) the design
                         of inter-institutional collaboration mechanisms in the rural water supply sector.

                         (c)   Subcomponent 3.3: Project Management (US$0.4 million). Project implementation
                         management, monitoring, reporting and coordination.

                         As established in the Grant Agreement, this Subcomponent will support MARENA and FISE to
                         implement, manage, monitor and evaluate the pertinent parts of the Project through, inter alia, the
                         carrying out of training, the provision of technical assistance, the acquisition of goods (includi ng
                         office equipment) and the provision of other incremental Operating Costs.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The general location of activities supported by Component 1 (pilot programs to protect micro-
                         watersheds and investment in climate adaptation by improving water demand and supply conditions)
                         have been defined during project preparation, without identifying specific locations in order to allow
                         flexibility in the Project's implementation. The activities of the Adaptation Project (Component 1)
                         will be implemented in eligible communities within the four municipalities (Juigalpa, Murra, San
                         Ramon and San Juan de Limay), which have been selected during project preparation to represent
Public Disclosure Copy




                         diverse socio-economic and ecological conditions and potential climate change impacts felt in those
                         areas. The selection of the communities will be based on the eligibility criteria used under the
                         PRASNICA project; along with additional criteria reflecting the extent of climate change
                         vulnerability in the communities (i.e. the extent to which water sources are vulnerable to floods and/
                         or droughts in the eligible communities).

                         Activities of Component 2 will focus in Corn Island located in the Atlantic coast of Nicaragua within
                         the "Regin Autnoma del Atlntico Sur" (RAAS). Activities of Component 3 consist of technical
                         assistance and institutional strengthening at the national level and do not have a geographic focus.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo (LCSWS)
                         Abdelaziz Lagnaoui (LCSEN)

                          6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes
                          BP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          Yes




                                                                       Page 5 of 15
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                  Yes
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Pest Management OP 4.09             Yes

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     Yes
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       Yes

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      Yes
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        Yes
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential l arge scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The project triggers the following Environmental safeguard policies: OP4.01, OP 4.04, OP 4.09,
                              OP 4.11, and OP 4.36. The Adaptation Project has been classified as Category B, requiring a
                              Partial Environmental Assessment of the potential environmental and social impacts. However,
                              the Adaptation Project is expected to generate positive effects on environmental sustainability in
                              the project areas by improving rural water supply infrastructure, supporting conservation of rural
Public Disclosure Copy




                              communities' water sources, promoting strategic planning, and strengthening the capacity of
                              national- and local-level institutions to promote adaptation to climate change in the water sector.
                              No large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts are expected. Any subproject that may
                              cause such impacts or any subproject considered as Category A under the World Bank's definition
                              would not be eligible for project funding.

                             An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared to screen, assess,
                             and mitigate environmental impacts related to the triggered policies. The ESMF also outlines the
                             process to prepare the necessary Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) for each investment
                             activity in environmentally sensitive area. The ESMF also includes other instruments such as
                             sitting criteria and environmentally sound design standards for rural water supply and sanitation
                             investments that present well-defined and well-understood issues of narrow scope.

                             The environmental screening conducted during the preparation phase concluded that the expected
                             impacts of the proposed activities are manageable provided that the recommendations provided in
                             the ESMF are taken into account when preparing the site specific Environmental Management
                             Plans (EMPs) for those investment activities in environmentally sensitive areas during
                             implementation. The EMP requirements will be translated into bidding and contract documents to
                             ensure that mitigation and other requirements are clearly communicated to contractors; equally,
                             that competent environment inspectors monitor performance of the contractor responsible for the


                                                                        Page 6 of 15
                         civil works.

                         The justification for safeguard policies triggered and not triggered by the Project is explained
Public Disclosure Copy




                         below:

                         Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)

                         The Adaptation Project is expected to generate positive impact on the environmental sustainability
                         in the project areas by improving the resilience of rural water supply infrastructure to climate
                         change, supporting conservation of rural communities' water sources, promoting strategic
                         planning, and strengthening the capacity of the national- and local-level institutions to promote
                         adaptation to climate change in the water sector. The Project will support small scale civil works
                         to provide water and sanitation, coastal wetland protection to prevent potential impacts on
                         drinking water supplies and watershed management to protect water sources. The Project has been
                         classified as Category "B," requiring a partial assessment of the potential environmental and social
                         impacts and mitigation measures to prevent and reduce adverse or negative impacts. It has been
                         agreed that any sub-projects considered as Category A according to the definition of the Bank are
                         not eligible for funding by the Project.

                         The Adaptation Project will have two implementing agencies (MARENA and Nuevo FISE) and a
                         project beneficiary agency ANA. Only Nuevo FISE and MARENA have the responsibility for the
                         preparation of the environmental and social safeguard instruments for the Adaptation Project.
                         Since the Adaptation Project will support the development of rural water and sanitation
                         infrastructure similar to that developed through PRASNICA, the PRASNICA's Environmental and
                         Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been used as the basis for the future environmental
                         management of the civil works involved in sub-component 1.1. The environmental instruments
                         used for PRASNICA have been adapted and included in the Adaptation Project's ESMF. This
                         ESMF will guide MARENA and Nuevo FISE in the prevention and mitigation of potential
                         environmental and social impacts due to overall project activities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Since the specific works to be implemented by the Components 1 and 2 of the Project are not
                         known, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was developed. Since the
                         Adaptation Project will support the development of rural water infrastructure similar to that
                         developed through PRASNICA Project, the ESMF of PRASNICA was be used as the basis for the
                         preparation of the Project ESMF and additional measures were included for the activities that will
                         be implemented by MARENA. The ESMF includes: (i) the environmental and social
                         characteristics of the four pilot municipalities and Corn Islands; (ii) the potential environmental or
                         social impacts that could result from project activities; (iii) environmental principles, screening
                         criteria, evaluation and monitoring procedures, and guidelines for the preparation of any potential
                         sub-project Environmental Management Plan (EMP); (iv) eligibility criteria to exclude any
                         subproject with potential adverse impacts on natural and critical habitats and archeological and
                         cultural resources; (v) communication and grievance mechanisms; and (vi) guidelines for pest
                         management plans if needed. The ESMF also includes capacity-building activities on safeguards
                         and environmental management to strengthen Nuevo FISE's and MARENA's Climate Change
                         Office.

                         It is expected that Project-related negative impacts would be low to moderate in magnitude, and
                         that these could be prevented and mitigated by the implementation of EMPs, communication and
                         grievance plans, community monitoring and effective field supervision. The Project will have two

                                                                    Page 7 of 15
                         implementing agencies (MARENA and Nuevo FISE) and a project-beneficiary agency ANA. In
                         relation to the Project, both implementing agencies have the responsibility to comply with the
                         country's environmental, water and other applicable legislation, World Bank Safeguards Policies,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and the requirements in the Project's ESMF.

                         Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)

                         Some project activities may include management and conservation activities in coastal wetlands,
                         inland forested ecosystems, natural and critical habitats. The Project's ESMF includes screening
                         criteria, procedures to develop biodiversity and water resources assessment prior to the
                         implementation of any of the Project's restoration activities, guidelines to prepare an EMPs to
                         reduce and prevent environmental impact, terms of reference in case an Environmental Impact
                         Assessment is needed.

                         The environmental assessments will create the baseline data on the conditions of the selected sites
                         in terms of water quality and quantity, presence of endangered species and the overall
                         environmental conditions of the area, as well as its current vulnerability to climate change.

                         The type of management and restoration activities supported by the project to be agreed upon with
                         the GoN may include: (i) environmental regulatory coastal plans, (ii) restoration of riparian
                         corridors, (iii) community monitoring plans, (iv) and any other measure defined in the ESMF.

                         Forests (OP/BP 4.36)

                         The Project may implement riparian restoration activities in coastal ecosystems. These activities
                         will be defined in a participatory process during project implementation and may support the
                         restoration of degraded and vulnerable coastal habitats using native coastal species such as
                         mangroves, among others. The Project's ESMF includes measures and a forest restoration protocol
                         to ensure proper development of a coastal reforestation program, community participation, and use
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of native species.

                         Furthermore, through the activities of Subcomponent 1.2, the Project will implement a
                         Compensation for Environmental Services program, seeking to conserve forest land and other
                         sustainable land uses and ultimately protecting and conserving water resources (by enhancing
                         filtration and reducing sediment runoff) of selected sites. The Project's ESMF includes measures
                         to ensure protection of native forests, transparency protocols of grievance mechanisms, inclusion
                         of communities' valued tree species and community monitoring protocols.

                         Pest Management (OP 4.09)

                         This operation will not finance the procurement of pesticides or any other agricultural chemicals,
                         nor will it lead to their increased use. The Project's ESMF includes measures to be followed in
                         case project beneficiaries (farmers under the Compensation for Environmental Services program)
                         already use agrochemicals for their crops.

                         Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)

                         Subprojects that affect Physical Cultural Resources will not be eligible for financing under this
                         Project. However, the Project's overall ESMF contains measures and guidelines to be

                                                                   Page 8 of 15
                         implemented in the case of any chance finds of archeological materials during project execution.
                         EMPs will include an archeological diagnostic of project sites when project areas are prone or
                         likely to have physical cultural resources.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)

                         Because of the presence of indigenous and Afro-Nicaraguan peoples in the Project area in the
                         Pacific Region and the Corn Islands, OP/BP 4.10 is triggered.

                         In the Pacific Region, the diagnostic study was not able to identify the indigenous groups that
                         would be affected. However, the consultations carried out from March 22 to 23, 2012 with
                         indigenous groups of the Pacific Region were aimed at determining more accurately the presence
                         of indigenous peoples in the area of intervention. Meanwhile, an Indigenous Peoples Planning
                         Framework (IPPF) was prepared by MARENA and Nuevo FISE, in the event that indigenous or
                         Afro-Nicaraguan groups may be directly or indirectly affected by the Project. In that case, the
                         framework will be activated, and MARENA and/or Nuevo FISE will be responsible for the
                         preparation of an Indigenous Peoples' Plan for every instance in which the indigenous peoples are
                         affected. Each plan will need to be approved by the indigenous organizations involved, MARENA
                         and/or Nuevo FISE and submitted to the World Bank for approval and financing. The IPPF
                         capitalizes on the existing Indigenous and Afro-Nicaraguan Peoples Plan for PRASNICA, to
                         ensure that the ethnic groups affected by the Project are properly consulted and organized to
                         participate in the preparation and implementation of the Indigenous Peoples' Plans, particularly
                         those generated under Component 1.

                         In Corn Island municipality (which includes Great Corn Island and Little Corn Island), at the
                         request of the municipal and local climate change teams, the entire Component 2 is to be
                         considered an Indigenous Peoples Project (IPP) because the majority of people are Afro-
                         Nicaraguan Creole, with a minority of Miskitu, and a small minority of mostly transient mestizo
                         population. Therefore, the entire Component 2 was designed in consultation with the local
Public Disclosure Copy




                         government and civil society teams to ensure that the component is designed and delivered in a
                         culturally adequate manner, which may include the following characteristics: (i) free, prior and
                         informed consultations, (ii) presentation of the subproject design and discussion with stakeholders
                         and beneficiaries, (iii) behavior modification and change of habits, (iv) broad community
                         participation and support to the Project, (v) support of the Municipal Social Team to the
                         communities, (vi) communication strategies, (vii) costs of social participation, (viii) grievance
                         redress mechanisms, and (ix) mechanisms and benchmarks for monitoring, evaluating, and
                         reporting on the implementation of the component.

                         The design of each subcomponent/activity will need to take into account the information of the
                         social assessment (called Diagnstico Cultural) carried out by the firm INCLAM, pertaining to the
                         legal standing of the islands, historical background of the groups living in the islands,
                         demographic characteristics of the population of both islands, traditional and modern community
                         organizations and synergies, relationship of the islands with the continent, etc.

                         As part of this process, a workshop was conducted by INCLAM with stakeholders (local
                         government officials and members of the civil society, NGOs, and others) to discuss with them the
                         potential options in order to select those most appropriate. Once the possible options were
                         selected, another workshop was carried out to discuss the manner of implementation, to ensure
                         culturally-appropriate mechanisms of consultation, participation, monitoring and evaluation by the

                                                                   Page 9 of 15
                         communities involved. In other words, there is total ownership of the pilot project by IPs: it was
                         designed with the participation of IPs, will be implemented by IPs, benefiting IPs, monitoring and
                         evaluation are carried out with the participation of IPs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Whenever any potential adverse effect on Indigenous Peoples is identified, the project will take
                         appropriate measures to avoid, minimize, mitigate, or compensate for these adverse effects.

                         Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)

                         The Adaptation Project triggers the OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement. In the case of Corn
                         Island, one significant result of the social assessment was the imperative need to carry out a
                         resettlement of 10 families settled in "Swamp Coe" on Great Corn Island to protect the main
                         sources of freshwater for the island. A Bank team accompanied by the OASH, the Nuevo FISE
                         RAAS Delegation, and the GRAAS, and guided by the municipal team, visited the five swamps on
                         Great Corn Island and two swamps on Little Corn Island, and concluded that there was an urgent
                         need for the abovementioned resettlement. All seven wetlands were analyzed for the presence of
                         inhabitants, and only in one wetland ("Swamp Coe") there is 10 families living. Any of the
                         potential activities to be identified during project implementation for the wetland rehabilitation
                         and protection plan for Swamp Coe would require the relocation of these 10 families due to need
                         to address the issue of water pollution generated by households living within the boundaries of the
                         wetlands, their precarious living conditions in the wetland (e.g., risks due to flooding, etc.), and
                         incompatibilities of households within this wetland with sound wetland and climate change
                         management for this wetland. Since it is known that the project Component 2 would only have to
                         deal with the 10 families in Coe Swamp (i.e., there are no other potential families that would have
                         to be resettled), a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for ten families presently inhabiting "Swamp
                         Coe" on Great Corn Island was prepared by the Municipality of Corn Island with the support of
                         Nuevo FISE and reviewed by Bank technical specialists. A census with a cut-off date and a
                         socioeconomic baseline were carried out as the first step. The municipality acquired a piece of
                         land in another section of the island where, based on an agreement between the municipality and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the Nicaraguan Urban and Rural Housing Institute (Instituto de la Vivienda Urbana y Rural,
                         INVUR), each family resettled will have access to a home built by INVUR. Draft blueprints, the
                         signed Agreement between INVUR and the Municipality, and the registered land title for the land
                         acquired by the municipality, are included as annexes to the RAP. The Resettlement Action Plan
                         (RAP) was submitted to the Bank for approval prior to project appraisal and published on the
                         webpages of the involved institutions in Nicaragua, and on the Bank's website.

                         Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)

                         This policy is not triggered as the project will not support the construction or rehabilitation of
                         dams nor will it support other investments which rely on the services of existing dams.

                         Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)

                         Some of the proposed project activities under Component 1 will be located in the Greater San Juan
                         River Basin (a trans-boundary basin shared with Costa Rica), Rio Coco and Rio Negro Basins
                         (shared with Honduras), and Rio Grande Matagalpa Basin, which is within Nicaraguan territory
                         and drains into the Caribbean Sea. Rio Coco and Rio Negro are border rivers between Nicaragua
                         and Honduras. Therefore, the project triggers and will be governed by the Operational Policy on
                         International Waterways (OP 7.50) which normally requires notification to all relevant riparian

                                                                    Page 10 of 15
                          states.

                          Given the localized and small-scale nature of the works under Component 1, there is reasonable
Public Disclosure Copy




                          certainty that their potential impacts on the quality and quantity of water flows to relevant riparian
                          states will be negligible. It was therefore determined that the exception to the notification
                          requirements applies to this project.

                          No large-scale works (such as sewage systems, treatment plants, dams, or large reservoirs) will be
                          funded under the Project.

                          Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)

                           At present, some transboundary areas around the River San Juan are subject to disputes between
                           Nicaragua and Costa Rica. The Project will not support any activities in these areas or any other
                           areas known to involve disputed areas as defined in the policy.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            No potential indirect and or long term impacts are anticipated as a result of the proposed
                           activities. These consist of relatively small civil works which are not expected to generate
                           significant environmental impact. As appropriate, each civil works contract would specify the
                           required structural safety and exposure to natural hazards to be considered in the design and
                           construction of water storage facilities, aqueducts, water wells and associated household
                           connections. A rigorous monitoring and quality assurance procedure will be included in the
                           contracts to ensure compliance with environmental health and safety standards as outlined in the
                           ESMF.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            NA
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            The borrower designated MARENA (the National Environmental Authority) and Nuevo FISE to
                           implement the proposed Project. They prepared the necessary safeguards instruments, notably the
                           Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF), Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and the
                           Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), which have been disclosed in draft
                           form and are currently being finalized to incorporate inputs from stakeholder consultations.

                          As part of project preparation, the team held several meetings with representatives of the two
                          implementing agencies, Nuevo FISE and MARENA, to identify potential risks associated with the
                          proposed project investments, to discuss possible schemes for environmental management and the
                          necessary institutional arrangements for implementation of proposed mitigation measures.

                          The Bank's and Nuevo FISE's environmental specialists reviewed the current PRASNICA
                          environmental management procedures, monitoring, stakeholder participation and grievance
                          mechanisms in place. This information has been used to define the appropriate environmental
                          safeguard instruments for the Adaptation Project.

                          Nuevo FISE: With regard to environmental management in the PRASNICA, it was found that: (i)


                                                                     Page 11 of 15
                           Nuevo FISE personnel are familiar with the Safeguard Policies and have experience with the
                           assessment and mitigation of environmental and social impacts related to water infrastructure civil
                           works, following the requirements and procedures described in PRASNICA's ESMF; (ii) current
Public Disclosure Copy




                           arrangements for the management of environmental and social aspects are rather complex due to
                           the involvement of several actors, and streamlining adjustments are foreseen under the Adaptation
                           Project; (iii) PRASNICA's environmental instruments (ESMF, checklists, environmental clauses,
                           etc.) have been adjusted to fit the specific needs of the new Adaptation Project and its objectives;
                           (iv) Nuevo FISE mainly delegates responsibility for the supervision of works to municipal
                           personnel and regional advisors; (v) participation of beneficiaries is very strong and community
                           monitoring can strengthen the current environmental and social supervision; and (vi) capacity-
                           building activities in the implementing agencies and at local level will be needed to ensure
                           understanding and application of the ESMF for the Adaptation Project.

                           MARENA: MARENA is the National Environmental Authority of Nicaragua. It formulates,
                           proposes, manages, and supervises compliance with national environmental policies, such as the
                           Environmental Impact Assessment. The Climate Change Office, which will be responsible of the
                           overall technical implementation of this Project, has little knowledge and experience with World
                           Bank projects and safeguard policies. Experienced staff of the MARENA's CORAZON Project,
                           which has experienced in compliance with World Bank Safeguard Policies but is closing soon,
                           will be retained by MARENA for the implementation of the Adaptation Project. The Bank's
                           environmental specialist will work closely with the Climate Change Office to make sure that all
                           project activities are implemented in compliance with national and World Bank policies.

                           For implementation of the Adaptation Project, it will be necessary to provide support to: (a)
                           MARENA's Climate Change Of fice with one full-time environmental staff to deal with future
                           project activities and environmental requirements, as well as supervision and coordination with
                           Nuevo FISE, and (b) a part-time consultant in Nuevo FISE to support the current environmental
                           specialist, and ensure coordination with municipalities, Nuevo FISE and MARENA. Incremental
                           budget for compliance with environmental and social safeguards has been incorporated in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Adaptation Project.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The Safeguard instruments (ESMF, IPPF and Resettlement Action Plan for Swamp Coe) have
                           been disclosed on Nuevo FISE's and MARENA's websites and at the WB's Infoshop. They
                           include inputs from stakeholder consultations. During preparation of these safeguards instruments,
                           consultations with key stakeholders were held in representative locations. The ESMF was
                           consulted in Corn Island on May 10, 2012, in Estel on June 13, 2012, and in San Ramn on June
                           26, 2012. The IPPF was consulted on March 23 and 24, 2012, in Managua during an indigenous
                           peoples' forum organized by Nuevo FISE. The RAP and Component 2 were consulted in Corn
                           Island on May 10, 2012. The Draft documents were disclosed for public comments, which were
                           included in the final disclosed versions. Interviews were held with mayors, vice-mayors,
                           administrators, and project technicians, authorities, and people in randomly selected communities.
                           Further, the ESMF includes consultation guidelines for subproject teams for subproject activities
                           to be prepared during implementation.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements Date
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?


                                                                     Page 12 of 15
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         29-May-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                     31-May-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      15-Jun-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         22-May-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                     31-May-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      15-Jun-2012
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         14-May-2012
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                     31-May-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      15-Jun-2012
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      NA
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         NA
                           Date of "in-country" disclosure                                     NA
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      NA
                         Technical Assistance Project
                         For a TA project which will finance the preparation of a specific safeguards instrument, please
                         indicate type of document disclosed, if any.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:

                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
                         ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [      ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or       Yes [      ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management




                                                                    Page 13 of 15
                             If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
Public Disclosure Copy




                             in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                             Management Specialist?
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                             Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Irina I. Klytchnikova
                            Approved By



                                                                       Page 14 of 15
                         Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)     Date: 30-Sep-2012
                         Coordinator:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sector Manager:     Name: Emilia Battaglini (SM)    Date: 03-Oct-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             Page 15 of 15
