                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA5026
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Sep-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 23-Sep-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Iraq                               Project ID:    P131550
                            Project Name:     Transport Corridors Project (P131550)
                            Task Team         Ibrahim Khalil Dajani
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         23-Sep-2013                        Estimated   19-Dec-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    MNSTI                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (70%), Public administration-
                                              Transportation (30%)
                            Theme(s):         Injuries and non-communicable diseases (40%), Other public sector governance
                                              (30%), Rural services and infrastructure (20%), Trade f acilitation and market
                                              access (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     413.00           Total Bank Financing:                400.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                  13.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                    400.00
                              Total                                                                                    413.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to improve road transport connectivity and safety on selected
                           road sections along Expressway 1 and the North-South transport corridor in Iraq.



                                                                      Page 1 of 10
                         3. Project Description
                         Component A: Transport Corridors Improvements. Through works and services contracts, this
                         component would support activities that address infrastructure deficiencies that enable the transport
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of goods and people in a safer manner and with better services and improved communication system:

                         (a)      Rehabilitation of Expressway No. 1. The Bank will finance the maintenance and road safety
                         improvement of sections R7 (Nasiria – Rumaila - 145 km), R8A (Rumaila – Basrah - 31 km), R8B
                         (Rumaila - Safwan - 81 km) and R9 (Baghdad West – Hit - 123 km). Other Expressway 1 segments
                         are either being financed or will be financed, in parallel, by the Government of Iraq (GoI) (327 km)
                         and IsDB (257 km).

                         (b)      Upgrading the existing corridor between Ibrahim Khalil and Duhok, linking KRG and the
                         rest of Iraq and with Turkey and Syria. The Bank will finance the construction of a new road section
                         between Girsheen and Suheila intersection (25 km). The upgrading of other sections (about 60 km)
                         along this corridor is financed by KRG.

                         (c)    Fiber optics network for Expressway No. 1. The Bank will finance a pilot project for sections
                         R7, R8A, R8B, and R9, covering design and built of fiber optics cable network that will serve as the
                         communications infrastructure for all ICT systems needed for the project and will allow for future
                         development of the Iraqi national communications network backbone and access to it.

                         Component B: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building in the Road Sector. Through
                         services, supply of goods and training contracts, this component would support activities that enable
                         SCRB and GDRB to plan and manage corridors in their respective regions and enable the provision
                         of better quality services alongside them, including faster response to emergency road users' calls and
                         reports and monitoring and enforcement of traffic and axle loads regulations.

                         This component would support key investment activities, including:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (a)      MOCH/SCRB and KRG/GDRB organizational improvement. Activities to support the
                         restructuring of the road sector will be implemented under this sub-component, and are part of the
                         new road sector vision medium-term activities. Support entails:

                         (i)      developing an effective road sector organizational structure with clear responsibilities at all
                         levels, including sector level coordination and regulation;
                         (ii)     raising level of awareness to routine maintenance and improving capacity;
                         (iii)    Developing Information and Communications Technology Systems that will enhance the
                         effectiveness and efficiency of road management including, communication and surveillance systems
                         for traffic safety monitoring and enforcement axle-load limit enforcement, and a Citizen’s Roadway
                         Reporting System for public outreach and communications. Operation of the Citizens’ Roadway
                         Reporting System will provide an opportunity for women’s employment in SCRB and GDRB. The
                         Citizens’ Roadway Reporting System will be based on mobile phone and GPS technologies and
                         along the Expressway No. 1 be linked with the new fibre optics network being supported by the
                         project. It will serve road users and adjacent communities who wish to report concerns such as
                         pollution, excessive travel speeds, crashes, etc. and who will benefit from real-time information on
                         travel times, road conditions, temporary road works, etc. for the project roads;
                         (iv)     on-the-job training to strengthen SCRB/GDRB capacity in strategic planning, programming,


                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                         maintenance monitoring and supervision;
                         (v)     strengthening capacity in procurement, financial and contract management, from the
                         engineering, legal and financial aspect;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (vi)    analysis and improvement/development of relevant regulations and standards that apply to
                         all phases of the road life cycle;
                         (vii)   Training and study tour(s) for managerial and technical staff.

                         (b)     MOCH-Baghdad construction companies organizational improvement. The support would
                         include assessing the institutional structures of the eight SOEs - and proposing options for revising
                         the regulatory framework, and introducing options for restructuring, as well as strengthening their
                         bid capacity, project management and financial independence.

                         (c)      Training of local contractors and consultants. An assessment of the current capacities in the
                         private sector to prepare and submit quality bids, and the development of a structured training
                         program will be carried out, to focus on improving understanding of procurement guidelines and
                         safeguards policies, in addition to the overall project management.

                         Component C: Project Implementation and Monitoring. The Project is expected to be implemented
                         over a 5 year period. This component will provide support to the project management and
                         implementation entities.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project would finance:

                         (i)      The rehabilitation of several sections of Expressway No. 1 specifically R7, R8 and R9.
                         Other sections of the Expressway No. 1 will be financed by GOI and the Islamic Development Bank.
                         Rehabilitation of one section of the Expressway No. 1 – Section R6 --is already underway. The
                         Client has agreed to apply Bank safeguards policies to the entire corridor. From a social safeguards
Public Disclosure Copy




                         perspective, these improvements will involve only rehabilitation and maintenance of the existing
                         roadway and provision of road furniture; there will be no expansion of the roadway and no land
                         acquisition will be necessary. However, over time there has been encroachment on the Right of Way
                         (ROW) by numerous small businesses and vendors who will need to be relocated to ensure both their
                         and road users’ safety. Public consultations, together with preparation of an Environmental and
                         Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) have identified a widely
                         acceptable mitigation measure for these entities – relocation to formal lay-bys served by a gas
                         station, vehicle parking areas, and services such as waste disposal and WCs. Additionally, the
                         installation of road furniture, including median and side barriers and road-side fencing will, in some
                         instances, adversely affect operation of small businesses and vendors located just outside the ROW,
                         requiring their relocation also to the formal lay-bys. Road furniture might also, to some extent, hinder
                         road crossings by farmers, herders, and community members to land and facilities on the opposite
                         side of the Expressway, a factor that will be mitigated through rehabilitation of existing road
                         underpasses. Identification of these issues has, and will continue to be given careful attention
                         through the ESIA and the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), and the full RAP
                         that have been prepared and disclosed.. Since SCRB is already upgrading other segments of
                         Expressway No. 1, namely R6, it was agreed that an Environmental and Social Audit will be
                         prepared prior to the completion of project appraisal. The action plan of which will be implemented
                         by the client.



                                                                      Page 3 of 10
                         (ii)     The expansion of the North-South Corridor in KRG from a 2 lane to a 6 lane transport
                         Corridor. This Corridor comprises 4 road Sections. Sections 1 and 4 are financed by GOI and are
                         already under construction. Section 2 is financed by GOI and is currently under bidding. Section 3
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will be financed by the Bank with some co-financing from KRG. KRG has agreed to apply Bank
                         safeguards policies to all 4 Sections. Safeguards audits will be undertaken on Sections 1 and 4 prior
                         to completion of project appraisal to identify necessary retroactive safeguards actions, specifically
                         regarding environment, resettlement or land acquisition aspects. Sections 2 and 3 will address
                         safeguards requirements pro-actively. The road alignment for Section 3 (Girsheen to Suheila) is
                         under consideration with 4 possible alternatives being explored. It is likely, geological and
                         hydrological factors permitting, that an alignment where there are essentially no population
                         settlements, as confirmed by site visits will be selected. However, acquisition of state-leased
                         agricultural land would be necessary in this densely farmed area. An Environmental and Social
                         Impact Assessment Framework (ESIAF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) have been
                         prepared by the client and determined the extent to which households and individuals will be affected
                         by the roadwork for Sections 2 and 3. An ESIA with a detailed ESMP and RAP for all road Sections
                         will be prepared by the client -- acceptable to the Bank -- and disclosed prior to road works
                         commencing on Sections 2 and 3.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Carolyn Winter (MNSSU)
                         Dariusz Kobus (MNSTI)
                         Africa Eshogba Olojoba (MNSEE)

                         6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes               This OP is triggered due to the environmental
                         BP 4.01                                             impact during the rehabilitation of expressway 1
                                                                             ( noise and air quality) and during the expansion
                                                                             of the North South Corridor ( construction of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             section 3-noise, air quality, blocking, diversion
                                                                             and /or reduction of natural flow for permanent
                                                                             and seasonal surface water ,Ecosystem
                                                                             fragmentation )
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No                This OP will not be triggered as the road does
                                                                             not cross protected areas, and the nature of works
                                                                             is limited to rehabilitation and repairs of an
                                                                             existing expressway. Thus any impact on species
                                                                             (especially birds and wild migrating animals,
                                                                             ecosystem fragmentation)should not change.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No                This project does not pass through any forested
                                                                             areas
                         Pest Management OP 4.09             No                Use of pesticides is not envisaged in this project

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No               For Expressway 1 , Physical cultural resources
                         BP 4.11                                             will not be affected due to the scope of works –
                                                                             rehabilitation and repairs of existing expressway
                                                                             and road.
                                                                             However for the North-South transport corridor,


                                                                     Page 4 of 10
                                                                               mitigation measures will be identified as part of
                                                                               the ESMP in case of chance find.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No              Not relevant
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      Yes              This policy is triggered because resettlement is
                            4.12                                               necessary on both the Expressway No. 1 (in this
                                                                               case of businesses and vendors encroached on the
                                                                               ROW; and of businesses and vendors located
                                                                               immediately adjacent to the ROW who will be
                                                                               adversely affected by installation of road
                                                                               furniture) and the North-South Corridor in KRG
                                                                               (in this case because of expansion of the ROW
                                                                               from 2 to 6 lanes plus median and side strips;
                                                                               encroachment of businesses and vendors on the
                                                                               existing ROW; relocation of businesses and
                                                                               vendors on the widened ROW; and because of
                                                                               necessary acquisition of state-leased agricultural
                                                                               lands). (Rehabilitation of the Expressway No. 1
                                                                               will not involve expansion of the road, so no land
                                                                               acquisition will be necessary.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No               Not relevant

                            Projects on International        No                  Not relevant
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  Not relevant
                            7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The proposed project falls under the World Bank environmental category A classification due to
                              the potential environmental and social impacts that might be adverse.

                             Rehabilitation of Expressway 1 :

                             Environmental impacts:
                             -        Physical aspects mostly affected by the construction phase are: noise level and air quality.
                             -       The most sensitive physical and ecological aspects of the receiving environment are found
                             to be noise emission and ecosystem fragmentation.
                             -       The ecological aspects mostly affected by the construction phase include impacts of
                             fencing
                             and rehabilitation (resulting in very temporary closures) of underpasses on grassland and
                             desert ecosystems.
                             -       The potential impact that might affect the IBA is noise during the construction activities.
                             However, the distance to the IBA is sufficient to render the noise impact minor. Thus, the


                                                                       Page 5 of 10
                         impact level is considered “low?.
                         - The detailed design of the HDPE duct are not known at this stage however given the length and
                         scope of this work (installation of HDPE duct for fiber optic cable will comprise of an 80
Public Disclosure Copy




                         centimeter deep duct along the Expressway shoulder over 380 km and within the current right-of-
                         way) the ESIA determined that the potentail ai and potential air quality and noise impacts will be
                         temporary and mitigation measures will be included in the contractors' EMPs.

                         Social impacts:
                          -       Negative social impacts of the construction phase of the Expressway 1 rehabilitation are
                         related primarily to relocation of small businesses which have encroached on the ROW, road and
                         labour safety, and operation of the labour camps.
                         -        The social aspects related to encroachers on the ROW will be addressed through the
                         implementation of a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP).
                         -        The relocation of small businesses on the ROW is planned to be undertaken only after
                         completion of alternative dedicated lay-bys which will provide vending areas, easy access for
                         passing traffic with parking, and provision of basic services. The provision of completed lay-bys
                         before relocation is being done to minimize livelihood losses by small businesses during the actual
                         relocation.
                         -        The most sensitive social aspects of the project are: relocation of small business located on
                         the ROW, provision of local employment on the road works, maintenance of integrity of the local
                         community, and clearing of the existing underpasses for farmers and farm equipment, herders and
                         livestock, and other persons to facilitate easy access from one side of the Expressway to the other.
                         -        The single positive impacts of the project construction phase relate primarily to generation
                         of local employment.
                         -        The most significant positive impacts of the construction phase of the project resulting
                         from the combined effect of impact significance, weight of the construction activities, and
                         sensitivity of the receiving environment and social context are: the safety impacts of road fencing
                         and safety barriers, the positive effects of improved signage and road furniture, the improved,
                         dedicated, and much safer facilities provided for small businesses originally located on the ROW,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         road resurfacing and labour camps on local employment; the labour opportunities created by road
                         rehabilitation works.
                         -        The short-term, negative impacts of the construction phase will be offset by long term
                         positive impacts after completion of the works, including from relocation of small businesses
                         encroaching on the ROW.
                         -        One of the positive impacts of the project during operation is improved road safety due to
                         the installation of side and median guardrails, signs and road furniture, installation of fence on
                         both sides of the road, and provision of dedicated vendor lay-bys off the ROW. All these features
                         are protective measures and will reduce the projected number of fatalities and injuries despite the
                         growth in traffic and increase in vehicle operating speed.

                         Expansion of the North-South transport corridor:

                         The environmental and social issues and impacts of the North-South Corridor are not fully known
                         at this time because the alignment of the Bank-supported Girsheen – Suheila Section (Section 3) is
                         still under consideration.
                         However, it is certain that land acquisition (of state-leased agricultural land) will be required.
                         Some limited relocation of small businesses and vendors has occurred in Sections 1 and 4, and will
                         occur in Section 2. The alignment most likely to be chosen for Section 3 – pending extensive
                         geological and hydrological studies – is through exceptionally sparsely populated areas so

                                                                    Page 6 of 10
                           relocation in this case will be very minimal. However, given the extensive agricultural nature of
                           this area acquisition of state-leased agricultural lands will be required.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           On the environment side, it is likely that the following impacts will be associated with the
                           construction of Section 3 irrespective to the exact alignment:

                           -       Potential impact from the blocking, diversion and /or reduction of natural flow for
                           permanent and seasonal surface water that may affect the quantity and quality of downstream flow
                           of water and increase soil erosion.
                           -       Potential impacts on surface water resources from accidental spillage and sedimentation.
                           -       Potential increase in noise levels during construction activities such as excavation,
                           movement of vehicles and heavy equipment.
                           -       Dust generation due to earthworks, construction machinery and stockpiling of construction
                           material. In addition, generation of gases and particles such as SOx, NOx, CO, CO2, and PM10
                           due to vehicle induced emissions.
                           -       Ecosystem fragmentation affecting migratory species and species that utilize the
                           agricultural land as their food source and habitat.

                           The potential impacts during the operation phase are likely to include:

                           -        Potential increase in exhaust emissions due to traffic volume and variation in vehicle types
                           using the new constructed road.
                           -        Potential increase in noise levels attributed to the increase in traffic volume as well, due to
                           the anticipated larger number of vehicles along the new road.
                           -        The proposed project will increase the traffic through the road in case of widening current
                           road, and introduce traffic to new areas in the case of the three alternatives; this will result in
                           increasing land value and provide more options for commercial activities along the road.
                           -        The construction of the new ro ad is anticipated to significantly reduce traffic fatalities
                           since the new road is safer and more suitable for trucks and it will not cross settlements.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             A dispersion simulation model was not conducted as a part of ESIA for Expressway 1
                           rehabilitation due to the lack of meteorological data which made it difficult to assess the project
                           impacts to the ambient air quality. However, an ambient air quality monitoring program building
                           on existing monitoring work in the country will be developed as part of the ESMP. The Project
                           Management Team of Expressway 1 rehabilitation is already collaborating with the Ministry of
                           Environment which nominated a focal point to follow up on this.

                           No other potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
                           project area are anticipated, beyond those noted above, and if any long term air quality issues
                           arise, they would be addressed through the ESMP.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             For Expressway 1, project alternatives considered included: (i) different road surfacing to
                           minimize environment impacts; and rehabilitation of under-and over-passes to avoid
                           fragmentation of communities, agricultural lands and biospheres; and (ii) cash compensation to
                           small businesses and vendors encroaching on the ROW rather than relocation. However, PAPs
                           overwhelmingly preferred relocation to the proposed formal serviced lay-bys.

                                                                       Page 7 of 10
                           For the North-South Corridor in KRG, project alternatives under consideration include the
                           consideration of 4 alternative alignments for Section 3. Consideration of the alignments is
Public Disclosure Copy




                           involving examination of geological, hydrological and other technical concerns but also, very
                           critically for the KRG government, the minimization of resettlement and relocation
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             The borrower has shown strong commitment to address both environmental and social safeguards
                           issues. The borrower has hired a consulting firm to prepare the necessary ESIA/ESMP and RAP
                           for the Expressway 1, and fully supports the application of Bank safeguards policies to all sections
                           of the Expressway 1 being rehabilitated, whether or not rehabilitation is being supported by the
                           Bank.

                          In the case of the North-South transport corridor, the borrower is complying with all safeguards
                          requirements, including preparation of an ESIAF and RPF, and the future preparation of a full
                          ESIA/ESMP and RAP. The borrower is applying Bank safeguards policies to all sections of the
                          road corridor, including those sections supported by the government on which work has already
                          commenced and to which mitigation will be applied retroactively as necessary to ensure
                          compliance with Bank policies.

                          Expressway 1 and the North-South corridors include 3 sections that are already under construction
                          with Government financing. These sections will undertake a social and environmental audit which
                          will result in corrective action plan for each section that the Government of Iraq has committed to
                          implement during the Transport Corridor Project. The audit report will be delivered by mid
                          October 2013 and its corrective action plans for the 3 sections will be negotiated as part of TCP
                          negotiations and become part of the legal agreement of the TCP project.

                           The Borrower’s capacities to plan and implement safeguards policies and implementation,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           however, remains limited, and most especially in the area of social safeguards. However, the
                           Client is participating actively in planned safeguards training programs and agreed to supplement
                           their teams with dedicated environmental and social safeguards monitoring specialists. The Bank
                           operation intends to focus on building the capacity of SCRB staff and interested local consultants
                           and contractors to the Bank Safeguards Policies through intensive training program and on the job
                           mentoring. This should be accompanied by a more rigorous effort carried out at the national level
                           which could be included in the curricula of the higher education program.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The key stakeholders include the following groups:
                           •        Communities located close to the roadways
                           •        Small businesses and vendors encroaching on the existing ROW or in the immediate
                           Corridor of Impact;
                           •        Small businesses and vendors located in the ROW of widened North-South Corridor road
                           in KRG
                           •        Agricultural concerns operating in the ROW of the widened North-South Corridor in KRG
                           (which operate on State-leased land)
                           •        Farmers and herders whose lands span the Expressway No. 1 and the North-South
                           Corridor in KRG
                           •        Governorate and local governments along the roadway

                                                                     Page 8 of 10
                           Consultations have, to date, involved: (i) consultations with small groups of PAPs at selected
                           consultation points along the entire length of both the Expressway and the North-South Corridor:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           (ii) consultations with owners, renters and employees of all entities encroaching on the ROW or
                           located immediately adjacent to the ROW of the Expressway No. 1; and (iii) large public-access
                           townhall meetings, two held along the Expressway No. 1 and one held for the North-South
                           Corridor.

                           The Project Management Team of Expressway 1 rehabilitation will follow-up with those entities
                           who were identified in the RAP as either seasonal operators or closed entities to ensure all PAPs
                           have been included in the RAP.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      20-Aug-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   21-Aug-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      21-Aug-2013
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Iraq                                                             21-Aug-2013
                           Comments: MOCH Baghdad website
                                         MOCH KRG website
                                         GDRB Dohuk website
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      21-Aug-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   21-Aug-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Iraq                                                             21-Aug-2013
                           Comments: MOCH Baghdad website
                                         MOCH KRG website
                                         GDRB Dohum website
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)      Yes [      ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector       Yes [      ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [      ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?

                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Ibrahim Khalil Dajani
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (RSA)                         Date: 23-Sep-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Patricia Veevers-Carter (SM)                      Date: 23-Sep-2013




                                                                       Page 10 of 10
