                         INTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
                                 APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: 
77505
Date prepared/updated: April 17,2013 


I. Basic Information

 .    . P
1 B aSlc    '
          rOjeet D ata
Country: IRAQ                                    Project ID: P125102
                                                 Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: Youth Livelihoods Development Project
Task Team Leader: Gloria La Cava
Estimated Appraisal Date:                        Estimated Board Date:
Managing Unit: MNSSD                             Lending Instrument: Specific In         L
Sector: Other Social Services
Theme: Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction, Other social development
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source: JSDF TF, US$ 3.00 million
Environmental Category: C
Is this a transferred project                    Yes []                    No [X]
Simplified Processing                            Simple []                 Repeater ]
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises         Yes []      No [Xl
and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives:
The objective of this project is to support 3,000 unemployed young people (aged 16-24) who
have dropped out of school or who are working in the informal sector in four governorates in
Southern Iraq (Basra, Thi-Qar, Missan, and Muthanna) in accessing opportunities for positive
engagement and sustainable livelihoods through community development approaches.

3. Project Description:
The project addresses the difficult situation of young people in Iraq, which especially in the
South face challenges in accessing opportunities for employment, as well as for developing skills
for employment amidst an environment of very high unemployment rate. The project is
implemented by Save the Children and has the following four components: (1) Youth
Livelihoods Skill Development; (2) Employability and Income Generation; (3) Communication
Activities; and (4) Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E).

Component 1: Youth Livelihoods Skill Development
Save the Children's Youth Livelihoods Development project will build the skills of youth to
attain gainful employment in Southern Iraq. The component includes a labor assessment study
which will be carried out at the inception of the project to identify existing opportunities and
services. Based on the assessment findings, Save the Children will adapt and tailor existing youth
livelihoods skills development materials from its programs in the region. At least 50 local
trainers will participate in 10-dayTraining of Trainers sessions equipping them to cascade the
training with youth, with mentoring and monitoring from Save the Children. Trained facilitators
will support 3,000 youth aged 16 - 24, of whom half are females to build life and employability
skills. Training modules include orientation on the labor market, development of key
interpersonal and employability skills such as financial/market literacy, communication,
teamwork, critical thinking and problem solving and introduction to entrepreneurship. Save the
Children will partner with IJMA3, a regional NGO with significant experience of working with
youth in Iraq, to deliver a package of ICT training that will further strengthen youth
competitiveness on the market.

Component 2: Putting Skills into Practice
The project's second component - the largest - will give youth the opportunity to put their new
skills to work through a menu of hands-on learning activities. Save the Children will support
small groups of youth to develop very practical skills relevant to market needs and to put these
skills into practice through small scale youth-led community development projects. Young
women and young men will work in teams of 20 to map needs in their communities, identify
gaps and design small improvement initiatives. Using their newly acquired teamwork,
communication and negotiation skills and their financial literacy, youth will manage these
projects which may include the creation of community gardens, school libraries, internet cafes,
catering services and other community assets. A total of 1,200 youth, half of them young
females, will participate in these activities. In addition, two types of apprenticeships will be
offered to youth. A total of 240 youth will participate in skill-based apprenticeships lasting
between three and four months during which time they will learn a trade or skill and have the
opportunity to be employed by the business thereafter. Each of these youth will receive a
monthly stipend complemented by investment from the business owner. A further 1,100 youth,
generally from the younger 16 - 18 age group, will participate in work placements over a period
of four to six weeks. These placements will provide them with exposure to the labor market and
opportunities to put their newly acquired skills into practice. Youth participating in work
placements will be given a smaller stipend to cover transportation costs. Lastly, Youth Enterprise
Projects will support youth to identify available market opportunities including small income
generating activities. Save the Children will work closely with 460 young women and men who
have passed through the foundation course, and they will be selected for youth enterprise
training. Save the Children will provide specialized training on business start-up and expansion
tailored to the specific needs of youth who will learn about conducting a feasibility study,
obtaining the appropriate approvals, designing the business, marketing, purchasing, pricing,
finance management and customer relations. This activity will assist young people who complete
the business skills course to establish small scale business through provisions of essential tools
and/or small grants for business startup. It is expected that approximately 400 will be awarded
small start-up or expansion grants worth an average of $500 each.

Component 3: Communications
Under this component, a series of roundtable discussions and meetings are planned with donors
and government officials to raise awareness of the project and, especially, to increase awareness
of the importance of investing in youth livelihoods development across Iraq. Community
 mobilization campaigns are also planned to include radio spots, posters and other materials for
 information dissemination about the project with the aim of encouraging youth to join.

 Component 4: Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E)
 At the onset of the project, a baseline study will be conducted to collect data on indicators
 specific to youth in Southern Iraq and their livelihoods' pathways and opportunities. Data from
 this study will serve as the basis for measuring the project's success during the course of
 implementation. An M&E system will be established and linked to an MIS to monitor project
 progress, review challenges and develop solutions and report on achievements on a regular basis.
 Additionally, Save the Children will conduct a series of case studies on individuals and
 organizations participating in the project. Depending on the availability of additional funding, an
 impact evaluation will be conducted after the end of the program activities. At the end of the
 project, Save the Children will present the Bank with an Implementation Completion Report
 (lCR), documenting the use of funds, outputs and results. This component also covers costs for
 project management, internal supervision travel, administrative support, audit, office equipment,
 operating materials, supplies and utilities.

 4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:
 The projects takes place in four governorates in Southern Iraq, namely (i) Basra, (ii) Thi-Qar,
 (iii) Missan, and (iv) Muthanna targeting urban, peri-urban and rural youth. These governorates
 have been selected due to their low employment rates, high levels of poverty and low progress
 against the humanitarian and development indicators. Female employment is especially low in
 these areas. The project locations will avoid any environmentally and socially sensitive areas.
 This is ensured by the negative list .prepared as part of the Environmental and Social
 Management Plan.

 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:
 Hana Salah (MNSSD)

 Suiko Yoshijima (MNSEN)

  6. Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                     Yes            No
  Environmental Assessment (OPIBP 4.01)                                                    x
  Natural Habitats (OPIBP 4.04)                                                            x
• Forests (OPIBP 4.36)                                                                     x
  Pest Mana2ement (OP 4.09)                                                                x
  Physical Cultural Resources (OPIBP 4.11)                                                 x
  Indigenous Peoples (OPIBP 4.10)                                                          x
   nvoluntary Resettlement (OPIBP 4.12)                                                    x
  Safety of Dams (OPIBP 4.37)                                                              x
  Projects on International Waterways (OPIBP 7.50)                                         x
  Projects in Disputed Areas (OPIBP 7.60)                                                  x
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary ofKey Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

The project is expected to finance approximately 60 community youth sUb-projects under
component 2 which involves minor works. Those sub-projects are expected to provide
substantial economic, social and environmental benefits rather than causing disturbances.
Activities will include: cleaning and rehabilitation of streets and public spaces; trash collection;
planting gardens; and painting, repair and minor rehabilitation of classrooms at schools and
youth centers. Those activities will not result in any potential large scale, significant, or
irreversible impacts and therefore it is classified as Category "c" in accordance with World Bank
Operational Policy 4.01. Any subprojects that could trigger the involuntary resettlement policy
(OP 4.12) will be excluded and part of the negative list in the Operational Manual. In other
words, sub-projects cannot be financed that result in direct economic and social impacts through
the: (a) involuntary taking of land resulting in: (i) relocation or loss of shelter, (ii) lost of assets
or access to assets, or (iii) loss of income sources or means of livelihood, whether or not the
affected persons must move to another location; or (b) involuntary restriction of access to legally
designated parks and protected areas resulting in adverse impacts on the livelihoods of the
displaced persons.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:

No cumulative impacts are expected. The work will be a one-time activity at the existing sites so
it is very unlikely to cause long term impacts.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts:

Not applicable. Sub-projects with lower risks will be carefully selected.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and impleme.nt the measures described:

An Environmental Management Plan (ESMP) was prepared and disclosed. The ESMP will be
included in the Operations Manual in order to ensure full consideration of environmental
safeguards in accordance with the Bank policies. A consultation workshop was conducted on
August 29, 2012 in order to raise awareness of the youth who is going to implement the sub­
projects.

The ESMP includes the following:

        a. 	 A list of the typical environmental and social risks and mitigation measures for each
             type of subproject;
       b. 	 Standard language on environmental protection to be included in agreements with
            youth about each activity that will be implemented;
       c. 	 Monitoring indicators to be evaluated by the Save the Children (SC) staff when
            supervising works; and
       d. 	 A monitoring grid to be completed by the SC staff when supervising works.

If the youth propose a new set of activities with potential environmental implications, the SC will
update the ESMP and resubmit to the World Bank (WB) for review and approval.

A presentation on the World Bank safeguard policies was given to the counterparts at the SC in
order to ensure their understanding on the safeguard matters.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people:
Consultation on the EMP was held in (where) on August 29,2012 during the life and work skills
training to raise awareness of the environmental aspects as well as to ensure participatory
approach throughout the project. The consultation was attended by 19 youth (10 males and 9
females) and took place in Missan governorate, which is centrally located and contains a major
part of project activities. SC facilitated a discussion on potential environmental and social risks
of the community projects and mitigation measures.
Furthermore, preparation of the sub-projects, managed by youth, would include consultations
with local stakeholders, including residents of the community, in order to ensure that needs are
met and that project design is participatory. Youth themselves will lead these consultations.

B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental AssessmentlAuditlManagement Plan/Other:
   Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                   No
   Date of receipt by the Bank                                                      NA
   Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                  NA
   Date of submission to InfoShop
   For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                                                    NA
   Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action PlanlFrameworkIPolicy Process:
   Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                   NA
   Date of receipt by the Bank                                                      NA
   Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                  NA
   Date of submission to InfoShop                                                   NA
     1genous PeOPJes
I n d'             1 PIan!PIanDlng F ramewor k :
   Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                   NA
   Date of receipt by the Bank                                                      NA
   Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                  NA
   Date of submission to InfoShop                                                   NA
Pest Management Plan:                                                                                 !
      Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                             NA
      Date of receipt by the Bank                                                NA
      Date of "in-country" disclosure                                            NA
      Date of submission to InfoShop                                            NA
    * If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies,
  the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
I Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
  If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



     C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is
    finalized by the project decision meeting)

    OPIBP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
    Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including       Yes [   1   No [xl       N/A [ ]
    EMP) report?
    If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector   Yes
    Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
    Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP          Yes
    incorporated in the credit/loan?
    The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to    Yes [ ]     No [ ]       N/A [xl
    the World Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a     Yes [xl     No [ ]       N/A []
    public place in a form and language that are
    understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
    and local NGOs?
    All Safe2uard Policies
! Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional   Yes [x]      No [    1    N/A [ ]
. responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
I measures related to safeguard policies?


• Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been         Yes
  included in the project cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the             Yes
  project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and
  measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been           Yes
  agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
  reflected in the project legal documents?
D. Approvals

. Si ned and submitted b :
!   Task Team Leader:


. Additional Environmental and/or
  Social Develo ment S ecialist(s):

    A
                                      Ma ed Hamed
      Comments:
    Sector Mana er:
      Comments:
