                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                           Report No.: AC3568


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/28/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Kenya                               Project ID: P107314
Project Name: Nairobi Metropolitan Services Improvement Project
Task Team Leader: Andreas Rohde
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 6,        Estimated Board Date: May 3, 2012
2012
Managing Unit: AFTUW                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Solid waste management (25%);Sanitation (25%);Sub-national government
administration (25%);General transportation sector (25%)
Theme: Other urban development (67%);Pollution management and environmental health
(33%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           0
IDA Amount (US$m.):         100
GEF Amount (US$m.):            0
PCF Amount (US$m.):            0
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                            10.00
                                                                      10.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to strengthen governance and service delivery in
the Nairobi Metropolitan Area.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The proposed project is comprised of four components:

 Component 1: Institutional reform and planning (IDA US$8 million). This component will
assist local governments and whatever successor institutions are brought into being through the
new constitution. Specific focus areas will be (a) urban planning; (b) financial management,
including revenue enhancement; (c) accountability citizens, through measures such as a
participatory budget planning process, a transparent automated construction-permit system, and
other measures; (d) improving service delivery; (e) developing land use plans to promote
development in the vicinity of new commuter rail stations, and (f) possibly the creation and
operation of ring-fenced solid waste collection companies in local authorities which would
dispose the waste into regional landfills, as supported under component 3. To the extent that they
emerge, the component will also support the evolution and build the capacity of metropolitan
governance agencies. These include (i) the Nairobi Metropolitan Spatial Planning Authority; (ii)
the Metropolitan Water and Wastewater Authority and (iii) solid waste companies. In addition,
the component will assist in strengthening the Ministry of Nairobi Development (MoNMD).

  Component 2: Critical local government infrastructure and services (IDA US$40 million).
This component will finance critical infrastructure and investments for selected local authorities
to improve service delivery in urban areas and to support urban growth in the metro area. Most
funding will be spent on municipal infrastructure investments such as such as street lighting,
traffic management, markets, public infrastructure around the commuter rail stations, roads
which are under the mandate of the local authorities, bike and walk paths. However the funds
could also be used for training of LAs staff in relevant fields, consultants services to increase
performance, accountability, governance, and revenue generation in LAs. The amount that each
selected local government will receive will be determined during project preparation.

 Component 3: Critical metropolitan infrastructure and services (IDA US$50 million). This
component will assist in the field of providing solid waste, transport and sewerage services,
which are crucial for metropolitan development at the regional level. This could include solid
waste services such as (a) developing an integrated solid waste management (ISWM) strategy for
the entire metropolitan area, (b) constructing regional and local sanitary solid waste disposal sites
for metropolitan towns, (c) gradually closing unsanitary disposal sites, (d) constructing solid
waste transfer stations, (e) establishing and making operational sanitary landfill management
companies, and (f) improving conditions for solid waste pickers at the new landfills; transport
services to improve the connectivity between centers of growth in the metropolitan area through
measures such as (a) constructing or upgrading infrastructure feeding to commuter rail stations
or connecting satellite towns for pedestrians, bicyclists, and busses, (b) improving routing and
efficiency of mass transit systems and (c) rehabilitating strategic roads linking local authorities.
This, as well as the land use planning around commuter rail stations (under component 1) will
create synergies with the Bank's National Urban Transport Improvement Project (NUTIP)
currently under preparation; and sewerage services such as (a) collection systems, (b) treatment
systems and, (c) disposal systems.

 Component 4: Project management, and monitoring and evaluation (IDA US$2 million). This
component will finance the management activities associated with project implementation,
including establishing and implementing a comprehensive monitoring and evaluation (M&E)
system and training of the implementing agencies in environmental and social management.

D. Project location (if known)
The Project includes a number of infrastructure sub-projects in the fields of Integrated Solid
Waste Management, Water Supply, and Transport Management that will be managed by the
local counties to be established under the new constitution that make up the Nairobi Metropolitan
area, of which Nairobi City Council is one.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The leading agency at present is the Ministry of Nairobi Metropolitan Development which has
been established only recently and as such has no track record as an agency in environmental
management and resettlement (as defined by the Bank's Operational Policies). However, some of
the staff appointed to this Ministry have a lot of experience in Solid Waste Management, and
have undertaken a study tour to the Durban Landfill at Marianhill, perhaps the leading sanitary
landfill in SSA. The future of the MoNMD is unclear at present, and it is likely to be merged
with another ministry. Whether it remains the project's implementing agency is not known at
this time. The Bank will carry out a capacity assessment to determine environmental and social
management capacity, and will develop, in collaboration with whichever authority is the
Project's implementing agency, about an action plan to enhance such capacity. Resources for
training of environmental and social (resettlement) staff will be allocated in the Project budget.

 The Environmental Department of the City Council of Nairobi which will be implementing
parts of the project has a good track record for implementing projects with other development
partners. The same applies for the Athi Water Services Board (AWSB) in charge of the
wastewater component. For many years AWSB is working with the Bank in different water
projects.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Noreen Beg (AFTEN)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                           Yes          No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                   X
     The project has positive environmental impacts in the medium -to-long term, as it supports a
sustainable integrated solid waste management system, wastewater treatment, the promotion of
and facilitation of access to improved mass transit facilities, and facilitation of non -motorized
transport modes. During construction of these facilities, there will be short-term negative
environmental impacts which can be managed through EMPs and appropriate occupational
health and safety measures. Specific infrastructure investments have not yet been definitivey
selected for the Project. An Environmental and Social Management Framework is therefore
under preparation, that will include a screening process that will be employed for each proposed
sub- project, to determine the appropriate extent and type of environmental assessment (EA
and/or EMP)required so that adequate measures are undertaken proportional to potential risks
and to direct, and, as relevant, indirect, cumulative, and associated environmental impacts. The
siting and construction of the sanitary landfills is an area of particular importance as care should
be taken to ensure that groundwater and surface water sources are protected, that odour control
and safety measures (both for on-site workers and for surrounding areas)are in place, and that the
sites are located as far as possible from densely populated areas. Open and transparent
consultations with local communities are critical for all sub-projects, but are of particular
importance when determining siting for landfills and wastewater treatment facilities.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                       X
     Given that the project is located in its entirety in urban and peri-urban areas, this policy will
not be triggered. None of the sub-projects will be located adjacent to Nairobi National Park or
its immediate environs.
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                          Yes           No         TBD
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                X
    Given that the project is located in its entirety in urban and peri-urban areas, this policy will
not be triggered. None of the sub-projects will encroach upon forested areas in the Nairobi
Metropolitan Area.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                           X
    The project is not located in agricultural areas, and this policy will not be triggered.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                            X
    Every effort will be taken to avoid impact on identified physical cultural resources. Chance
finds procedures will be incorporated into detailed engineering drawings as well as bidding and
contract documents.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                     X
    As this project is located in heavily urbanized areas in or around Nairobi, the policy is not
triggered as none of the groups in the Project Area meet the Bank's criteria of Indigenous
Peoples (as described in OP 4.10, para 4).
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                  X
    Specific infrastructure investments have not yet been definitivey selected for the Project.
However, given the population density in the Nairobi Metropolitan Area , it is highly likely that
sub-projects will include land acquisition and the resettlement of Project Affected Persons. A
Resettlement Policy Framework is under preparation. A screening mechanism to be included in
the RPF will ensure that, as required by specific sub-projects, Resettlement Action Plans will be
prepared to ensure that Project Affected Persons will be assisted - through appropriate means of
compensation - in improving or at least restoring their livelihoods and standards of living in real
terms relative to pre-displacement levels.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                         X
    Not applicable
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)
    Not applicable
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                             X
    Not applicable


Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 01/03/2011

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A
C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   The Bank will review and clear the Environmental and Social Management Framework
   (ESMF)and the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) before they are disclosed in Kenya
   and at the Bank's Infoshop prior to appraisal in February 2012. Subsequent RAPs and
   EAs/EMPs will be reviewed and cleared once sub-projects have been identified.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Mr Andreas Rohde                                               11/23/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                                       11/28/2011
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Mr Junaid Kamal Ahmad                                          11/23/2011
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
