                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 12/21/2011                                    Report No.: AC5851
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Kenya                                Project ID: P122671
Project Name: Kenya Private Sector Power Generation Support Project
Task Team Leader: Karan Capoor
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 17,         Estimated Board Date: February 28, 2012
2012
Managing Unit: AFTEG                          Lending Instrument:
Sector: General energy sector (100%)
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                       0.00
         IDA Guarantee                                               166.00
                                                                     166.00
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The objectives of the proposed project are to: (i) assist the Borrower to meet growing
short term demand in power generation; and (ii) the PRG will directly impact the
capacity, efficiency, and in a timely manner, the power supply by adding more generation
capacity to the grid by the IPPs.

3. Project Description
It is proposed that a series of PRGs with an IDA allocation of US$166 million equivalent
be provided in support of payment obligations of Kenya Power and Lighting Company
Ltd. (KPLC) under individual PPAs for the IPPs being considered by the Government.

 The proposed project would support the: (a) installation of three separate 83-87 MW
capacity Medium Speed Diesel (MSD) Power Plants; and a third expansion of the
existing Olkaria III geothermal power plant. They will be constructed by IPPs under a 20
year Build Own Operate (BOO) arrangement. Each IPP for the respective thermal power
plant will be responsible for the construction of a Fuel Storage Facility as well as the
construction of an Interconnection Facility at each plant site to transmit the power to the
national grid.
 One ESMF and separate ESIAs will cover the three thermal IPPs due to their similar
size, nature and impact. The geothermal project will follow WB environmental and
social safeguards separately. The PRGs will be processed as sub-projects of the Kenya
Private Power generation Support Project. The first PRGs are expected to be in support
of the PPA between KPLC and Gulf Power Limited (GPL), the IPP developer of an 80
MW MSD plant east of the town of Athi River, for a total estimated Letter of Credit (LC)
amount of US$35 million and Euro 7 million along with Thika Power Limited and
Triumph Generating Company Limited. Once Board approval is obtained of the first
proposed project, based on the PRG framework detailed in the PRG Term Sheet, it is
proposed that the balance amount be deployed for the other subsequent three PRGs.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The 3 MSD Plants are to be located at three different sites in the outskirts of Nairobi as
follows:

 (1) Plant 1 will be an 81 MW facility operated by Triumph Power within an Export
Processing Zone (EPZ) southwest of Athi River off Athi River-Namanga Road,
approximately 30 km south of Nairobi.

 (2) Plant 2 will be an 80 MW facility operated by Gulf Power east of Athi River town
on Mombasa Road approximately 35 km south east of Nairobi.

 (3) Plant 3 will be an 87 MW facility operated by Thika Power on Thika Road near
Thika Town approximately 35 km north east of Nairobi.

 Key site selection criteria included: a site with minimal environmental and social
impacts; a site from which power could be easily evacuated and a site available for sale
immediately. KPLC used print media, estate agents, local authorities, and the public to
identify suitable candidate sites.

 Given their respective generating capacities, prevailing winds, and distances from each
other, the airsheds of the three MSD projects are not expected to overlap such that
cumulative adverse impacts occur on ambient air quality. With a limit of two percent
sulfur content in the fuel, the MSD projects are expected to comply with relevant WBG
Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines.

 The existing Olkaria III geothermal project is located within Hell's Gate National Park,
which is designated as a Category II protected area by IUCN; however, the park was
established after the Olkaria geothermal fields had been gazetted for geothermal power
production, and the first power plant (Olkaria I) had been built. The park is divided into
two sections: the western section in which geothermal production is permitted, and the
eastern section in which hiking and recreational activities (primarily bird watching) are
encouraged. The Olkaria III project currently has an installed capacity of 55 MW and is
located in one of seven designated geothermal fields within the western sector of the
park. The Olkaria III project was originally designed, assessed, and approved as a 100
MW facility; however, a decision was made to build it in phases. MIGA has insured
investments in the Olkaria III project since March 28, 2002, first as part of the project's
initial phase of construction and operations, and then again in December 18, 2007, for a
subsequent second phase of expansion. The Kenyan environmental authorities on May
21, 2010, amended the September 14, 2007, EIA license to approve the project to the
final expansion to 100 MW, as originally proposed in the 2000 EIA for the Olkaria III
project.

 At the Olkaria III project, both spent steam and geothermal brine are re-injected in
wells, with over 95% reinjection achieved. Non-condensible gases, primarily carbon
dioxide, are piped to adjacent flower farm greenhouses to boost flower production.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Gibwa A. Kajubi (AFTCS)
   Ms Noreen Beg (AFTEN)
   Mr Harvey D. Van Veldhuizen (MIGEP)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                  X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                      X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
There are no significant environmental and social risks associated with the three MSD
power plant sites in terms of natural habitat, land use, or other characteristics associated
with the site itself. Rather, the likely impacts are associated with the construction and
operation of the proposed MSD thermal power plant at each of the three sites, e.g.,
construction-related impacts, air emissions and impacts on ambient air quality, solid and
liquid waste management, noise, and the transport, handling, and storage of fuel, etc. To
avoid the potential cumulative environmental impacts of siting three such power plants
within the same parcel of land, KPLC and/or sub-project sponsor has acquired land in
three separate locations to minimize significant impacts on air quality.
 Preliminary and subsequent assessments for all four projects have determined that
significant or sensitive physical cultural resources are unlikely to be found; however, as
per standard practice, construction contracts will include chance finds procedures.

 There will not be any resettlement or compensation for lost assets required at the three
thermal power project sites. Prior to the award of concessions to successful IPPs, KPLC
conducted preliminary environmental and social assessment work for each of the three
sites and was able to determine that there were likely to be no significant social risks
associated with the three sites in terms of land use, or other characteristics associated
with the site itself.

  There are different agencies responsible for power generation and for electrical
transmission and distribution systems. Therefore, transmission lines will be built
separately under the authority of a different project proponent, and by law the project
proponent must prepare a separate ESIA for its investment. For two of the thermal power
plants, the connection to the transmission line grid will occur within the purchased sites.
For the third, the transmission lines will follow existing road rights-of-way or cross
unoccupied land designated for industrial use. A separate EIA will be prepared by a third
party developer responsible for the transmission lines, but preliminary analysis by the
thermal power plant IPP has indicated there are no significant adverse environmental or
social issues associated with the construction and operation of the associated transmission
lines.

 The proposed expansion of the Olkaria III power project is located within a designated
area of a national park that is gazetted for geothermal field development, and the park has
been under the management of the Kenya Wildlife Service since the park was
established. No resettlement or displacement of livelihood activities will occur as a result
of the proposed expansion of the Olkaria III power plant or increase of capacity in the
existing transmission lines connecting it to the grid.

 There are no vulnerable and marginalized ethnic groups on or near the proposed project
sites. Screening has occurred, and no groups recognized by the Bank as IPs under OP
4.10 are on or near the project sites.

 The Olkaria III project site is located within Hell's Gate National Park, which is
designated as a Category II protected area by IUCN; however, the park was established
after the Olkaria geothermal fields had been gazetted for geothermal power production,
and the first power plant (Olkaria I) had been built. The Olkaria III expansion is located
within the western sector of the park in which geothermal field development is allowed.
The project area is located in a semi-arid landscape occupied predominantly by savanna
grassland. The project area itself is characteristic of geothermally altered soils, with
sparse vegetation. Hell's Gate National Park is the only national park in Kenya in which
hiking is encouraged, given the absence of large predators such as lion and leopard. The
primary habitat and recreational value for the park is bird nesting and bird watching,
especially large raptors and a large colony of swifts. A gorge separates the eastern and
western sectors of the park, and topographical features west of the gorge (Olkaria Hill,
Hobbley's Volcano, and Hell's Kitchen) effectively isolate the Olkaria III geothermal
field from viewers in the eastern sector of the park. The initial EIA for Olkaria III
considered cumulative impacts of the three existing geothermal fields in the park,
including the proposed expansion of Olkaria III. Geothermal field development and
activities are closely coordinated with the Kenya Wildlife Service (KWS), which is
responsible for park management and protection. All geothermal operations within the
park are required to enter into an Environmental Management Agreement with the KWS.
The Olkaria III project's Environmental Management Plan will continue to be
implemented as part of the Environmental Management Agreement with the KWS.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
There are no long term environmental impacts anticipated as a result of future activities
in each of the three project sites at this time.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
A reasonable range of project alternatives has been evaluated, including a "no-project"
alternative. There are constraints, however, on the range of reasonable alternatives that
can be discussed because the project consists of concessions awarded to respective IPPs.
KPLC initially identified a parcel of land in an Export Processing Zone (EPZ) on the
southwest side of the town of Athi River for three proposed MSD thermal power plants to
be built by IPPs. Due to the potential cumulative environmental impacts of siting three
such power plants within the same parcel of land, KPLC subsequently sought to acquire
land in three separate locations. Key selection criteria included: a site with minimal
environmental and social impacts; a site from which power could be easily evacuated;
and a site available for sale immediately. KPLC used print media, estate agents, local
authorities, and the public to identify suitable candidate sites. The three sites selected and
purchased by KPLC are: the initial site within an unused part of the EPZ southwest of
Athi River town, a site near Thika town, and a site along the Nairobi-Mombasa highway
to the east of Athi River. Given their respective generating capacities, prevailing winds,
and distances from each other, the airsheds of the three projects are not expected to
overlap such that cumulative adverse impacts occur on ambient air quality.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Prior to the award of concessions to successful IPPs, KPLC conducted preliminary
environmental and social assessment work for each of the three sites and was able to
determine that there were likely to be no significant environmental and social risks or
impacts associated with the three sites in terms of natural habitat, land use, or other
characteristics associated with the site itself.

 ESIAs have been prepared and have been reviewed by the Bank in their final form for
all but one of the IPPs (for which a draft ESIA was reviewed). Draft ESIA reports were
prepared for the Triumph Plant in November 2010 and Gulf Power in April 2011, while a
detailed scoping report of an ESIA was prepared for the Thika Plant in February 2011. It
was determined that the Draft ESIA prepared for the Gulf Power plant could serve as a
model of good practice for an ESIA suitable for power plants of this size using Medium
Speed Diesel (MSD) engines and Heavy Fuel Oil (HFO). A modified version of Gulf’s
ESIA was adapted as an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for
the other two thermal power plants for which ESIA work was still in progress. The
ESMF and the Gulf Power ESIA were disclosed locally and in the InfoShop on May 23,
2011. Subsequently, the finalized ESIA for the Thika MSD thermal power plant was
disclosed locally and at the InfoShop on November 3, 2011. The final ESIA for the
Triumph MSD thermal power plant is expected by mid-December 2011 and will be
disclosed locally and at the InfoShop shortly thereafter.

 With respect to the proposed Olkaria III project, MIGA has guaranteed an investment in
Olkaria III since March 2002, with a second guarantee offered for the second phase
expansion in December 2007; therefore, information regarding WBG involvement in the
Olkaria III project has been subject to MIGA disclosure policy since 2002. In addition,
the Bank disclosed locally and in the InfoShop on June 9, 2011, the following key
documents for the Olkaria III project: the initial (August 2000) EIA, which noted that the
project would be expanded in phases over time to 100 MW and assessed from that
perspective; the supplement to the EIA dated May 2001; and the most recent (2010)
environmental audit of the existing Olkaria III project operations.

 The ESIAs prepared to date describe potentially adverse environmental impacts of the
construction and operational phases of the power plants on the built and natural
environment. Environmental Management Plans have been prepared or are under
preparation specifying mitigation measures and management actions identified in the
impact assessments, and include a budget, schedule, and institutional responsibilities for
each action. Annexes have been prepared or are under preparation assessing air and soil
quality, noise levels, and the hydrogeology, geology, archeology and current land use of
the Plant sites and surrounding areas.

 Borrower capacity to implement environmental mitigation measures is well established,
and the IPPs have all hired highly reputable, experienced environmental consultancies to
prepare the ESIAs. The IPP management will ensure an environment/social/OSHA
officer is based on-site during project construction and operation.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Preliminary public consultations with stakeholders (neighbouring industrial and
commercial establishments primarily, but also a housing estate on the Mombasa Road
near the Gulf Power project site and pastoralists along the road) have been held at all
three MSD Plant locations. This first round of consultations occurred as KPLC carried
out preliminary environmental and social assessment of the three MSD sites prior to final
award of the concession to the respective IPPs.

 A second round of consultations were held as required by Kenyan regulations regarding
scoping, preparation, and disclosure of site- and project-specific ESIAs by the respective
IPPs. Details of the outcome of these consultations in preparation of the ESIAs are
described in the respective ESIA documents.

 In the case of Olkaria III, the project proponents will continue to liaise with Kenya
Wildlife Service (KWS), which is responsible for Park management.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 04/21/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             05/23/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              05/23/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                              12/12/2011
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)            Yes
review and approve the EA report?
  Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
  credit/loan?
  OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
  Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        No
  critical natural habitats?
  If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   N/A
  (non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
  acceptable to the Bank?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's        Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a        Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities     Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project    Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the            Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the              N/A
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name                          Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Karan Capoor                               12/15/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Harvey D. Van Veldhuizen                   12/05/2011
Social Development Specialist       Ms Gibwa A. Kajubi                            12/05/2011
Additional Environmental and/or     Ms Noreen Beg                                 12/15/2011
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                      12/15/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Lucio Monari                               12/15/2011
  Comments:
