                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 03/27/2012                                     Report No.: AC6622
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Kenya                               Project ID: P107314
Project Name: Nairobi Metropolitan Services Improvement Project
Task Team Leader: Andreas Rohde
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 9,        Estimated Board Date: May 3, 2012
2012
Managing Unit: AFTUW                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Solid waste management (25%);Sanitation (25%);Sub-national government
administration (25%);General transportation sector (25%)
Theme: Other urban development (67%);Pollution management and environmental
health (33%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):            300
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                          30.00
                                                                     30.00
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []          Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to strengthen urban services and
infrastructure in the Nairobi metropolitan area. This will be achieved by investing in
local infrastructure (roads, markets, street lighting, bicycle and pedestrian pathways,
drainage, and the like). It will also be assisted by supporting improvements in integrated
solid waste management and in sewerage collection and disposal. Finally, the project
will help to improve service delivery by strengthening the current and future entities
responsible for service delivery, including the central ministry, current local authorities
and future county governments, utilities and other service providers, and possible future
metropolitan authorities responsible for planning, transport, and other services.

3. Project Description
The proposed project comprises four components. These are: (1) institutional reform and
planning, (2) local government infrastructure and services, (3) metropolitan infrastructure
and services, and (4) project management, and monitoring and evaluation. The details of
the four components and the proposed activities are presented below.
 Component 1: Institutional reform and planning (IDA US$15 million). This component
will assist existing local authorities within the Nairobi metropolitan area, as well as new
entities and authorities that will be created once the devolved government aspect of the
new constitution takes effect. These new entities possibly include county governments,
metropolitan authorities, and agencies, and other units of administration. This component
will support the capacity enhancement and planning activities of these entities. In
addition, the component will strengthen the Ministry of Nairobi Metropolitan
Development (MoNMD) or its functional successor, if applicable, after the constitutional
changes come into place.

  Component 2: Local government infrastructure and services (IDA US$60 million).This
component will finance on a grant basis priority urban infrastructure in 13 selected urban
areas in the Nairobi metropolitan area. The infrastructure to be financed will be the
responsibility of the current local authorities and under the mandate of the future county
governments. The investments to be financed under this component are relatively small-
scale local projects; the large projects that cross local administrative boundaries will be
supported under component 3. The investments to be selected by the local authorities can
include drainage systems, local streets, bicycle and foot paths, street and security lighting,
public parks, public markets, solid waste management and street cleaning, and
firefighting equipment and facilities. All subprojects will be selected on the basis of the
existing participatory process for prioritizing local investments, called the Local
Authority Service Development Action Plan, which provide the basis for local authority
strategic plans. A number of priority investments have already been selected through
citizen participation in the project’s selected urban areas. The specific activities NaMSIP
will finance out of these lists will be limited by the project’s financial allocation for each
urban area and will be defined by the municipal councils, which are democratically
elected bodies representing citizens of urban areas.

   The urban areas to benefit from the project have been selected out of the total 24
within the Nairobi metropolitan area. The selection criteria for these areas include: (a)
population size (current and projected), (b) population density, and (c) high population
growth since 1999. Additionally, these urban areas have been identified as critical for the
growth of the metropolitan area as per Nairobi Metropolitan Spatial Plan. Most of the
current local authorities, including those within the 13 selected urban areas will
functionally cease to exist as administrative units following the elections (expected in
December 2012, or latest in March 2013) and they will be succeeded by county
governments. Thus, the approach of the project to focus on urban areas, rather than on
specific local authorities will allow the project to adapt to the changing governance
arrangements and support the emerging institutional structures, once the new constitution
is implemented.

  Component 3: Metropolitan infrastructure and services (IDA US$250 million). This
component will assist in providing large-scale metropolitan infrastructure in the areas of
solid waste, transport, and sewerage services. In contrast to those financed under
component 2, these investments will be large-scale which is crucial for the development
and integration of the metropolitan area as a whole. Regarding solid waste, the
component will support the preparation and implementation of an integrated
metropolitan-wide solid waste management (ISWM) strategy. The ISWM strategy will
identify the policy, institutional, legal, and regulatory changes required to create a well-
functioning solid waste system. The project will support design and implementation of
such reforms. Regarding transport, the component will strengthen the connectivity
between centers of growth in the metropolitan area by (a) preparing land use plans and
constructing or upgrading public infrastructure surrounding commuter rail stations and
other nodes of transport; (b) constructing and rehabilitating strategic roads as identified in
the Mass Rapid Transit Study undertaken by Ministry of Transport; and (c) improving
traffic management and flow. The general location of the commuter rail stations has
been agreed with the KRC, and the exact locations will be identified in a study to be
financed under NaMSIP. Support for transport-related activities will be undertaken in
close coordination with the Bank-supported National Urban Transport Improvement
Project (NUTIP), currently under preparation. Support for sewerage services will include
the construction and rehabilitation of wastewater collection systems to enable urban
growth in strategic areas, as well as wastewater treatment and disposal facilities.
Specifically, the component will support the construction of the Ruiru-Juja-Thika
sewerage system.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project will take place in the areas of 13 selected urban areas (out of 24 urban areas
which comprise the Nairobi metropolitan region). Nairobi metropolitan region covers an
area of approximately 32,000 square kilometers and is located on the central and southern
part of the country such as to include the jurisdiction defined by boundaries of 15 local
authorities in Nairobi, Kiambu, Machakos and Kajiado Counties. Nairobi is Kenya’s
capital city and its most populous urban area. In 2009, Nairobi was estimated to have 3.1
million people, or over 8 percent of the country’s total population of 38.6 million.
Nairobi is growing fast, at nearly 4 percent a year and its population is expected to reach
5.2 million by 2030. Smaller towns around Nairobi within the metropolitan area are
growing even faster than the capital city itself, at an estimated 6 percent a year, as people
seek affordable housing within commuting distance of work places. The 15 local
authorities in the Nairobi metropolitan region are now home to about 3.5 million people.
Thus in 2009, over 17 percent of Kenya’s population lived in the Nairobi metro region.
The area is heavily populated, with little undisturbed natural habitat remaining, although
Nairobi National Park lies within the Nairobi Metropolitan Region, as do the remaining
portions of Karura and Ngong forests.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Noreen Beg (AFTEN)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                  X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                       X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The environment category of the project is A. The project will trigger OP 4.01–
Environmental Assessment, OP 4.12–Involuntary Resettlement, OP 4.04–Natural
Habitats and OP 4.11–Physical Cultural Resources (which requires that the project and
contractors follow chance finds procedures). Given that the a significant portion of the
project provides investment in solid waste management and sewerage disposal, long term
impacts of the project are positive in that the project will improve air, soil, and water
quality, and reduce hazards to human health. The provision of infrastructure around
commuter rail stations will increase access to these stations and limit the use of vehicle
traffic, lessening air pollution and congestion. The project will necessitate resettlement
of project affected persons, given the population density in the Nairobi metropolitan
region. Natural Habitats is triggered because of the need to ensure that water quality
standards are maintained in the river that is close to the proposed water treatment plant.
This is also needed to ensure that a minimum ecological flow is maintained.OP 4.11 is
triggered as not all subprojects are yet identified, and there is always a chance in the case
of civil works projects that physical or cultural resources (in this project, they might
include gravesites or places of worship) are affected by project activities. Therefore OP
4.11 is triggered as a precautionary measure to avoid having to resubmit the project for
clearance should there be occasion to do so.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Enhancements to and development of solid waste collection and disposal systems, and
sewage treatment, will have benefits to human health and sustainably managed
agriculture in the Nairobi metropolitan region over the long term. The closure of
unsanitary landfills will also have positive impacts. The construction of public
infrastructure such as access roads, bike and pedestrian paths, bus stations, etc. around
commuter rail stations will inevitably led to development of commercial and residential
centers around the transport hubs. While this is not part of the Bank's investment project
(although a land use planning study may be financed as part of the project) environmental
and social impacts of this expanded development should be managed carefully by local
authorities, particularly in the case of commuter stations located relatively close to the
Nairobi National Park (which may be affected by urban spread as a result of the
commuter stations).

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Given the need to improve urban sewage and sanitation services in the expanding
metropolis, the no project alternative was not considered viable. In terms of the
infrastructure around commuter stations, this will increase passenger numbers for the
commuter rail which is environmentally friendly and will reduce traffic congestion. Non-
motorized transport solutions such as bicycle lanes and pedestrian walkways and
overpasses are also included in the project.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
All efforts will be made to minimize involuntary displacement and relocation of Project
Affected Persons. People displaced involuntarily will be compensated in line with the
Bank’s Involuntary Resettlement Policy. A Resettlement Policy Framework has been
prepared to adequately mitigate any unavoidable impacts associated with the land
acquisition and displacement, including the impact-specific entitlements. Based on the
impacts, Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) or Abbreviated RAPswill be prepared to
mitigate the impacts and propose suitable implementation arrangements. Land use plans
for the areas surrounding commuter rail stations where the Bank will finance works will
include RAPs or Abbreviated RAPs. These will be implemented prior to executing
works. Terms of reference for land use plans for areas that will not be developed under
the project will include the requirement that the plans contain measures consistent with
the principles of OP 4.12.

 While the environmental impacts of this urban improvement project are less substantial,
EIAs and/or EMPs will be prepared for all sub-projects, and a screening process will be
followed to ensure no sub-projects are located in the immediate vicinity of Nairobi
National Park or any other National Parks in the NMR. Sub-projects that would involve
destruction of the limited forest cover in the NMR will be excluded from NaMSIP.
While assistance on resettlement and environmental plans will be provided by existing
local authorities/counties, the MoNMD and particularly local authorities/county
environmental and social officers will require substantial help and additional training to
undertake the socio-economic surveys, censuses, and Resettlement Action Plans that will
be necessary under NaMSIP. This can be achieved through additional MoNMD staff or
external consultants (the former being the preferred option). Cut-off dates will be
established as soon as project sites are definitively selected and the censuses are ready to
commence.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The project explicitly aims to enhance participation in local planning processes and
programs. NaMSIP will strengthen mechanisms of community participation by financing
only those activities that have undergone a thorough vetting by communities and that
communities have ultimately endorsed. This will be especially important in reaching
agreement on sites for landfills and transfer stations. A community workshop was held in
December 2011 at which the RPF and ESMF were discussed. Stakeholders included
local residents, civil society, commercial and industrial entities in the Nairobi
metropolitan region, government officials, and NGOs. Stakeholders asked that
consultations take place regularly throughout the implementation of the subprojects and
that compensation for resettlement be paid in a timely manner. The NaMSIP team
assured the stakeholders that these concerns will be fully addressed.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 12/27/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             12/27/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              12/28/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                              01/10/2012
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 12/29/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             12/29/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              12/29/2012
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        N/A
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   N/A
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?             Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential           Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process               Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector         Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's        Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a        Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities     Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project    Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the            Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the              Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                               Name      Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Andreas Rohde           03/26/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Noreen Beg              03/26/2012
Social Development Specialist       Ms Noreen Beg              03/26/2012
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi   03/27/2012
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Alexander E. Bakalian   03/27/2012
  Comments:
