                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 01/31/2012                                        Report No.: 67247
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P094103                 Original Project Name: Regional
                                             Communications Infrastructure Project
Country: Kenya                               Project ID: P127380
Project Name: Kenya - KTCIP/Additional Financing (RCIP 1)
Task Team Leader: Maria Isabel A. S. Neto
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 6,        Estimated Board Date: March 29, 2012
2012
Managing Unit: TWICT                         Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program
                                             Loan
Sector: General information and communications sector (35%);Public administration-
Information and communications (35%);Public administration- Financial Sector (30%)
Theme: e-Services (45%);e-Government (45%);Rural services and infrastructure (10%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):             53
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                            0.00
         Financing Gap                                                 0.00
                                                                       0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]    No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The original project’s development objectives are: (i) to contribute to lower prices for
international broadband capacity and extend the geographic reach of broadband networks
(the “connectivity development objective?); and (ii) to contribute to improved
Government efficiency and transparency through eGovernment applications (the
“transparency development objective?). These objectives are being achieved through
five thematic areas: (i) digital inclusion, (ii) content, (iii)-(iv) eGovernment applications
and Shared services and (v) BPO/ITES.

 Under the proposed Additional Financing the original PDO will remain unchanged.

3. Project Description
The additional financing for the Kenya KTCIP project is proposed to enable scale up of
some activities under the project. Candidates for scaling up will be identified in greater
detail during project preparation, but are likely to include a scale-up of support for
implementation of eGovernment activities - including IFMIS implementation, open data,
eSecurity and development of an infrastructure management framework.
  Digital inclusion (open access framework and transit to neighboring countries): The
original project supported connectivity and open access mostly through the bulk capacity
purchase for universities and government, and other selected access initiatives.
Implementation of all of these initiatives is now completed or ongoing. Since project
approval the landscape of communications in Kenya has changed dramatically. Three
submarine cables have arrived, the volume of traffic has increased twenty times, and the
prices have dropped ten times. Yet, at the national level, the price of national
communications has only been divided by two, despite the fact that one of the backbone
networks, NOFBI, is fully financed by government. This indicates that the arrival of
submarine cables and of the new infrastructure backbone in the country needs to be
accompanied by the implementation of clear and non discriminatory open access
frameworks to benefit rural areas and neighboring countries. Following the various
government investments in infrastructure (namely TEAMS, NOFBI, Datacenter)
government would like to develop a framework for how such infrastructure would be
managed for the benefit of the industry. The additional financing would include support
for the development of such framework. This framework will be particularly important
for the region, as the national costs will directly impact the transit costs for neighboring
countries and how they are able to access the three submarine cables that currently land
on the Kenya coast.
  Content (open data initiative in Kenya and the EAC region): the original project
included support for development of a government information portal, an activity that has
been successfully completed. Since project approval the President of Kenya has launched
an open data initiative in July 2011, an initiative to make key government data freely
available to the public through a single online portal. A version of this portal is working,
and government would now like to expand by (1) clarifying the policy and legal
framework; (2) ensuring consistent supply of credible key data sets; (3) continue to
improve the website aesthetics and functionality; (4) build capacity of the media and
research community to use the data and thereby generate more demand for datasets to be
released; (5) use the demand created within Kenya and the region to launch similar
initiatives across the East African Community (EAC).
  eGovernment and shared services (IFMIS, shared services/end-to-end eGovernment and
cyber security): The original project includes financing for the implementation of
selected eGovernment applications and the implementation of a shared services platform.
Several eGovernment activities have been successfully undertaken, such as the
digitization of company registry and of the High Court registry. Government has also
developed, with support from the project, a shared services concept for eGovenment, and
has mapped all processes to develop an end-to-end eGovernment platform. Government
would now like to expand and complement these activities by:
  IFMIS. The Integrated Financial Management Information System (IFMIS) has been
singled out as the single most important shared service in government, and it would
contribute in a major manner to the increased transparency and efficiency in
eGovernment, one of the project PDOs. The government, has, over the last few years,
been trying to implement an IFMIS system for Kenya, without much success. A renewed
leadership and the thrust of the new constitution has now added new momentum to this
initiative, there is a clear ownership on this agenda and significant work has been
achieved over the last few months. A challenging task lies ahead, and the team needs
access to quick financing to implement the plans and not lose momentum in
implementation. The bulk of the project support to IFMIS would go to ensuring the
connectivity needed for the system to function across the country and by hiring a long
term Systems Integrator that would design and install a fresh version of the system (1
year) and support its implementation (during 2.5 years). Procurement of this contract is
already ongoing, and government is currently waiting for responses to the RFP. It is
likely that by the time the project goes to board the contractor will have already been
identified.

 End-to-end eGovernment: The overall purpose of the end to end government processes
work stream was to assist e-Government and the KICTB define processes and
opportunities within the major end-to-end service categories of establishments and
Persons. The end to end government services activities report has recently been finalized
in Oct 2011 and will serve as the blue print for the shared services design and
implementation:

 Setting up a PPP: Government would like to explore manners in which to develop this
blueprint through a large scale PPP to outsource development and management of
eGovernment to a private sector partner, and is exploring options to that effect. The
additional financing would include technical assistance to develop this PPP framework.
 Cybersecurity: one of the underlying needs for the successful implementation of
eGovernment is the development of a sound security framework. Government is currently
doing a study, financed by USTDA on cybersecurity and on the implementation of a
Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) and initial results of the study should be available in
early 2012. Government would like to fund the implementation of such infrastructure
through the additional financing.
 BPO/ITES: no additional activities are anticipated in this thematic area.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Activities will benefit citizens throughout the country. Most activities will be soft in
nature and do not have a specific physical location. Limited physical activities will
include minor refurbishment of buildings in Nairobi but also throughout the country.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Zarafshan H. Khawaja (AFTCS)
   Ms Svetlana Khvostova (AFTSG)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
To date, and regarding the Kenya operation, no additional safeguards instruments have
been prepared since the original project was approved in 2007, as the specific project
activities have not required such instruments.

 The activities proposed under additional financing for the project do not envisage
significant potential adverse impacts to the environment and will likely include minor
refurbishment work of selected buildings and rooms with no planned land acquisition.
Yet it is important to ensure the appropriate screening, review and appraisal process for
subprojects in accordance with the project ESMF and RPF. During project
implementation, as each subproject activity is defined and the site is selected, potential
environmental and social impacts associated with the proposed activity will need to be
identified using a sub-project screening form.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
No long term impacts due to proposed project activities are anticipated.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The program-level ESMF and RPF have been published in-country as well as at the
Infoshop. The project has established a screening mechanism, where, upon identification,
sub-projects are screened according to standard checklist. Monitoring & Evaluation
officer for the project has overall responsibility to follow up on screening of sub-projects
and their compliance with ESMF and RPF.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Potentially affected people may include ministry staff, local communities and university
staff (participating in KENET Virtual Network). If, as a result of sub-project screening,
the project-specific ESMPs and/or RAPs are developed, they will undergo public
consultations with project stakeholders and get disclosed.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 02/06/2007
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             02/13/2007
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              02/15/2007
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 02/06/2007
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             02/13/2007
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              02/15/2007
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
  review and approve the EA report?
  Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
  credit/loan?
  OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
  Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
  framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
  Manager review the plan?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name                         Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Maria Isabel A. S. Neto                   01/10/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Svetlana Khvostova                        01/10/2012
Social Development Specialist       Ms Zarafshan H. Khawaja                      01/10/2012
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                     01/11/2012
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Philippe Dongier                          01/11/2012
  Comments:
