                        INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                 CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                              Report No.: AC6530


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/14/2012

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Kenya                               Project ID: P128163
Project Name: KENYA: Lake Turkana Wind Project
Task Team Leader: Karan Capoor
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 5, 2012      Estimated Board Date: September 27, 2012
Managing Unit: AFTEG                         Lending Instrument:
Sector: Other Renewable Energy (100%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (50%);Infrastructure services for private sector
development (50%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           0
IDA Amount (US$m.):            0
GEF Amount (US$m.):            0
PCF Amount (US$m.):            0
Other financing amounts by source:
        Borrower                                                         0.00
        IDA Guarantee                                                   78.00
                                                                        78.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The development objective of the proposed Project is to: increase power generation capacity,
contribute to the diversification of the fuel mix; and increase the capacity of clean electricity
generation in Kenya through the Lake Turkana Wind Project (LTWP).

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
Lake Turkana Wind Power Limited is a special purpose vehicle (SPV) formed to develop,
finance, build and operate a EUR 582 million, 300 MW wind farm near Loyangalani in Marsabit
County, approximately 12 km east of Lake Turkana in north-eastern Kenya. The Project site is
located on the southeast border of Lake Turkana between two high ranging mountains. This
location lies in the "Turkana Corridor" where a low level jet stream originating in the Indian
Ocean creates favorable wind conditions. The Project area falls within a valley between Mount
Kulal and Mount Nyiru which produces a venturi effect (effectively serving as a funnel) in which
wind streams are accelerated to high speeds. The site covers an area of 165 km/sq with unique
geographical conditions in which daily temperature fluctuations generate strong, predictable
wind streams between the lake and the desert hinterland. The closest deep-sea port is Mombasa,
1,200 km southeast of the site.
 The Project will comprise 365 Vestas Wind Systems A/S V52 wind turbine generators, each of
850 kW generating capacity, a Siemens-supplied and built 33 kV electrical collection network
and 33/200 kV substation, and an ABB dynamic reactive power system. The renewable power
generated will be fed into Kenya's national grid and make up approximately 17 percent of the
country's installed power supply in the first year of operation (2014). The transmission
infrastructure required for the Project is the responsibility of KETRACO. The works will
include a 428 km, 400 kV overhead transmission line and a sub-station at Suswa, 90 km north of
Nairobi. This infrastructure is scheduled to be completed 3 months prior to the commissioning
of the first phase (first 50 MW) of the Project.

 The Project will sell 100 percent of its output to KPLC under a 20 year take-or-pay PPA.
LTWP Limited, which was incorporated as a SPV in September 2006, will implement the
project. The Bank Group involvement in the Project will comprise an IDA Partial Risk
Guarantee (IDA PRG) and MIGA Breach of Contract Insurance. The IDA PRG will be
denominated in Euro and will be issued for an initial amount of up to EUR 54 million (US$78
million). This amount will cover three months of energy charge payments under the PPA
equivalent to EUR 30 million, and six months of payments associated with delay in completion
of the transmission infrastructure equivalent to EUR 24 million. Upon completion of the latter,
the amount of the IDA PRG will be reduced to EUR 30 million. The IDA PRG will be
implemented using a Letter of Credit Structure. Twenty-five percent of the exposure under the
IDA PRG would be counted against IDA's commitment to Kenya.

D. Project location (if known)
The wind farm site will occupy about 24,000 acres within a concession area of 150,000 acres
located about 50 km north of South Horr Township. The nearest turbines will be located at least
10 km east of Lake Turkana, approximately 20 km southeast of the village of Loiyangalani. In
addition to building and operating the wind farm, LTWP Ltd. (the private sector project
proponent) will upgrade the final 196 km of existing, unpaved, rural road leading up to the
project site. Ketraco, a state-owned enterprise, will build with Spanish government financing a
428-km 400 kV transmission line from the wind farm to a new substation to be built on
unoccupied, open land near Suswa, about 60 km northwest of Nairobi. For the 250 km stretch of
proposed transmission line between Rumuruti and the project site the area is semi-arid to arid
with sparse population. For the 190 km between Suswa and Rumuruti, there are more people
and agricultural activities located in the proposed corridor.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
LTWP Ltd. arranged for local consultants to prepare Environmental and Social Impact
Assessments (ESIAs) for the wind farm and the 400 kV transmission line; these were submitted
to NEMA in May 2008 and July 2008, respectively. Subsequently, a social-economic study
report for the proposed wind farm and transmission line was produced in March 2009, an
updated ESIA for the wind farm power project was produced in July 2009 that reflected a larger
project design and was prepared to meet the requirements of the IFC Performance Standards and
Equator Principles, and a draft ESIA was prepared in June 2010 for the proposed strengthening
of the existing road from Laisamis to Loiyangalani via South Horr. The project design, the
ESIAs for the project components, including the transmission line, and the associated ongoing
community consultation programs were subject to an independent review in May 2011 for
compliance with IFC Performance Standards. The independent review of the ESIA
documentation confirmed that the project, including the associated transmission line, is broadly
in line with IFC Performance Standards. The key issues subject to ongoing assessment work
include: confirmation of sufficient water supply for construction and operations; confirmation of
impacts of building short road bypasses around the communities of Ngurunti, South Horr, and
Kurungu; management of road traffic during construction; and location of workers camps and
office and maintenance facilities.

 LTWP Ltd. has demonstrated a sensitivity to the cultural setting of the area and has engaged
each tribal group in an equitable manner in relation to consultation, management of employment
opportunities, as well as development of the Corporate Social Responsibility Program (CSRP)
that is intended to help meet local needs and interests of the respective communities within their
particular areas of settlement and pastoralist activity. Key issues and concerns that have been
raised during the ESIA process are identified in the ESIA reports. Kenya Transmission
Company (KETRACO) will be the implementing entity for construction of the Transmission
Line. It is a state-owned company, established in 2008, responsible for building and operating
new transmission lines. Under the ongoing IDA-supported Electricity Expansion Project,
KETRACO is receiving capacity building in environmental management and monitoring. It is
the implementing entity for the Mombasa-Nairobi 220 kV high voltage line (financed by AfDB,
EIB, and AFD) and thus has experience in implementing environmental and social management
activities.

 KETRACO has already prepared a standardized Resettlement Policy Framework, largely in line
with Bank OP 4.12, which has been reviewed by Bank staff and accordingly revised to ensure
full compliance with Bank standards. KETRACO environmental and social staff will be
included in training visits to utilities with similar projects that have implemented Bank
safeguards.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Gibwa A. Kajubi (AFTCS)
   Ms Noreen Beg (AFTEN)
   Mr Harvey D. Van Veldhuizen (MIGEP)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                       Yes         No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                               X
    Environment

     LTWP Ltd. arranged for local consultants to prepare Environmental and Social Impact
Assessments (ESIAs) for the wind farm and the 400 kV transmission line; these were submitted
to NEMA in May 2008 and July 2008, respectively. Subsequently, a social-economic study
report for the proposed wind farm and transmission line was produced in March 2009, an
updated ESIA for the wind farm power project was produced in July 2009 that reflected a larger
project design and was prepared to meet the requirements of the IFC Performance Standards and
Equator Principles, and a draft ESIA was prepared in June 2010 for the proposed strengthening
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                           Yes          No       TBD
of the existing road from Laisamis to Loiyangalani via South Horr. The project design, the
ESIAs for the project components, including the transmission line, and the associated ongoing
community consultation programs were subject to an independent review in May 2011 for
compliance with IFC Performance Standards. The independent review of the ESIA
documentation confirmed that the project, including the associated transmission line, is broadly
in line with IFC Performance Standards. A few specific issues require addition analysis and
clarification so that the ESIA findings can be incorporated into Environmental and Social
Management Plans for the project, and to produce a detailed Corporate Social Responsibility
Program, which is still in progress through ongoing consultations with local groups living in the
project area. The key issues subject to ongoing work include: confirmation of sufficient water
supply for construction and operations; confirmation of impacts of building short road bypasses
around the communities of Ngurunti, South Horr, and Kurungu; management of road traffic
during construction; and location of workers camps and office and maintenance facilities. The
ESIAs for the wind farm and road improvement will be updated during project preparation
before Board approval. KETRACO, a state-owned enterprise, will build with Spanish
government financing a 428-km 400 kV transmission line from the wind farm to a new
substation to be built on unoccupied, open land near Suswa, about 60 km northwest of Nairobi.
Although KETRACO will be responsible for the final environmental and social impact
assessment and management of the transmission line, LTWP Ltd. arranged for an environmental
and social assessment of the proposed transmission line corridor in the early stages of project
design and preparation.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                        X
     The ESIAs for the wind farm and the road improvement describes the area as semi-arid to
arid, with sparse plant cover and low density of wildlife. The wind farm will be located well
away from Lake Turkana, which is an important natural habitat, and designated protected areas
located well to the east and to the west of the wind farm site. Detailed bird studies have been
carried out. The wind farm site has been assessed as having low risk of impact to birds and bats.
Given the extremely high wind velocity, the site is not heavily populated with avi-fauna, apart
from raptors whose flight paths are well above the height of the turbines.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                 X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                            X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                             X
     Consultations with local communities have not identified any physical cultural resources on
the wind farm site, and an archaeological survey has also been carried out. Significant issues of
cultural heritage are not anticipated for the wind farm site or the road improvement. Chance
finds procedures will be included in the construction projects. The ESIA for the transmission
line identifies a few sites of cultural and religious significance to local communities, and
recommends avoidance of these areas. KETRACO's consultants have indicated that there is
sufficient flexibility in the routing of the transmission line to avoid these areas.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                               X
     The team is exploring the project footprint and its potential impact on or proximity to
Indigenous Peoples.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                   X
     The ESIA for the wind farm concludes that there will be no requirement for land acquisition
or resettlement, although a RAP has been prepared for the wind farm site, and will be updated
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                         Yes         No          TBD
before Board approval to address remaining compensation issues (temporary location of a
pastoralist community with improved access to water facilities through provision of a borehole).
Consultation with local communities identified access to grazing land as a concern; to minimize
impact, the wind farm will not be fenced off apart from the switchyard and individual
transformers, for safety reasons. Grazing will be allowed between the turbines. Although no
physical resettlement is currently envisaged, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was
prepared for the project in November 2010. The initial draft ESIA for the improvements of the
existing road as it approaches the project site anticipated the alignment would still pass through
the villages of Ngurunit, South Horr, and Kurungu. The project RPF would be applicable to the
road improvement component as well; however, current plans are to build bypasses around the
three communities, and it is expected that this will avoid the need for any displacement of
households or economic activities. The ESIA for the road improvement component will not be
finalized until additional planning and design work is completed regarding the new bypass
rights-of-way, and associated activities such as borrow pits, access tracks, and the staging area
near Laisamis junction. The November 2010 RPF was also prepared with the intent for it to be
applied to the transmission line; consultants hired by Ketraco are carrying out additional survey
and design work in order to minimize the number of affected properties that may require
compensation for land acquisition in accordance with the RPF. There will be a need for a draft
RAP to be prepared, approved, and disclosed for the transmission line once the exact alignment
and civil works are known. The RPF - and a standardized RPF prepared by KETRACO in
accordance with Bank OP 4.12 will also be used to guide preparation of a RAP for either the
wind farm or the road improvement, once final design and siting decisions are made and it is
known whether households will be displaced or livelihoods significantly impacted by land
acquisition.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                       X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                  X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                           X


Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 06/14/2012

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.


1   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
   The final cleared Safeguards documents, namely the ESIA and the Addendum, as well as the
   RAP, have been disclosed both in the country and at the Bank Infoshop.

IV. APPROVALS

 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                  Mr Karan Capoor                           03/12/2012
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                  03/12/2012
   Comments:
 Sector Manager:                    Mr Lucio Monari                           03/12/2012
   Comments:
