                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                          RESTRUCTURING STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 11/15/2012                                    Report No.: AC6830
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Kenya                               Project ID: P111546
Project Name: Kenya Youth Empowerment Project
Task Team Leader: William David Wiseman
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 19,        Estimated Board Date: May 4, 2010
2010
Managing Unit: AFTSE                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Other social services (84%);Vocational training (13%);Public administration-
Other social services (3%)
Theme: Social safety nets (44%);Other social protection and risk management
(50%);Education for the knowledge economy (6%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):             17.03
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                            0.00
         Financing Gap                                                 0.00
                                                                       0.00
Environmental Category: C - Not Required
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is revised to support Government of
Kenya (GoK) efforts to improve youth employability.

3. Project Description
The project originally had three components:

 1.    Labor-intensive works and social services;
 2.    Private Sector Internships and Training Program; and
 3.    Capacity Building and Policy Development

 The main objective of Component 1 was to support the GoK in reducing the
vulnerability of unemployed young women and men by expanding and enhancing the
effectiveness of the Kazi Kwa Vijana (KKV) program. The component financed labor-
intensive projects that provided income opportunities to participating youth, and at the
same time, enhanced the communities' access to social and economic infrastructure. The
target group of the component was unemployed youth in the 18-35 age bracket, which is
the same bracket of the ongoing KKV.

 The project is being restructured so that Component 1 of the Project is cancelled and the
scopes of Components 2 and 3 are slightly modified. In addition, introduce a provision
for retroactive financing to allow for payment of "Operating Costs" incurred in the
amount of $650,000 on after January 1, 2012 , The restructuring proposes to untrigger
OP 4.10 and to downgrade the environmental Category from B to C as a result of
dropping Component One which comprised the funding of small scale civil works with
environmental and social impacts, including the presence of Indigenous Peoples in some
of the rural areas where the civil works were proposed to take place. The remaining two
components do not involve such civil works and will have activities that are in urban
areas.

 The restructured project will be financed using a Specific Investment Loan (SIL), for a
total credit amount of US$ 17.03 million over an implementation period of four years.
The PDO is proposed to be achieved through remaining two components, namely:

 (i)    Private Sector Internships and Training Program; and
 (ii)   Capacity Building and Policy Development

 Component : Private Sector Internships and Training - The main objective of the second
component is to improve youth employability, by providing youth with work experience
and skills through the creation of internships and relevant training in the formal and
informal sector (with priority given to growing sectors). This component is a pilot that
addresses the lack of skills and work experience for disadvantaged young women and
men. It will provide youth in the 15-29 age bracket who have at least eight years of
schooling, have been out of school for at least a year and are not working with an
opportunity to acquire relevant work experience and skills through a private sector
internship and training program. The component will start implementation in Nairobi and
Mombasa, and will expand to one more rural area in Year 2 of the Project.

 It will support three activities: (i) creation of internships in the private sector; (ii)
provision of training relevant to the work experience; and (iii) monitor and evaluate to
capture lessons from the pilot.

 Component: Capacity Building and Policy Development. The main objective of this
component is to enhance the capacity of the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports
(MoYAS) to implement the national youth policy and increase the institutional capacity
for youth policy planning. This will be done through activities under the following main
areas: (i) training of youth officers; (ii) communication activities to increase awareness of
the Project; and (iii) policy development, through the provision of technical assistance to
the National Youth Council and youth policy development.
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The proposed Project will cover urban areas.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Gibwa A. Kajubi (AFTCS)
   Ms Noreen Beg (AFTN1)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                     X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                     X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
With the cancellation of Component One no adverse social and environmental impacts
are anticipated. An Environmental and Social Safeguards Completion Brief for
Component One has been prepared and placed in project files. It details the actions and
safeguards instruments that were prepared and disclosed by the Government as well as
the related activities that had been undertaken. The report confirms that the application of
environmental and social safeguards under Component One was satisfactory through the
closing of Component One.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
N/A

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
N/A
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
N/A



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
The project does not trigger the Pest Management and/Cultural Property. Therefore, in-
country disclosure of any of the above-mentioned documents is not expected.


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       No
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       No
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                          Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr William David Wiseman                     03/29/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Noreen Beg                                03/29/2012
Social Development Specialist       Ms Gibwa A. Kajubi                           03/29/2012
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                     03/29/2012
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Lynne D. Sherburne-Benz                   03/29/2012
  Comments:
