                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 11/30/2011                                    Report No.: AC6579
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P074091                 Original Project Name: Health Sector
                                             Support
Country: Kenya                               Project ID: P128663
Project Name: Health Sector Support Additional Financing
Task Team Leader: Gandham N.V. Ramana
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 26,        Estimated Board Date: December 19, 2011
2011
Managing Unit: AFTHE                         Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery
                                             Loan
Sector: Health (100%)
Theme: Health system performance (50%);Child health (30%);Nutrition and food
security (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):             56.8
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                            0.00
                                                                       0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [X]       No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objectives are to improve: (i) the delivery of essential health
services for Kenyans, especially the poor and the drought-affected populations; and (ii)
the effectiveness of planning, financing and procurement of pharmaceuticals and medical
supplies. The key indicators are: (i) Direct Project Beneficiaries (Number of outpatient
visits to levels 2&3), (ii) Children fully immunized, (iii) Value fill rate for commodities
on KEMSA Essential Drug List, (iv) HSSF facilities meeting the core financial
management requirements of the fund, (v) Fiduciary irregularities reported from HSSF
and KEMSA acted upon (during the previous quarter), (vi) Level 2 and 3 HSSF facilities
displaying information as per Government of Kenya (GoK) guidelines, and (vii) Severely
malnourished children under five receiving treatment recovered.

3. Project Description
The proposed Project has two components: (i) Component 1 (US$58.8 million) will
support the effective and transparent implementation of the Kenya Essential Package for
Health (KEPH) through Health Sector Services Fund (HSSF) grants and performance
based financing support to increase access to basic quality services; and (ii) Component 2
(US$98 million) will fund the increased Availability of Essential Health Commodities
and Strengthening of Supply Chain Management. Both components will support
improvements in health sector governance, accountability and performance.

 The proposed Additional Financing (AF) from the IDA Crisis Response Window
(CRW) to the Kenya Health Sector Support Project (KHSSP) would support the
emergency response to deliver essential health and nutrition services for the drought
affected arid and semi arid regions of Kenya. The AF will include new activities to
address the nutrition and health needs of children under five and pregnant and lactating
women as well as scale-up of ongoing activities to improve the supply of essential
medicines to mitigate the risk for infections and communicable disease outbreaks.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
NHSSP II, which the Project supports, covers the whole country. As per the descriptions
above, implementation will be at all levels of the health system.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Gibwa A. Kajubi (AFTCS)
   Ms Svetlana Khvostova (AFTOS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                               X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                     X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Safeguard policies triggered in the original project were Environmental Assessment
(OP/BP 4.01) and Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) and no new safeguard policies will
be triggered. No exceptions to Bank policies are required.

 Environment: The main environmental safeguard policy relates to health care waste
management, in view of the risks associated with the handling and disposal of medical
waste. The GoK prepared a Health Care Waste Management Plan, which focused on
medical waste generation, as well as segregation, storage, collection, transport, and final
disposal practices; technologies for waste disposal; public awareness programs; and
relevant national legislation. The plan was publicly disclosed by the Ministry of Public
Health and Sanitation (MOPHS) and Ministry of Medical Services (MOMS) in Kenya,
and in the InfoShop in February 2010, in association with the East Africa Public Health
Laboratory Networking Project (EAPHLNP). The plan was disclosed again in the
InfoShop in May 2010. The EAPHLNP will fund some laboratory investments relating
to the waste management plan, and the KHSSP will provide some additional funding for
other waste management activities. For malaria control, the Essential Medicines and
Medical Supplies (EMMS) pooled fund only supports anti-malarial drugs, bednets and
diagnostics. No indoor residual spraying will be supported in the Project. The Project
does not support civil works other than maintenance and very minor renovation of
existing health facilities under the HSSF. The Project does not finance activities
involving the involuntary taking of land, loss of assets or access to assets, loss of income
sources or means of livelihood or the involuntary restriction of access to legally
designated parks and protected areas. The proposed AF will not change the
environmental category of the KHSSP which is rated Category B.

  The Project also triggered OP 4.10. An Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF)
was developed by the MOPHS and MOMS for the EAPHLNP and then updated to
include the new health Project too. The documents were reviewed by IDA and found to
be acceptable. The MOMS and MOPHS disclosed the documents in the country on
February 4, 2010, and the Bank disclosed them in the InfoShop on February 5, 2010. The
framework was disclosed again in the InfoShop in May 2010 to ensure clarity about the
application of the safeguards documents to the KHSSP. The Ministry of Health prepared
joint terms of reference for the development of Vulnerable and Marginalized People's
Plans (VMPPs) for the three health projects supported by The Bank: Kenya Health
Sector Support Project (P074091), Kenya Total War Against HIV and AIDS Project
(P081712) and the Kenya East Africa Public Health Laboratory Networking Project
(P111556) in May 2011. No negative impacts are anticipated on Vulnerable and
Marginalized Groups (VMGs), rather the aim of the plans is to identify pro-active
measures to ensure that VMGs benefit from the project.An Expression of Interest (EOI)
was issued by MOPHS in July 2011 to undertake a social assessment and develop project
specific Vulnerable and Marginalized Peoples Plans (VMPPs) through free, prior and
informed consultations with the local vulnerable and marginalized ethnic groups based on
existing VMPP frameworks, that will enable such groups in the project areas to access
benefits from each project equitably and in a culturally appropriate manner under the
three projects.

 While the scope of the VMPPs will be national, the assessment will be conducted in ten
sites across seven districts (Garissa, Marsabit, Wajir, Moyale, Narok, Lamu and
Koibatek) with areas mapped as home to Indigenous Peoples. The proposed AF to the
KHSSP will focus on Turkana. Garissa, Wajir, Mandera, Marsabit, Isiolo and Tana River
the hardest hit areas. The VMPPs will cover three of these seven districts hardest hit by
the drought (Garissa, Marsabit, and Wajir). The plans will make concrete suggestions on
how to target these hard to reach and underserved groups. This work is currently
underway and implementation should start in early 2012. However, the current security
situation in Northern Kenya may necessitate revisiting the sites selected.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
There are no potential impacts other than medical waste, as discussed above.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Medical waste is inevitable in health care. There were therefore no alternatives
considered.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The GoK has already prepared a Health Care Waste Management Plan, which focuses on
existing laboratory waste generation as well as segregation, storage, collection, transport,
and final disposal practices; technologies for waste disposal; public awareness programs;
and relevant national legislation. This plan was been reviewed and accepted under the
EAPHLNP.

 The KHSSP has developed a Pilot to Integrate Social Accountability Approaches in the
Health Sector Services Fund (HSSF). The pilot will include (i) preparatory activities for
holding two health baraza with communities and health staff at each facility, (ii) )
planning and implementing support activities to strengthen social accountability at health
facilities and their communities; (iii) providing hands-on training to health staff and
Health Facility Management Committees (HFMC) to takeover implementation of social
accountability at their facilities and communities; and (iv) preparing reports on lessons
learnt from implementing social accountability for further scaling up.

  A Draft Operational Manual with appropriate tools for integrating Social Accountability
(SA) into HSSF has been developed focusing on three aspects of social accountability -
transparency, effective complaint redress, and participation. Training and consultations
are already underway at selected health facilities. The pilot will be implemented at nine
(9) locations, reflecting different socio-economic settings in Kenya, which include: arid
and semi-arid including pastoral, fishing, agriculture, semi-urban, and coastal. The pilot
will be implemented from June 2011 to June 2012.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders include Ministry of Health, Non Governmental Organizations,
private and mission health facilities, municipal councils and health facilities, health
workers, patients, and people living near health facilities and dump sites. Consultation
for the NHCWMP was through public hearings, stakeholder workshops and meeting of
the heads of the implementing agencies. For disclosure, the NHCWMP and related
documents were posted on the websites of the Ministry of Health and the National AIDS
Control Council (NACC). The plan was also disseminated through local newspapers and
radio. In addition, it was disclosed at the World Bank Information Center in Nairobi and
the InfoShop in Washington DC.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 02/03/2010
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             02/04/2010
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              05/14/2010
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 02/03/2010
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             02/04/2010
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              05/14/2010
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?             Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)         Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the         Yes
credit/loan?
  OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
  Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                  Yes
  appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
  Manager review the plan?
  If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed   Yes
  and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                          Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Gandham N.V. Ramana                       10/27/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Svetlana Khvostova                        11/17/2011
Social Development Specialist       Ms Gibwa A. Kajubi                           10/31/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                     11/18/2011
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Miriam Schneidman                         11/17/2011
  Comments:
