                                                                                                72282


                             INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                     APPRAISAL STAGE

Date preparedlupdated: 29/08112

1. Basic Information

     . P rOJec
1 BaSle    . tD a t a
Counhy: Kiribati                                        Project ID: P121878
                                                           1
                                                        Additional Project ID (if any):
                                                           1
Project Name: Grid Connected Solar PV Central Station Project
Task Team Leader: Kamlesh Khelawan
Estimated Appraisal Date: 7 September 2012            1 CD Approval Date: 30 November 2012
Managing Unit: EAP                                    1 Lending Instrument: Grant
Sector: SDN
Theme: Climate Change
IBRD Amount (US$m.): NIL
IDA Amount (US$m.): NIL
GEF Amount (US$m.): 1.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other fmancing amounts by source: PRIF $2.92m

Enviromnental CategOly: C
Is this a transfened project                             1 Yes [X]                        No[]
Simplified Processing                                    1 Simple [X]                     Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response ta Crises and                     Yes []            No [X]
Emergencies)                                                                                            1



2. Project Objectives:
This ISDS is for the Kiribati Grid Connected Solar PV Central Station Project. The project goal is ta
contribute to reducing Kiribati's dependence on imported petroleum for power generation in arder ta
improve energy security and ta reduce the GHG emissions from diesel fuel use for grid electricity supply in
Kiribati. The specific objective of the proposed MSP is ta serve as a catalyst for the substitution of the
diesel based electricity generation for the South Tarawa grid by grid-connected solar PV supply of
electricity.

3. Project Description:
 Project Components:

Investment Component
About 500 kWp (kilowatt peak capacity) of grid solar PV without storage ta kick-start a staged
implementation sh'ategy for grid connected solar PV over the medium-term. The solar PV arrays will be
installed and managed at four technically suitable locations, with associated inverters to enable grid in-feed
at each location. The feasibility study undertaken in 2012 has taken into account engineering, economic
and market conditions and has determined the sizing and key specifications of the power stations, taking
into account load shape characteristics and operational and system reliability considerations that may arise
from injecting the power into the S. Tarawa grid system. Design considerations take into account the
maritime environment within which the equipment must funct?on reliably.

The project investments will be built, owned and operated by Tarawa Public Utilities Board (PUB). For
procurement pUl'Poses, the project will be implemented largely on a "design, supply and install" contract
for the solar PV installation, and inc\ude a 3 -year operations and maintenance (O&M) and capacity
building program ta coyer the entire project duration, while PUB gains experience in O&M and builds its
capacity to initiate and manage future investments. The Consultants will also prepare technical_bid
documents for the design, supply and install contract and for ongoing capacity building and maintenance
programs.

The salaI' PV installations will be on government facilities on sites that are owned or leased by the
government under long term lease arrangements. The project as sets can be relocated without substantive
risk ta project outcomes in the unlikely event that any access issues arise on expiry of govemment land
leases.

Technical assistance
The technical assistance component of the project includes the following:

    1.   Implementation Consultant (Employer's Engineer) ta assist PUB, including: supporting
         preparation and technical evaluation of contractaI' bids received for construction of salaI' power
         stations, supervision of contractor through commissioning and plant's operational integratiol1
         including monitoring systems and safeguards supervision.

    2.   Preparation of a shOlt ta medium term development and implementation plan for PUB grid system
         based onleast cast options for additional grid connected salaI' PV (central and distributed) ta meet
         demand and reduce dependence on diesel for power generation and safety considerations. [This
         has been completed as part of the feasibility study undertaken during the project preparation].

    3.   Recommendations for improving the fmancial viability of PUB and the sector.

    4.   Technical assistance, including training for PUB staff for the salaI' power station operations and
         maintenance, capacity building and appropriate SUppOlt ta ensure compliance with Bank
         safeguards applicable ta the project, as well as [mancial management.

4. Projeet Location and salient physieal eharaeterislies relevant ta the safeguard analysis:
The project's physical investments will be located at four sites in South Tarawa, Kiribati. These four sites
have been chosen based on the fact that they minimize any environ ment and social impacts, are on sites and
based on theiJ' suitability ta produce salaI' power, and are located on facilities owned and operated by the
govemment; on land owned or leased by the government.

The sites are: (1) Tungaru Central Hospital in Nawerewere (roof-top installations on 9 buildings); (2)
Kiribati Institute of Technology (KIT) in Betio (one existing roof-top installation, two installations on new
buildings ta be constructed; (3) Betio Sports Campi ex in Betio (one roof-top installation); and (4) King
George V Secondmy School in Bikenibeu (five roof-top installations). All installations are ta be on
existing roofs except at KIT, with sorne roofing ta be replaced where the roofs show signs of rust.

Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The PUB has not worked with the World Bank before on any investment projects and therefore has no
experience with World Bank Safeguards Policies. However, the safeguards-related risks ofthis project are
very low and any required capacity building needs necessary for the PUB ta successfully manage the
safeguards aspects will be done through the TA component of the project.

In addition, the project will provide funding fol' and Employer's Engineer and a local support officer ta
assist PUB with the day ta day supervision ofthe inlplementation of the Environmental Management Plan.
It is worth mentioning that there is already existing capacity in some ministries in Kiribati in dealing with
World Bank Safeguards - in particular the Project Management Units (PMU) set up for the Kiribati
Adaptation Project III (KAP III) and the Kiribati Raad Rehabilitation Project. If necessary PUB can \Vork
together \Vith these PMUs in order ta increase their capacity ta manage any safeguard concems.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:
Ms. Pene Ferguson (Consultant)
Mrs. Ann McLean (Consultant)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered (plcase explain wh))                     Yes   No   OPfBP 4.00
Envil'Onmcntal As,essment (OP1BP 4.01)                                   X
Potential adverse environmental impacts are only anticipated to be
present during the construction/installation of the solar power
generation systems on the building roofs. However, such impacts
are expected to be minor and site-specific. They can be easily
avoided or effectively managed through the use ofreadily available,
simple and cost effective mitigation measures. Therefore, in
compliance with 0P4.0 l, the team has assigned an EA Category of
tle11 to the project.
The PUB has prepared an Environmental Management Plan (EMP)
as part of an environmental assessment. The EMP will be included
in the civil works contract for use dming construction. The provisos
of the EMP during construction will be binding upon the civil
works contractar.
Natural Habitats (OPfBP 4.04)                                                  X
The policy is not triggered because the project will not cause
adverse impacts on any natural habitats at any time during
construction or operation of the system. No land outside of the
boundaries ofthe existing properties is required for the solar power
generation systems to be installed. No off-site impacts from
obtaining materials (e.g., reef aggregates) for leveling or other
construction purpose are expected either.
Forests (OPfBP 4.36)                                                           X
The policy is not h'iggered because the project does not involve any
activities that would affect the healthfquality of forests, or the
rightsfwelfare of people who depend on forests for livelihoods, or
the managementfprotection/utilization of natural forests or
plantations.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                      X
The policy is not triggered because no use or procurement of
pesticides is needed.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP1BP 4.11)                                       X
No Physical Cultural Resources (PCR) are present at the potential
sites where solar power systems are to be installed.
Indigenous Peoples (OP1BP 4.10)                                           X
Kiribati is a homogenous society - 99 percent of the population
consists ofI-Kiribati indigenous people and the remainder ofreeent
migrants such as Tuvaluans and Europeans. The I-Kiribati are not
marginalized or vulnerable and enjoy fulliegai status. They are
organized along family and kin lines and they speak one language,
I-Kiribati. English is also eonsidered a local language, particularly
in govemment. The communities living around the cUlTently
identified project area are likely to host people who have an
ancestral attachment to the land (originallandowners) however,
these communities will not have a separate language, separate
institutions, nor will they self-identify as indigenous peoples. The
project poses no risk to dignity, human rights, eeonomies, or
cultures. Free, prior, infonned, gender inclusive and culturally
appropriate consultation has been undertaken in advanee of the
Appraisal ISDS. Social assessment reported in the EMP shows that
the project has potentially positive eftècts on the population. lPP is
not required.
Involuntary Resettlement (OPIBP 4.12)                                                           X
Ali selected locations are on Government owned or reclaimed land.
Therefore, no conflicts with landowners due ta modified or
additionalland use are expected. Land acquisition will not be
needed for the projec!.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                                     X
Projects on Intel'llational Waterways (OPIBP 7.50)                                              X            NIA'
Proiects in Disputed Areas (OPIBP 7.60)                                                         X            NIA

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Sl/lIIl11ary of Key Safegl/arrl Issl/es
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed projec!. IdentifY and describe
any potentiallarge scale, significant and/or ?tTeversible impacts:

The project if successfully implemented, operated and maintained will have significant environment
benefits mainly derived from the switch of power generation from a fossil fuel (diesel) source ta a
renewable source (solar energy).
There is no decommissioning of diesel generators, and no use of batteries as paIi ofthis projec!.
Potential adverse environmental impacts are only anticipated ta be present during the
construction/installation of the solar power generation systems on the building roofs. However, such
impacts are expected ta be minor and site-specific. They can be easily avoided or effectively managed
through the use of readily available, simple and cast effective mitigation measures.
Fm1hermore, to ensme the construction-related environmental and social impacts are eftèctively managed,
the PUB has prepared an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) as part of an environmental assessmen!.
The EMP will be included in the civil works conh'act for use during construction and will be binding upon
the Contractar.      It cantains tangible mitigation measures, institutional responsibilities for their
inlplementation and monitoring, during bath construction and operation of the system, and budget
estimation ta ensure adequate funding is available ta implement the EMP. It also includes management
measures for ensuring the safety at these sites during the physical works, especially at hospitals and
schools. A grievance mechanism is included. As required in the EMP, the implementing agency will also
assign a dedicated officer ta address any public concems or complaints during construction. The costs in
the EMP will be included in the overall cast of the projec!. The EMP has been cleared and publicly
disclosed, bath locally in Tarawa and at the ln fa shop.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due ta anticipated future activities in the project
area:

No adverse inlpacts expected. There will be positive benefits from the substitution of diesel electricity
generation.




1   OPIBP 7.50 and OPIBP 7.60 are not eligible for piloting under OP 4.00
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered ta help avoid or minimize adverse impacts:

The project involves installation of grid connected renewable energy (solar panels) on sites owned and
operated by the Republic of Kiribati on land that is under long term lease arrangements. Ali sites are
located on existing buildings ta minimize the land required for energy generation. The alternative (free
standing salaI' arrays) would take up valuable land that could not then be used for other purposes.

4. For those safeguards ta be addressed through OPIBP 4.00, characterize in general tenns the extent ta
which borrower systems are equivalent ta the Objectives and Operational Principles of OP 4.00, Table AI.
For those safeguards to be addressed through conventional OPIBPs, identify the reason for the decision to
not apply OP 4.00 (e.g. absence of equivalence and/or acceptability report).

OP4.00 is not applicable.

5. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues to identify any significant
gap-filling measures necessary to fulfill the conditions for application of OP 4.00. Provide an assessment
ofborrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described:
OP4.00 is not applicable.

6. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, including the Safeguard Diagnostic Review (SDR) with an emphasis on potentially affected
people:

As OP 4.00 is not applicable, SDR is not required.


B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Public Information Bulletin and Environnlental Management Plan:
   Dates ofllin-countri l consultation and disclosure                                           6 July 2012
   Date of submission ta InfoShop                                                            31 August 2012
   For categOly A projects, date of distributing the PlD to the Executive Directors         CategOly C projec!.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliollce MOllitorillg [/Illicolors ollile CorpoTllle Level (la be jillelf ill wilell lile ISDS is jillolizelf
by lile projecllfedsioll meelillg)

OP/BP/4.01 - Envil'onment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?             Yes [X]        No[]       NIA [ ]
                                                                              The borrower engaged TTA (environmental
                                                                              consultants) to complete an EA and EMP.
                                                                              Under the safeguards policy, the project
                                                                              required as a minimum an Environmental
                                                                              Code of Practice to cover construction-
                                                                              related activities.
Ifyes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager               Yes
(SM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.00 - Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address Environmental and Social Safegual'd Issues in
Bank-SuDDol'ted Proiects
Did the Quality Assurance and Compliance Unit (QACU) and the          Yes [ ] No [ ]    NIA [X]
ESSD and International Law Practice Group (LEGEN) review and
approve the Safeguard Diagnostic Review report?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any signifieant conversion or degradation     Yes [ ]   No [X]   NIA [ ]
of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of
otller Cnon-critical) natural habitats, does the project include
mitigation measures acceptable ta the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adeQuately address the pest management issues?                Yes [ ]   No [ ]   NIA [X]
Is a separate PMP required?                                               Yes [ ]   No [ ]   NIA [X ]
lfyes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards
specialist or Sector Manager? Are PMP requirements included in
project design? lfyes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physieal Cultural Rosources
Does the EA include adequate measures related ta physical cultural        Yes [ ]   No [ ]   NIA [X]
resources?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms ta mitigate the
potential adverse impacts on physical cultural resources?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples PlanIPlanning Framework Cas             Yes [ ]   No [ ]   NIA [X]
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenons
Peoples?
lfyes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or
Sector Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed ta benefit!P, has the design been
reviewed and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy rramework/process         Yes [ ]   No [ ]   NIA [X]
rramework Cas appropriate) been prepared?
Ifyes, then did the Regionalnnit responsible for safeguards or
Sector Manager review and approve the plan/policy
rramework/process rramework?
OPIBP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and       Yes [ ]   No [ ]   NIA [X]
constraints been calTied out?
Does the project design include satisfactOlY measures ta overcome
these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if SO, does it
include provisions for certification system?
OPIBP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                      Yes [ ]   No [ ]   NIA [X]
Have the TORs as weil as composition for the independent Panel of
Expelis (POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan CEPP) been prepared and
arrangements been made for pnblic awareness and training?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                    Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [X]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions ta the notification
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Dep31iment, and
the memo ta the RVP prepared and sent?
What are the reasons for the exception? Please explain:
Has the RVP approved such an exception?
OP 7.60 - Proiects in Disputed Areas
Has the memo conveying ail pertinent infonnation on the                Yes [ ]      No [ ]       NIA [X]
international aspects of the project, including the procedures ta be
followed, and the recommendations for dealing with the issue, been
prepared
Does the PADIMOP include the standard disclaimer referred ta in
the OP?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent ta the World      Yes [X]        No [ ]       NIA [ ]
Bank's Iufoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place    Yes
in a form and language that are understandable and accessible ta
project-affected groups and local NGOs?
Ali Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional             Yes [X]       No [ ]       NIA [ ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related ta safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the   Yeso The project provides for an owner's
project cast?                                                          engineer, who will aIso oversee the
                                                                       implementation oflcompliance with the
                                                                       EMP;

                                                                       The project budget provides for a local PST
                                                                       support officer who will assist with the day-
                                                                       ta -day issues in relation ta the EMP;

                                                                       The environmental and social contacts have
                                                                       been identified within the Ministry of Public
                                                                       Works and Utilities (govermnent in kind);
                                                                       and

                                                                       The Ministry of Enviromnent, Lands and
                                                                       Agricultural Development will oversee
                                                                       compliance with locallegislation
                                                                       (govemment in kind).


Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include       Yes
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the     Yes as per clause 2.03(b) ofboth the GEF
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal   and PRIF General Agreement documents.
documents?
      D. Approvals

Sifilled alld submÎtled bv:                        Name                     Dale
Task Team Leader:
                                 Kamlesh~                  ~            30 August 2012
                                                  :/.   '" ~        ~


Environmental Specialist:        Pene Ferguson                          30 August 2012




                                       ~~t                     /'




Social Development Specialist:   Ann McLean                             31 August 2012


                                 ~~ A~
Approved by:


                                                  7~~
Sectol' Manager (Acting):        Roberto Aiello                         31 August 2012


  Comments:
