                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 07/24/2013                                   Report No.: AC6948
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Kiribati                                Project ID: P144099
Project Name: Kiribati Road Rehablitaiton Project - Additional Financing
Task Team Leader: Christopher R. Bennett
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 22, 2013          Estimated Board Date: April 1, 2014
Managing Unit: EASNS                             Lending Instrument:
Sector: Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (100%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (75%);Other public sector governance
(10%);Other urban development (10%);Infrastructure services for private sector
development (5%)
SPF Amount (US$m):                0
GEF Amount (US$m.):               0
PCF Amount (US$m.):               0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                          7.45
         Pacific Regional Infrastructure Facility Trust Fund              14.40
                                                                          21.85
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                            Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                      Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The project development objective is "The project will improve the condition of South
Tarawa's main road network and help strengthen road financing and maintenance
capacity."

3. Project Description
Component A: Civil Works - This component consists of the main civil works activities
to be undertaken on the South Tarawa road infrastructure. The activities include:

  •      Reconstruction and Rehabilitation of Paved Roads on South Tarawa. The road
from the Betio Toll booth to the junction with the Ananau Causeway (22.4 km), the
Ananau Causeway to just past the airport terminal (2.2 km), the road from the Ananau
Causeway junction towards Temaiku (2.2 km) and then to the south of the airport where
it will reconnect with the Ananau Causeway road (3.9 km), and the road from Tanaea to
the north of Buota island (2.0 km) will be reconstructed or rehabilitated with safety
improvements. 8 km of water main adjacent to the road will be replaced.
 •      Rehabilitation of Betio Causeway. The pavement and revetment structure of the
approximately 3.2 km long causeway will be rehabilitated, as well as repairs to the bridge
deck.
 •      Rehabilitation of Paved Roads in Betio & Bairiki. Repairs to localized pavement
failures and drainage improvements in Betio.
 •      Sealing of Feeder Roads. 8 km of unsealed urban feeder roads with high traffic
volumes will be sealed and provided with improved drainage. The roads were identified
in consultation with the New Zealand Aid Programme (NZAP) financed STP.
 •      Road Safety Improvements. Improvements including solar street lighting, road
signage and pavement markings to address road safet issues on paved roads not included
in the main civil works packages.
 •      Consulting Services. For the design and supervision of civil works.

 Component B: Road Sector Reform - Activities to strengthen the road sector and
ultimately lead to more sustainable main road infrastructure in South Tarawa:

  •      Micro-Enterprises for Routine Road Maintenance. Provision of assistance in the
form of (i) training, (ii) procurement of basic plant and equipment, and (iii) operational
support for the management and monitoring of contracts, in order to promote the
establishment of micro-enterprises to undertake routine maintenance on the GOK's paved
road network, using performance-based contracting methodology, and under supervision
by MPWU.
  •      Road Safety Action Plan. Development and implementation of a multi-sectoral
road safety action plan in consultation with the Kiribati's National Road Safety Task
Force Committee, including provision of breath testing equipment and radar guns for the
traffic police to improve enforcement.
  •      Drafting of Legislation. Updating the Kiribati road law as well as legislation
dealing with speed and driving under the influenc of alcohol.

 Component C: Project Support. Specialist support to the GOK for implementation of the
Project. This includes:

 •      Establishment of the Kiribati Central Fiduciary Unit (KCFU) to ensure the
smooth operation of the project. The KCFU will handle procurement and financial
management, as well as assisting in the preparation of work-plans, budgets, progress and
impact reports, and coordination of the overall implementation of the project.
 •      Establishing the Project Support Team (PST). A PST Manager/Technical Auditor
will support the MPWU with implementation of the civil works activities.
 •      Project associated incremental operating costs (e.g. telecommunications, local
workshops for stakeholders, procurement-associate activities, etc.);
 •      A valuation specialist to identify the appropriate compensation rates for trees and
other assets affected by the Project; and,
 •      An NGO to monitor implementation of the RPF.
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Project activities will be located in Tarawa. The investments are on the main road
running east-west along South Tarawa, and also north towards the airport. Improvement
to the main road in Buota will be done. All investments are on the existing road right-of-
way.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Beverly Ann McLean (EASNS)
   Ms Penelope Ruth Ferguson (EASNS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environmental Assessment: The Project is rated as a Category B project because the
environmental impacts are considered small scale, reversible and / or temporary.

 The environmental license for the civil works was issued by the GoK on November 26,
2012.
 An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was prepared and disclosed during project
preparation. This was updated to reflect the final design and included in the bidding
document for the civil works. Upon mobilization the contractor will prepare the
Contractor's EMP, which will provide further details as to how the provisions of the EMP
will be implemented.

 The Bill of Quantity includes costs for environmental management and the contractor
shall have payments adjusted as necessary should there be non-compliance. The
government, through Ministry of Environment, Land and Agricultural Development
(MELAD), will monitor the D&S consultant and contractor as appropriate. The World
Bank and Asian Development Bank will monitor environmental compliance during
missions.
  As noted in the original PAD, the bulk of the road construction materials will be
imported from offshore destinations such as Banaba, Nauru or Fiji. This will minimize
the demand on the limited local resources. The European Union is financing an
'Environmentally Safe Aggregates Tarawa' (ESAT) project with support from the
Secretariat of the Pacific Community Applied Geosciences and Technology Division
(SOPAC). The financing includes the construction of a dredging barge which is expected
to be operational mid 2013. The Bank undertook a detailed assessment of the proposed
approach towards aggregate supply on the ESAT project and agreed, subject to the GoK
issuing an environmental license and certain other provisions being met, that the
contractor could use this material for road construction. The license was granted by GoK
in September 2012.

 Involuntary Resettlement Assessment: A draft Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) was
submitted in October 2012, and updated in January 2013 to reflect comments from the
World Bank and ADB. The RAP is based on the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
disclosed during project preparation and was disclosed in country and at InfoShop on
May 2, 2013. The RAP reports that the rehabilitation activities remain mainly within the
existing right-of-way. The feeder roads do not require land acquisition.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Environmental Assessment: The main potential environmental impacts identified include:
(i) disturbance including noise and dust arising from loading and unloading, and
transportation of construction materials (aggregates and bitumen) by dump trucks; (ii)
noise and dust arising during scarifying the existing road base, construction of the new
road base and construction of the new surface; (iii) erosion and sedimentation from
exposed surfaces that may affect the lagoon environment during the construction
processes; (iv) risks from the use and disposal of hazardous materials such as used fuel
and lubricants; and, (v) increased risk of accidents from increased vehicle movements.

 A key consideration during project preparation was where the materials for the road
construction would be sourced. The bulk of the road construction materials will be
imported from offshore such as Banaba, Nauru or Fiji. This will minimize the demand on
the limited local resources.

 The project will undertake an HIV/AIDS education campaign for workers and affected
local residents.

  The improved road will result in higher speeds. To ensure that there is proper safety to
road users and local residents, the project undertook a road safety audit of the design.
This identified a range of actions to be taken to improve road safety. In a beneficiary
survey undertaken for the project, 98.5 percent of respondents expressed concern over
safety on the road. Women's safety was of particular concern, with requests for more
frequent bus stops and improved street lighting. The project addressed these concerns by
significantly increasing both the number of bus stops and solar street lights. Much higher
road safety standards including speed humps, kerbs, footpaths and street lighting
(through all speed control zones as identified by the local Councils) are being
implemented by the project. The project will also implement a multi-sectoral road safety
action plan.

 Involuntary Resettlement: The rehabilitation works will result in:
 (i)    Loss of residential land of estimated 8,246 m2 for: (a) providing the roads with an
engineered alignment; (b) drainage easements; and (c) stopping areas. The individual
portions to be acquired from compounds are minimal and have no impact on the
concerned households' income sources and livelihood according to surveys of the
affected households.
 (ii) Loss of trees has been estimated with 131 affected coconut palm, pandanus and
breadfruit trees. There are between one and four trees per affected owner who confirmed
that their families' incomes were not dependent on these trees.
 (iii) No loss of primary and secondary structures and no relocation of households.
 (iv) No loss of agricultural land.
 (v) No loss of common property.
 (vi) No Project cases of economic resettlement and vulnerable people.

 The loss of land and trees affects an estimated 348 landowners including 21
organizations (mainly churches) and 28 owners with two or three plots potentially
affected. In the concerned 11 villages, the estimated 2,319 household members of the
affected households represent about 5% of Tarawa's total population. Taking into account
that several landowners are sometimes affected by the same strip of land to be acquired,
this leads to about 193 cases where land is lost only, 31 cases where both land and tress
are affected, and 55 cases where trees are lost only. The resettlement cost is estimated at
about AU$ 121,000, which will be financed by the GoK.

 An NGO has been recruited by the project to monitor the RAP implementation and to
ensure that any grievances that arise are properly addressed.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
This is the only east-west corridor through South Tarawa so there is no alternative to
ensuring that it meets the basic access needs to the community and remains passable.

 The main alternatives considered were with regard to road design options and,
importantly, material selection. The normal practice for materials supply is the use of
beach mined coral. The project will not use these materials, importing high quality
material from sustainably sourced suppliers in Banaba, Nauru and/or Fiji. Any locally
supplied material will come from licensed, sustainable sources acceptable to the Bank.
This will minimize the negative environmental impact of the project.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
For resettlement, the Borrower has exiting institutional capacity for implementing the
project. They are able to identify affected people and pay compensation payments. If
needed the project will provide additional support to the government's existing grievance
system. The project will supply a valuation specialist to update compensation for assets
such as trees. It will also finance an NGO to monitor implementation of the RPF.

 As noted above, the EMP was prepared by the MPWU with assistance from a consultant
procured by the ADB. It was reviewed by the Bank and found to be satisfactory. The
draft EMP was updated to reflect the final design and was included in the tender
document.

 The RAP has been completed, reviewed and subject to the Bank's final comments being
addressed is acceptable to the Bank.

 During implementation, the foreign consultant responsible for construction supervision
will be employed to ensure that the project is implemented in accordance with the EMP
and resettlement framework. An NGO has been hired to provide independent monitoring
of the RAP.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The road affects virtually the entire South Tarawa population.

 As required by the World Bank and Asian Development Bank Safeguards Policies,
public consultations were undertaken during the preparation of EMP. Preliminary
consultations were undertaken on July 10-11, 2010 during the environmental mission to
Tarawa, and August 12-26, 2010 during the pre-appraisal mission. Additional public
consultations and information disclosure took place in Tarawa September 20-21, 2010.
Upon completion of the design work and tendering, additional consultations were
undertaken on the RAP during December 7 – 18, 2012.

 The EMP and RPF will be available locally to the communities at the MPWU office and
Community centers, along with a Public Information Booklet on the project.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                     10/02/2012
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 03/06/2013
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                  10/02/2012
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                     05/02/2013
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 05/02/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               05/02/2013
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              No
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          N/A
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the            Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                         Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Christopher R. Bennett                   06/04/2013
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Penelope Ruth Ferguson                   05/30/2013
Social Development Specialist       Ms Beverly Ann McLean                       05/31/2013
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                   Mr Roberto Gabriel Aiello                     06/06/2013
  Comments: Roberto acting as SM on behalf of Michel Kerf
