                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 08/28/2011                                    Report No.: AC6197
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Kiribati                               Project ID: P112615
Project Name: Kiribati Adaptation Phase III (LDCF)
Task Team Leader: Emilia Battaglini
GEF Focal Area: Climate change                  Global Supplemental ID:
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 21, 2011        Estimated Board Date: September 15, 2011
Managing Unit: EASNS                            Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                                Loan
Sector: Central government administration (30%);General agriculture, fishing and
forestry sector (30%);Water supply (30%);Other social services (10%)
Theme: Climate change (60%);Water resource management (30%);Other social
protection and risk management (10%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):              0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):               0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):               3.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               0.25
         AUSTRALIA: Australian Agency for International Development 4.85
         Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery              0.90
         Japan Policy and Human Resources Development Fund                1.80
                                                                          7.80
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                    Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The development objective of the project is to improve the resilience of Kiribati to the
impacts of climate change on freshwater supply and coastal infrastructure. The project
would achieve this objective by strengthening the government capacity and improving
the management and governance of water resources and infrastructure.

 The main project outcomes would include: (a) government capacity in asset
management and strategic planning in the water and coastal engineering is improved; (b)
community fresh water quality and storage capacity is increased; (c) targeted coastal
areas are better protected from storm waves and flooding; (d) a pathway for improved
governance and sustainable management of groundwater reserves and infrastructure is
identified.
3. Project Description
The project scales up best practices in the design and implementation of adaptation
investments in water resource management and coastal resilience that were successfully
piloted under KAP II. It also strengthens the linkages between climate change adaptation
and disaster risk reduction and supports community-driven climate and disaster risk
management as part of a comprehensive, top-down-bottom-up approach to coastal
management.

  Component C1 # Improve water resource use and management (US$4.3 million
including contingencies). The activities include:
  #      Groundwater Abstraction Systems. Expand the installation of groundwater
abstraction systems in North Tarawa based on investigations and community consultation
work completed under KAP II.
  #      Water Reticulation Management (Leakage detection and repair of real
losses).Reducing leakage is a key priority for the GOK. It is proposed to expand on the
small pilot under KAP II supported with capacity development and community
awareness-raising under separate activities.
  #      Capacity Building in MPWU, PUB, MHMS and MELAD. Expand the KAP II
training and development programs relating to effective water management and planning.
  #      Community Behavior Change Campaign. Also a short/medium term priority of
the GOK, undertake targeted campaigns linked to the leakage reduction program and to
support MPWU, PUB, and MOH in their roles in managing safe water supply.
  #      Roof Rainwater Harvesting. Expand the program started under KAP II of
installing rainwater harvesting systems on public buildings for community use.
  #      Advisory Support for Water Projects in MPWU. Continue to further build
MPWU#s capability in water resource and water quality management through the
appointment of a Senior Water Engineer seconded to MPWU
  #      Improved Water Management Governance. Consider the legislative and
regulatory framework and governance model to support community management of
water reserves.

 Component C2 # Increase coastal resilience (US$2.9 million including contingencies).
Expanding on work started under KAP II, the activities are:
 #      Investments in Shoreline Protection. Implement further works at priority sites
identified and started under KAP II.
 #      Advisory Support for Shoreline Erosion Mitigation Measures. Continue to further
build MPWU#s capability in coastal assessment, options analysis, design and
construction through the appointment of a Senior Civil Engineer seconded to MPWU.
 #      Asset Management of Coastal Infrastructure. Develop skills in coastal
infrastructure asset management.
 #      Mangrove Replanting in Outer Islands. Continue/expand the mangrove planting
program commenced under KAP III.

  Component C3 - Strengthen the Capacity to Manage the Effects of Climate Change and
Natural Hazards (US$2.2 million including contingencies). Underpinned by the work
from KAP II and in support of a whole-of-government approach to climate change
adaption (CCA), disaster risk reduction (DRR) and community involvement, the
activities are:
  #      Technical Support to the Strategic Risk Management Unit, OB. Provide
additional support to the SRMU to better undertake its role with respect to Climate
Change Adaptation (CCA) and Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR) coordination, integration
and policy harmonization functions.
  #      Coastal Management Policy and Locally Managed Adaptation Planning. Prepare
a national coastal management policy framework and strategy aimed at better
management of coastal zones, resources and infrastructure and facilitate local
communities and Island Councils, with help from government ministries, to develop
locally managed adaptation plans, thus improving resilience at national, island and
village / community levels. Within the national framework objectives and guidelines, the
locally managed adaptation plans (LOMAPs) will identify risky localities and vulnerable
public infrastructure, preferred management actions, potential resources for small-scale
measures and solutions. Implementation of mitigation measures will be achieved through
other activities with an emphasis on locally managed solutions implemented within the
overarching national framework and strategy and coastal management framework.
  #      Communications & Media. Covers the direct costs of communications and media
activities relating to CCA and DRR over the duration of the project.
  #      Climate Change Website Maintenance. Covers the direct costs and IT services to
maintain and continue to populate the GoK#s website (www.climate.gov.ki) with KAP
III outputs, stories and general information.
  #      Disaster Fund Small Grants Scheme. Operation of a small grants scheme for
CCA and DRR activities at community level with an agreed proportion of activities
increasingly identified through the locally managed adaptation plans as they are prepared
across the country.

  Component C4 # Project Management, Monitoring & Evaluation (US$1.4 million
including contingencies). Activities are:
  #      Project Management Unit. Establishment and operation of an appropriately
staffed Project Management Unit (PMU) to be supported as needed by the central PMU
that has been established in MFED for other World Bank-supported projects in Kiribati.
  #      Independent audit. Audit of the project financial systems and results.
  #      Mid-term review. Independent review of the project progress and achievements
at the time the project has achieved roughly 50% disbursement of funds.
  #      Monitoring & evaluation. Monitoring of project implementation progress and
other key performance indicators; end of project review of the project achievements and
final verification of the indicators from the Results Framework.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Mainly South Tarawa and a few communities in North Tarawa (outer islands. Some very
small scale infrastructure could be financed in other outer islands under the Disaster Fund
small grant scheme.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Anil H. Somani (EASNS)
   Ms Maria Fernanda Miralles Gasparini (SEGOM)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                           X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                               X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                        X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                   X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                    X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                             X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                           X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                 X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                            X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                     X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The EMP for KAP III has identified broad environmental implications related to the
development and conservation of fresh water resources and coastal protections in Tarawa.
Environmental assessment of the proposed KAP III adaptation measures concluded that
no specific risks are foreseen with the Project activities aside from possible minor land
acquisition, and disturbance to the adjoining areas. The construction impacts will be
minor, reversible and manageable if the mitigation measures as given in the EMP are
properly implemented. The mitigation and monitoring plan given in the EMP is based on
the type, extent and duration of the identified environmental impacts. The EMP has been
prepared by close reference to best practices and in line with the World Bank#s
Safeguard Policies. The effective implementation of the EMP will be audited as part of
the Grant conditions. In this regard, the KAP III PMU will guide the design and
supervision engineers and contractors in the implementation of the EMP.

 The environmental impacts are associated mostly with construction and include dust,
noise, land and coastal erosion, safety, disruption of daily social and economic activities,
etc. potential impacts related to sand mining and aggregate collection for infrastructure
construction. The projects are small and the impacts are considered minor. The mitigation
measures will be built into the project design and included as part of the technical
specifications and the bid documents.

 The project will not convert or degrade any protected areas, known natural habitats or
established or proposed critical natural habitats. For water resources all activities will be
carried out to improve the established operations. Coastal protection walls will be built
inselected coatsal areas to reduce future environmental damanger from erosion and wave
actions.
 The project is triggering the World Bank Involuntary Resettlement policy (OP 4.12) due
to the potential need to acquire assets or land and/or cause minimal resettlement. Assets
or lands could be acquired, for example, to protect freshwater galleries or housing could
be moved away from areas that are vulnerable to the impacts of climate change.
However this will not be clear until specific subcomponents are designed. This was the
same case in KAP II and therefore a Land Acquisition and Resettlement Framework
(LARF) was prepared for that project. The existing LARF is found to be suitable to
inform KAP III as well. This LARF is an informed document and still very much up to
date. Therefore it is recommended that it be used in the preparation and implementation
of KAP III. The LARF will form the basis of agreement with government concerning
approaches to be taken in the event land acquisition and/or resettlement is necessary
during the implementation of subprojects, and guide the preparation of appropriate
Resettlement Plans, as needed. The LARF is publicly available at the KAP PMU.
 OP 4.10 is not triggered because the population of Tarawa is all from a single ethnic
group, they all speak the same language and do not identify themselves as different.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The groundwater abstraction systems have the potential to significantly improve the
water quality for people in Tarawa by preventing salt water to mix with freshwater.
Moreover, the protection of water reserves could translate into significant improvements
of the overall quality of the freshwater lens. However, long term protection of the lens
could mean restrictions on people#s land use, as often the areas where the lens is thicker
is where bawbai (taro) pits are planted, as well as other crops. In order to protect the
water lens, these crops would need to be dug out, which could translate into long term
livelihood and cultural impacts for people. Therefore the need to protect the freshwater
galleries will need to be discussed carefully with communities and, together, the project
and the community should decide the best approach to ensure enhanced water quality
with minimum disruption of livelihoods. The LARF should guide and land or asset
acquisition.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Communities will be consulted on the subprojects and discuss options that could
minimize any adverse impacts expected. For example, when installing groundwater
abstraction systems, efforts will be made to ensure as little crops and land as possible are
disrupted. This will be done in consultation with communities.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The proposed project will build on KAP II best practices in designing and implementing
adaptation measures in water and civil works. Project implementation will emphasise
physical investments, capacity building and community consultation/participation in
pursuing sustainability and climate resilient investments.
  The KAP III Project Management Unit (PMU)developed considerable experience from
implementing the KAP II project and will be responsible for the implementation and
compliance of the KAP III project with the Environment Management Plan (EMP), Land
Acquisition and Resettlement Framework (LARF) and the Project Monitoring Plan. Day-
to-day implementation and compliance of environment and social safeguards will be the
task of Project Supervision Consultants who will make sure that the Contractor#s
Environment Plan (CEP) is in accordance with the EMP design recommendations and
that if Resettlement Plans (RPs) are needed, they are prepared in accordance with the
LARF. Public Works Department of the Ministry of Works and Public Utilities will
provide technical assistance and assist with contract labour to the Project Contractor as
necessary. Assistance on land matters will be provided by the Ministry of Environment,
Land and Agriculture Development (MELAD).

  As part of KAP II a Social Assessment (SA) was prepared which provides important
information about the physical and cultural environment in Kiribati, power structures
within society, the role of the church and other organizations, information on land tenure
systems, political organization, perceptions and awareness on climate change related
issues as well as local adaptation strategies. This SA is found to be a thorough document
that is well equipped to inform the preparation and implementation of KAP III as this is a
follow on from the previous project and the document remains accurate to the realities on
the ground.

 Moreover, a LARF was also prepared for KAP II given the potential for the acquisition
of small assets land, or structures and/or resettlement under the subprojects. Once again,
this is found to be an informed and up-to date document that reflects the current situation
in Kiribati, and should therefore be used in the preparation of KAP III and the
implementation of its subprojects. The Government of Kiribati has existing institutional
capacity to deal with land acquisition matters, and the KAP PMU has developed capacity
to manage these issues under the implementation of KAP II. However, close monitoring
will be required from both the PMU and the World Bank to ensure land acquisition
processes are appropriate and well documented in compliance with the LARF. It is
recommended that consultants be hired to prepare certain safeguard components (such as
Resettlement Plans), as it was done with the Resettlement Framework.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
1.      The key stakeholders of the project are the people of Tarawa who will benefit
from improved coastal infrastructure and from improved water quality due to the
groundwater abstraction systems. Government departments such as MELAD, MPWU
and the OB#s office will also benefit from training and capacity development. Local
people, in particular women and youth, NGOs, Church groups and other civil society
organizations will also be key stakeholders of the project that will be targeted in order to
develop effective awareness campaigns to help manage water supply.
  2.
  3.    Consultations were held in South Tarawa during February 2011 and focused on
informing stakeholders about the continuation of the KAP program through the KAP III
project, the potential environmental and social impacts of the proposed project and
measures to mitigate them, including disclosing the new project EMP. The LARF is
publicly available at the KAP PMU. Consultations on the proposed KAP III project were
supplemented by continuous consultations that have taken place with communities in
North and South Tarawa as part of the implementation of KAP II. One key lesson of
KAP II is the importance of continuous consultations throughout the project life, and this
approach will be continued and strengthened under the KAP III project. In addition,
informal consultations by the Task Team#s Social Safeguards Specialist were also held
with a variety of NGOs and civil society to get input into the project, particularly the
community awareness component of KAP III. During project implementation it will be
important to involve women throughout the consultation process as women can be one of
the greatest groups affected by the impacts of climate change.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 04/14/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             02/11/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              04/14/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 04/14/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             04/14/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              04/14/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
  C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
  ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

  OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
  Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
  If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
  review and approve the EA report?
  Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
  credit/loan?
  OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
  Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
  framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
  Manager review the plan?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank’s       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name                         Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Emilia Battaglini                         04/15/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Anil H. Somani                            04/15/2011
Social Development Specialist       Ms Maria Fernanda Miralles Gasparini         04/15/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Charles M. Feinstein                      07/07/2011
  Comments:
