                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                           Report No.: AC6301


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/13/2011

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Kiribati                               Project ID: P126324
Project Name: Telecommunications and ICT Development Project
Task Team Leader: Natasha Beschorner
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 1,           Estimated Board Date: April 1, 2013
2011
Managing Unit: TWICT                            Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance
                                                Loan
Sector: Telecommunications (100%)
Theme: Regulation and competition policy (75%);Infrastructure services for private
sector development (25%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              5.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                0.00
        Pacific Regional Infrastructure Facility Trust Fund               1.00
                                                                          1.00


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The proposed development objective is to increase access to telecommunications services in
Kiribati.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
Proposed Project Components are as follows:
  (a) Component 1. ICT Policy Support. US$ 1.35 million. The Project will provide assistance
to MCTTD in the following areas:
  (i) new market entry: assist in the design and conduct of a selection process for new
telecommunications service provider(s), to be undertaken in coordination with TAK;
  (ii) TSKL transformation: assist MCTTD, in coordination with the Ministry of Finance, in
identifying and implementing options for reforming/restructuring TSKL which may include the
introduction of an equity investor or other strategic partner for TSKL
  (iii) ICT policy review and coordination: updating the sector policy in line with industry
developments and Government objectives, including second-generation reforms and application
of ICT in other sectors, and monitoring ICT sector development.
  (b) Component 2. ICT Regulatory Support US$1.2 million. This envisages technical
assistance and capacity-building for the TAK in the following areas:
  #       issuing licenses and other authorizations, and monitoring compliance with sector
legislation and regulatory instruments;
  #       establishing and regulating the technical aspects of the interconnection regime;
  #       regulating competition;
  #       resolving disputes between operators, and between operators and users of
telecommunications services; and
  #       allocating, assigning and supervising the issuance of radio spectrum and frequencies,
numbering, and other technical regulation matters.

  (c) Component 3. Outer Islands ConnectivityUS$2.0 million. This will finance: (i) technical
assistance for:
  #      development of an appropriate Outer Islands connectivity policy and strategy, including
technical and financial feasibility analysis, and stakeholder consultations;
  #      development of the necessary regulatory instruments, instructions and practical
procedures to implement the regulatory regime (including legislative and licensing obligations)
in relation to Outer Islands coverage;
  #      identification, analysis and evaluation of possible coverage extension projects and
possible financing/risk-sharing mechanism (such projects might include voice and/or data;
broadband/backbone infrastructure and/or access facilities); and design and implementation of
awareness-raising and training programs for outer islands communities on the use of
telecommunications and ICTs to improve livelihoods; and
  (ii) based on the above strategy, and project identification, and, depending on the extent of
commercial rollout and connectivity gaps, a subsidy for outer islands communications, to be bid
competitively.
  (d) Component 4. Project Management US$0.4 million. This includes support for the
following inputs. The possibility of using a shared management unit with other projects will also
be explored:
  #      project management consultants#project coordinator and facilitator, financial
management consultant and procurement consultant#working together with staff to form within
MCTTD;
  #      project audit;
  #      computer and office equipment to support project management; and
  #      incremental operating costs.

D. Project location (if known)
The primary location for the project is the main population centre of Tarawa. The project may
include a subsidy component for outer islands connectivity (component 3 (ii)) to be determined
in the course of project implementation based on needs assessment.

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
The Government has limited institutional capacity for implementation of World Bank
environmental and social safeguards policies.

  Should there be any land acquisition (expected to be minimal, if any), the Government has
exiting institutional capacity for addressing the issues, with well established procedures. They
are able to identify affected people and pay compensation payments, particularly if done on a
small scale. The Government has in place a grievance mechanism that allows people to file
complaints at the Magistrates Court and make appeals at the High Court in Tarawa. Similar
arrangements exist in the outer islands. However, these systems can be overburdened and slow.
If necessary, the Project would need to work with the Magistrates Courts to ensure that they can
address any grievances related to the project expediently.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Josefo Tuyor (EASPS)
   Ms Maria Fernanda Miralles Gasparini (SEGOM)
   Mr Gerardo F. Parco (EASPS)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                        Yes          No           TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                                           X
    The Project mainly involves policy and regulatory support and technical assistance to the
Government of Kiribati to improve the reliability and affordability of telecommunications
services. Component 3 may involve subsidies for provision of connectivity in outer islands,
which would either finance maintenance of existing networks or minimal civil works such as
installation of antennas, computers, etc. Given that the final scope of the proposed subsidy of
Component 3 will not be known until the scale and scope of commercial investment in
telecommunications is better determined, it is proposed that an Environment and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) be included in the technical assistance activities for this
component to screen any environment and social impacts the subsidized investment may have
and to consider environmental and social measures in the design. The ESMF will include a
screening process to determine (a) if future investments to be identified under the proposed
project are likely to have other environmental and social impacts and (b) if simple instruments to
cover safeguards issues raised need to be prepared based on the ESMF during project
implementation. Such instruments may be abbreviated to be proportional to the potential
impacts. Given, however, the small scale nature of subsidized activities, it is unlikely that there
would be any significant negative impacts. Potential social benefits of the proposed Project are
significant in terms of improved access to information and communications for remote and
isolated communities.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                     X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                              X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                         X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                          X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                   X
    The people affected by the Project are from a single cultural group. They are not considered
to be Indigenous People according to OP 4.10.
Safeguard Policies Triggered                                        Yes          No         TBD
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                         X
    The Project mainly involves policy and regulatory support and technical assistance to the
Government of Kiribati to improve the reliability and affordability of telecommunications
services. Component 3 may involve subsidies for provision of connectivity in outer islands. The
Project itself would not finance any civil works. However, because civil works could be linked to
activities supported by the Project a Resettlement Planning Framework may need to be prepared
to ensure potential land acquisition issues are properly addressed. If voluntary land donations
occur, these should be carefully documented.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                       X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                  X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                           X


Environmental Category: C - Not Required

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: 09/15/2011

B. For projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
   09/30/2011

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.


IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Ms Natasha Beschorner                                          07/14/2011
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards Coordinator:               Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Mr Deepak T. Bhatia
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank’s Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
