                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 02/26/2013                                   Report No.: AC6804
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P096181                 Original Project Name: Energy Sector
                                             Cleanup and Land Reclamation Project
Country: Kosovo                              Project ID: P131539
Project Name: AF - Clean-up & Land Reclamation Project
Task Team Leader: Katelijn Van den Berg
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 1, 2013      Estimated Board Date: May 2, 2013
Managing Unit: ECSEN                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Other Mining and Extractive Industries (70%);General energy sector (30%)
Theme: Pollution management and environmental health (50%);Environmental policies
and institutions (50%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):              4.2
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                            0.00
                                                                       0.00
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objectives (PDO) for the original project, as updated at the
first project restructuring in June 2009, were to: (a) address environmental legacy issues
related to open dumping of ashes on land; (b) enable Kosovo Energy Cooperation J.S.C.
(KEK) to free land for community development purposes currently taken by overburden
material and to enable KEK to remediate the Kosovo A Ash Dump; (c) build capacity in
KEK for continued clean-up and environmentally good practice mining operations. The
present Additional Financing will further contribute to the achievement of Clean-up and
Land Reclamation Project's (CLRP) development objective by scaling up existing
activities, and will also support additional activities that further enhance its overall
impact and strengthen sector development. Some of the proposed additional activities
will build capacity not only at KEK but also at the Ministry of Environment and Spatial
Planning (MESP) in Kosovo; hence, under the additional financing, section (c) of the
PDO will be amended and expanded to state: (c) support KEK and MESP to implement
continued clean-up operations and environmental good practices in the mining and
energy sector.
3. Project Description
The project addresses legacy issues related to open dumping of ashes on land and the
inadequate storage of hazardous waste; free land currently taken by overburden material
for community development purposes; enable KEK to remediate the Kosovo A Ash
Dump and build capacity in KEK and MESP for continued clean-up operations and
environmentally good practices in the mining and energy sector. The original project
components (A-D) included preparation of the Mirash open pit mine for ash disposal,
remediation of Kosovo A ash dumps, and reclamation of overburden dump areas as well
as support for project management. The first additional financing funded a new
component (E) which had been proposed for the original project but could not be
included due to insufficient funds: i.e. the treatment, removal, package and export from
site (for final disposal) of about 17,500 m3 of hazardous chemicals. All phenol in watery
solutions has already been treated (13,245 metric tons) and the majority of other
hazardous substances were removed and properly disposed in Belgium and Sweden
following the Basel Convention. The present Additional Financing (AF) will enable KEK
to complete the removal of hazardous chemicals including tar deposits/tar sludge from
the Kosovo A's gasification site following the same techniques and also in line with the
Basel Convention and support further tree planting at the overburden dump areas.

 The additional financing will also fund a new component (Component F):
Environmental Monitoring and Management. This will include:

 An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) for the proposed Kosovo
Power Project (KPP) and associated infrastructure, including related lignite mining
development, with the objective to inform the decision-making process of the proposed
investments, including the Bank's decision on the possible partial risk guarantee, and to
increase the monitoring and management capacity of MESP. This ESIA, as financed
under the CLRP AF, is not intended to serve as the document to inform national
permitting and other authorization, e.g. under the Kosovo legislation on Environmental
Impact Assessment, which would be prepared later by the selected investor. Financing of
the ESIA for the proposed KPP under the CLRP AF does not imply that assumptions as
to the feasibility of the KPP have been made. In parallel, a Grant from the Government of
the Netherlands will support strengthening of the capacity of MESP in terms of
applicable European Union (EU) standards, mitigation measures and environmental
conditions to be expected from KPP bidders in line with Integrated Pollution Prevention
and Control (IPPC) permit procedures.

 Three online air quality monitoring stations will be funded by the AF to be established
in the proposed project area to collect baseline data on the air quality at their locations.
The equipment will monitor Sulfur Dioxide, Nitrogen Oxides, PM2.5 and PM10, Carbon
Monoxide, Ozone, temperature, relative humidity, and wind speed and direction.

 In addition, funding of an elaborate soil and water sampling and laboratory analysis
program will be undertaken to collect and analyze the baseline environmental data in the
soil, groundwater and surface water and river sediments of the area currently impacted by
the ongoing mining and electricity production operations. This activity will serve to
collect data related to existing lignite mining activities; operation of the power plants
Kosovo A and Kosovo B; and environmental rehabilitation activities undertaken under
the original project. The data will underpin the environmental baseline for the ESIA for
the KPP, taking into consideration the existing mining activities in Bardh and Mirash
open cast mines as well as already abandoned open cast and underground mining
activities; the current disposal of ash and wastewater from existing plants Kosovo A and
B; and fresh water supply related to existing fresh water consumption of the power
plants.

  A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been developed by the Government
consistent with Bank policies with financing from the now closed Lignite Power
Technical Assistance Project (LPTAP) that would govern the relocation and resettlement
of any population that might be displaced by the proposed KPP. Based on the RPF, a
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), also financed through LPTAP, has been prepared for
the Shala neighborhood of Hade village, in consultation with the affected communities.
The Shala neighborhood of Hade village will be relocated since it is close to the edge of
the mine from which extraction of lignite has started. The Shala community is proposed
to be relocated to a new site (Shkabaj) close to Pristina city where infrastructure and
housing plots are already being developed. In order to provide an extra level of oversight
and support, the Additional Financing will assist the Hade Project Office under the
Ministry of Environment and Spatial Planning which is responsible for the
implementation of the RAP, through support for a monitoring contract to oversee
implementation of the RAP. Also a resettlement completion audit of the RAP will be
included. Preparation and implementation of possible future RAPs related to the proposed
KPP will not be part of the AF of the CLRP. The monitoring contract will also not cover
the people displaced in 2004 from Hade village, which was carried out by United Nations
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), though the Bank will provide the Government with
technical advice and use its good offices to encourage the Government to engage the
resettled households to resolve outstanding issues. Resettlement has not been and will not
be needed for the Clean-up and Land Reclamation Project itself.

 An international Independent Panel of Environmental and Social Experts will be
recruited to assist the government of Kosovo in the supervision of the ESIA preparation
and RAP implementation.

 A low carbon growth energy strategy will also be prepared under the AF (Component F)
to help reduce demand and promote renewable energy projects for perspective
investments by the private sector and others, which will help identify the opportunities
for reducing future demand of electricity, increase power generation without increasing
emissions, and possibly reduce Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions. The strategy will
include: (i) building an energy sector GHG inventory; (ii) identification of mitigation
options in the energy sector (both on the demand and supply sides); (iii) conducting an
economic analysis that will generate Marginal Abatement Cost (MAC) curves and
indicating which technology would be the preferred choice dependent on different carbon
prices; (iv) describing/quantifying the potential for reducing future emissions based on
MAC; (v) identifying barriers against the implementation of low carbon options; and (vi)
reviewing existing mitigation measures and proposing new applicable measures. This
strategy will be developed in close cooperation with the Ministry of Economic
Development, which is responsible for Kosovo's energy strategy.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project is being implemented in the heavily industrialized Obiliq area where the
power stations Kosovo A and B are located and where most lignite mining operations
take place.

 The additional clean-up activities related to tar sludge/deposits removal under the
Additional Financing will be implemented at the former gasification plant situated
immediately adjacent to the Kosovo A thermal power plant (Kosovo A), also in the
municipality of Obiliq. This is the same location where earlier chemicals removal under
the Project took place.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Frank Van Woerden (EASER)
   Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg (ECSUW)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                             Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                        X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                          X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                        X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The CLRP triggered OP 4.01 only and was classified as Category A due to the scale and
nature of the works and the hazardous nature of some of the materials involved. An
Environmental Assessment (including Environmental Management Plan) was prepared
and disclosed prior to Appraisal (March 2006). The new activity financed under the first
additional financing (removal of hazardous chemicals at the gasification site) was
included in the EIA and EMP, therefore the existing EIA and EMP did not need to be
revised or supplemented for the first AF. The additional activities foreseen to be
implemented by KEK under the present additional financing are also covered under the
existing ESIA and EMP as they are the same as the original activities, only the quantities
are higher than originally estimated. The additional activities related to the additional tree
planting and completion of removal of tar sludge/deposits are expected to have positive
environmental impacts on the project area.

 The new Component F (Environmental Monitoring and Management) includes support
for preparation of an ESIA for the proposed Kosovo Power Project, which would fall
within the criteria for Category A projects under OP 4.01. World Bank practice is to
classify Technical Assistance (TA) supporting the preparation of a Category A project as
Category A as well. However, as the original CLRP was already classified as a Category
A, the additional financing for preparation of the ESIA does not require a change in the
project's EIA category. The other activities included in the new Component F are not
expected to have any negative environmental impacts (see discussion of social aspects
below).

 In keeping with Bank practice for TA operations, the Terms of Reference for the ESIA
are considered to be the "environmental due diligence" document subject to the
disclosure requirements under OP 4.01. The draft Terms of Reference for the ESIA has
been disclosed in Kosovo and in the Bank's Infoshop on July 26, 2012. The draft Terms
of Reference was submitted to the Board of Directors on August 8, 2012. The Ministry
of Environment and Spatial Planning organized the first public consultations on the draft
ToR on September 13, 2012. The table in Section II-B reflects the disclosure dates for
this TOR, not for the EIA of the original project.

  OP 4.12 was not triggered for the original CLRP or the first additional financing as no
land acquisition was required for the project activities. No land acquisition is required
under the present additional financing either, but OP 4.12 is triggered as the AF will
support enhanced monitoring of the implementation of a RAP which has been prepared
under a separate Bank-financed project. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
covering all resettlement associated with the mine area has been developed by the
Government consistent with Bank policies with financing from the now closed Bank
financed Lignite Power Technical Assistance Project (LPTAP). In addition, LPTAP
financed the preparation of a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), based on the approved
RPF, for the Shala neighborhood of Hade village, in consultation with the affected
communities. The RPF has been disclosed under the LPTAP. The Shala neighborhood of
Hade village will be relocated since it is close to the edge of the mine from which
extraction of lignite has started by KEK. The present additional financing for the CLRP
will finance a contract to assist the Hade Project Office under the Ministry of
Environment and Spatial Planning to monitor the implementation of this RAP as
previously prepared. The table in Section II-B and II C reflect the disclosure date of the
updated RAP for the Shala neighbourhood.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The gasification site is highly contaminated and removal of the hazardous materials
stored on site is considered the highest priority action to reduce risks of further
environmental contamination. The additional financing will have additional positive
long-term impacts to improve the environmental risks at the gasification site. Additional
tree planting is also foreseen to have positive impact on the overburden dump areas. The
impact of this AF related to the proposed Kosovo Power Project is to help ensure that
environmental and social risks are properly identified, mitigation measures defined and to
inform the decision-making process of the proposed investments as well as to increase
the monitoring and management capacity of MESP.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Under normal conditions adverse impacts do not occur from Project implementation.
Only accidental spills of hazardous materials could have negative impacts and will be
avoided or mitigated through safety measures and supervision.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The necessary safeguarding measures and operational practices to ensure proper handling
of the chemicals have been incorporated in the detail design of the works and in the
bidding documents and the existing Environmental Assessment and Environmental
Management Plan (EMP). The proposed activities for additional tar removal will be
implemented by an international contractor with international supervision and fully in
line with the Basel convention as under the original Project; the additional materials to be
removed are the same in nature as those already removed under the original project to
Belgium and Sweden and for which disposal certificates have been received by licensed
disposal facilities.

 The KEK Environmental Department and the PMU established under CLRP which has
well qualified environmental management staff will also closely supervise the execution
of the works related to removal of hazardous chemicals from the gasification plant site
and proper and timely implementation of the project EMP.

 The new Component F: Environmental Monitoring and Management will be
implemented by a PMU to be established in the MESP and with close involvement of the
Environment Department of the Ministry. The Ministry will be supported by an
international independent Panel of Environmental and Social Experts (PoE) that will
advise the Government and monitor implementation of Environmental Management
Plans and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs).

  The implementation of the RAP falls under the responsibility of the Hade project office
under the Ministry of Environment and Spatial Planning. In order to provide an extra
level of oversight and support, the AF will assist this office through support for a
monitoring contract to oversee implementation of the RAP as well as by the Panel of
Experts (which would include one environmental specialist and one social specialist).
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key project stakeholders include the communities near the project site, KEK, Ministry of
Environment and Spatial Planning including Kosovo's Environmental Protection Agency,
and representatives of the Ministry of Economic Development and NGOs.

  The ESIA will be prepared in consultation with the public, affected communities and
other stakeholders and will take into account relevant aspects of Kosovo's own
legislation, applicable policies of the World Bank Group, and relevant EU Directives.
The draft Terms of Reference for the ESIA has been disclosed in Kosovo and in the
Bank's Infoshop on July 26, 2012. The draft Terms of Reference was submitted to the
Board of Directors on August 8, 2012. MESP organized the first public consultations on
the draft ToR on September 13, 2012. The table in Section II-B below reflects the
disclosure dates for this TOR, not for the EIA of the original project. A public
information center will be established in the municipality of Obiliq.

  Although OP 4.12 is triggered for reasons explained above, this AF will not support any
resettlement, only the monitoring contract for the implementation of the Resettlement
Action Plan for the Shala neighborhood of Hade. The information and dates below in
Section II-B below indicate the disclosure date of the revised Shala neighborhood RAP,
which is disclosed to Infoshop under the Additional Financing and updated due to the
time passed.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                   07/01/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                               07/26/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                07/26/2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                                08/08/2012
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                   12/23/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                               12/20/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                02/25/2013
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                               Name          Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Katelijn Van den Berg       02/25/2013
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Frank Van Woerden           02/25/2013
Social Development Specialist       Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg   02/25/2013
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Agnes I. Kiss               02/25/2013
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Kulsum Ahmed                02/25/2013
  Comments:
