                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 09/22/2011                                     Report No.: AC6406
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P104994                   Original Project Name: Bishkek and Osh
                                               Urban Infrastructure Project
Country: Kyrgyz Republic                       Project ID: P122811
Project Name: AF - BISHKEK &OSH URBAN
Task Team Leader: Anna Cestari
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 26,        Estimated Board Date: December 15, 2011
2011
Managing Unit: ECSS6                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (80%);Urban Transport
(20%)
Theme: Urban services and housing for the poor (80%);Municipal governance and
institution building (10%);Participation and civic engagement (10%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             15.80
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               1.40
                                                                          1.40
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                     Yes [ ]    No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The original PDO of BOUIP will be modified as follows: To increase the availability of
(i) basic urban services in semi-formal settlements (novostroiki) of Bishkek, Osh and in
selected small towns, as well as of (ii) social infrastructures in Bishkek, Osh and selected
small towns.

3. Project Description
The proposed Additional Financing (AF) will help finance the costs associated with the
scaling up of project activities to enhance the impact of this well-performing project on
the living conditions in semi-informal settlements (novostroiki) in Bishkek and Osh, the
two largest cities in the Kyrgyz Republic. Building up on the results of the successful
implementation of the Small Town Infrastructure and Capacity Building Project STICBP,
P083377), which is closing on September 30, 2011, the proposed AF will also continue
extending the benefits of the project to residents of the country's twenty-three small
towns.
 BOUIP AF will finance the same type of investments as of the original BOUIP and of
the closing STICBP; and, in particular: (a) road construction, water supply and sewerage
infrastructure works in selected novostroiki in Bishkek, Osh and in selected small towns
of the Kyrgyz Republic's; (b) small community social infrastructure investments in
novostroiki of Bishkek and Osh,(c)implementing agency operating expenditures.
 The proposed AF will dedicate a comparatively larger proportion of resources to
investments in community infrastructure with a view to help mitigate social tensions and
foster mutual cooperation among residents of urban areas, especially of those affected by
the violence of 2010.
 The main adjustments which will need to be made to the original BOUIP project are
summarized below:
 (a) Component A: Basic Infrastructure:
 Increase in the IDA amount allocated to Sub-component A.1 Increase in the IDA
amount allocated to Sub-Component A.3 Addition of a new Sub-Component A.4: "Small
Town Infrastructure Development"
 (b) Component B: Community Investment Programs
 Increase in the IDA amount allocated to Sub-Component B.1: "Community Investments
in Bishkek"
 Expansion of the scope of Sub-Component B.2 from "Osh Community Investments" to
"Community Investments in Osh and Conflict Area Small Towns" and increase in the
IDA amount allocated to the Sub-component.
 Addition of a new Sub-Component B.3: "Small Town Community Investments"
 (c) Component D: Operating Costs
 Increase in the IDA amount allocated to Component D.1.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
All physical investments under the project will be implemented on public land and within
existing rights of way.
 Basic infrastructure investments financed by the project will be located on public land
and will serve areas of so-called "novostroiki" settlements of Bishkek and Osh.
"Novostroiki" ( literally "areas containing new constructions") consist of settlements
established on the basis of plot lay out plans prepared by the municipal authorities that
include (respected) rights-of-way for streets and public facilities (schools, etc.), but lack
for the time being necessary basic infrastructure (water supply, roads, etc.).
 The project will be also implemented in small towns of the Kyrgyz Republic.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Arcadii Capcelea (ECSS3)
   Mr Aly Zulficar Rahim (ECSS4)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                      X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project activities which include: upgrading and/or expansion of water supply, road
and other basic infrastructure as well as rehabilitation and/or upgrading of service
equipment required for improving the availability of basic services in selected
novostroiki settlements as well as small-scale investments in neighborhood infrastructure
and equipment, - if not adequately implemented, may cause some environmental risks
which are related to: damage to ecosystems and endangered plant species; pollution of
soil and surface water at construction site with oil and oil products; noise; dust;
generation of construction waste; soil erosion, water and air pollution; worker safety (e.g.
welding operations) and health hazards; traffic disruption. All these risks are minor and
can be mitigated by including into the work contracts specific measures to be taken by
contractors and close supervision of compliance by ARIS. The project will also bring
positive social impacts as the proposed activities would improve social conditions for the
population and would contribute to improving local population livelihoods.
 Since none of the project supported activities will take place on transboundary
waterways (i.e. in the basins of the Chui and Syr-Darya rivers, respectively), as defined in
OP 7.50, the project will not trigger this policy.
 The Project will not trigger OP/BP 4.12 as it will deal exclusively with
rehabilitation/repair/upgrading of existing infrastructure and installations on existing
premises or new routes on public rights of way which will not entail any land acquisition,
relocation of population, or restrictions on access to resources.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The potential long term impacts are positive and related to improved livelihoods for the
Bishkek and Osh novostroiki population, as well as these in the small towns. Social and
conflict risks in the associated beneficiary areas of the project will be addressed through
application of the Conflict Filter as per the 2011-2013 ISN.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
An Environmental Impact Assessment acceptable by the Association and in line with the
Kyrgyz legislation was prepared and disclosed for the Bashkarasuu water intake. The
EMF of the original project was updated and disclosed. Specific Environmental
Management Plans (EMPs) will be prepared for each individual investment.
 ARIS has good institutional capacity to manage the preparation of EMPs, as it is already
implementing similar Bank-financed projects, where EMPs for investments are required.
The quality of EMPs under these projects is satisfactory.
 A review of the status of EMF implementation and of compliance of implemented
within the initial project activities with safeguards issues were done during last WB
supervision mission in February 2011. The mission concluded the EMF is being
implemented well overall and that the implementing agency ARIS has relevant capacities
to ensure EMF successful implementation.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
An Environmental Management Framework (EMF) was prepared by the borrower and
published in Kyrgyz newspapers on January 25, 2008. This document was updated, re-
disclosed and consulted upon in September, 2011 ahead of appraisal for this Additional
Financing. The Implementing Agency, ARIS, posted the EIA for Bashkarasuu water
intake, and the EMF on their website and made a public notice on a local newspaper at
the beginning of September 2011. They held public consultations on the EIA for
Bashkarasuu on September 13, 2011 and on the EMF on September 19, 2011. Both
documents with enclosed list of attendants and minutes of the public hearing were sent to
the Infoshop. Further, ARIS is to conduct at least one public consultation with groups
affected by the projsct's investments prior to completion of the individual EMPs. In
advance the EMPs are disclosed on the IRIS website. Usually, these groups consulted
consist of people living near the project sites, representatives from local public
administrations and local environmental inspectors, as well as local NGOs.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                 09/12/2011
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                             09/13/2011
 Date of submission to InfoShop                              09/23/2011
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              No
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          No
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           No
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                  Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Anna Cestari                      09/20/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Arcadii Capcelea                  09/22/2011
Social Development Specialist       Mr Aly Zulficar Rahim                09/21/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Manuel G. Marino                  09/22/2011
  Comments:
