                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                          RESTRUCTURING STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 09/18/2012                                      Report No.: AC6575
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Kyrgyz Republic                      Project ID: P110267
Project Name: Second Rural Water Supply & Sanitation
Task Team Leader: Anna Cestari
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 13,        Estimated Board Date: April 21, 2009
2009
Managing Unit: ECSUW                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
Sector: Water supply (60%);Sanitation (30%);Public administration- Water, sanitation
and flood protection (10%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (70%);Rural policies and institutions (30%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):             10
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              1.75
         UK: British Department for International Development (DFID) 1.33
         Financing Gap                                                   0.00
                                                                         3.08
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                         Simple []          Repeater [X]
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
With the Restructuring the Development Objective of the Project is to be changed from
"assist the Borrower in: (a) improving access of participating communities to portable
water; and (b) improving hygiene, sanitation and water-related practices at individual,
family and institutional levels in the rural areas" to: "assist the Borrower in (i): improving
access to potable water for the participating communities; and (ii) improving hygiene,
sanitation and water-related practices at individual, family and institutional levels in the
rural areas, and (iii) strengthening the institutional framework and capacity for the rural
drinking water supply and sanitation sector."

3. Project Description
The Second Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project (RWSSP-2) consists of the
following four components: (a) Water Supply Infrastructure and Equipment; (b)
Sanitation and Hygiene Promotion Program; (c) Institutional Development; and (d)
Project Management.
 The total cost of the restructured RWSSP-2 is US$ 13.08 million of which US$ 10
million equivalent will be financed by IDA (as a blend of 55 percent credit and 45
percent grant), US$1.33 million equivalent by DFID and US$ 1.78 million by the
Government of the Kyrgyz Republic (GOKR).

 As part of the first Project restructuring step implemented in July 2011, the Project
implementation responsibilities have been transferred from the State Committee of Water
Resources and Amelioration (SCRWA) and the Joint Project Management Unit (JPMU)
to the Community Development and Investment Agency (ARIS). Necessary adjustments
to the Project investment scope are being implemented as part of the present restructuring
step that was requested by the GOKR on June 27, 2012.

 Component A: Water Supply Infrastructure and Equipment. This component will
provide grants to local communities through Community Drinking Water Users Unions
(CDWUUs) to rehabilitate or expand existing village water supply systems. As part of the
civil works contracts, this component will also finance the following: refurbishment or
construction of demonstration sanitation facilities at schools and medical posts;
equipment supplied to selected CDWUUs and/or their associations to maintain the water
systems; and consultancy services for technical supervision of construction activities to
ensure the quality of infrastructure financed by the Project.

  Component B: Sanitation and Hygiene Promotion Program. This component will
support village-level promotion of healthy hygiene and sanitation practices through
technical assistance. This activity will be carried out through communication campaigns
and advocacy for rural sanitation activities including #WASH# campaigns for hygiene
and sanitation awareness at village level; component activities will be coordinated by
ARIS, with specialized contributions by UNICEF,

 Component C: Institutional Development. This component will finance consultancy
services to assist the Government to ensure sustainability of the rural water supply
program, including support to: (a) endorse and implement the sector strategy; (b) develop
or revise legislation to ensure synergies between CDWUUs and local self-governance,
including develop and institutionalize new agreements between Ayil Okmotu and
CDWUUs; and (c) train and assist CDWUUs and the Department for Drinking Water
Supply (DDWS) to build on the experience and tools developed under the predecessor
Project (First Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project, RWSSP-1), including ensuring
that gender, voice, and choice in participatory processes are taken into account; and (d)
strengthen the Project Management Information System by adding a GIS interface and
consolidating a country-wide database on village-level water supply and sanitation.

 Component D: Project Management. The component will finance the following: limited
equipment and vehicles, operating costs (staff salaries, in-country travel, and mandatory
employer contributions) and training associated with the Project implementation;
monitoring and evaluation activities, including regular impact surveys/assessments and
annual audits.
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project is implemented in three Northern oblasts (covered under the first phase of the
Project) targeting the rehabilitation of about 36 water supply systems for about 60,000
beneficiaries. Given the scale of the Project, neither major nor adverse environmental
impacts are envisaged. Project activities include construction of village water supply
systems including the laying of pipes to feed neighborhood standpipes or individual
household connections. While most works are expected to be on public land and
easements, some pipes or facilities may encroach on fields or private property. In
particular this may require temporary acquisition of land and compensation for standing
crops to lay the pipes and then return the land to its original condition. Wells, pumping
stations and reservoirs to be rehabilitated are typically on public land, but in some cases,
where this is not available or suitable, private land may need to be permanently acquired.
Hence, although not triggered at appraisal, OP 4.12 must now be triggered.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Roxanne Hakim (ECSSO)
   Mr Arcadii Capcelea (ECSEN)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)               X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environmental Assessment (World Bank OP 4.01): OP 4.01 is triggered by the Project as
its sub-projects may have potential impacts that are moderate, of limited duration and
extent, but can be easily be mitigated through standard methods and procedures of good
housekeeping and good engineering practices. Most of the adverse impacts are expected
to occur during project construction. The types of issues or impacts normally associated
with several of the types of sub-projects that will be considered under RWSSP-2 may
include: noise pollution; pollution of soil and surface water at construction site with oil
and oil products; reduced amenity values of the area, etc. Proper mitigation measures
have been designed in an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) that represents
a revised version of existing Annex 8 of the Operational Manual, with expanded
Environmental Management Plan (EMP). The EMF defines environmental safeguards
responsibilities and procedures which ARIS and CDWUUs will apply to subprojects
considered for support under this Project. The procedures so defined will meet the
regulatory requirements for environmental screening of the Kyrgyz Republic as well as
the Environmental safeguard policy requirements of the World Bank.

 International Waterways (World Bank OP 7.50). Water supply systems scheduled for
rehabilitation under RWSSP-2 may draw limited amounts of water from small tributaries
of international waterways. The project received an exemption from notifying riparian
governments because the rehabilitations and minor additions will not exceed the original
schemes nor increase water consumptions, only improve the supply infrastructure.
Exception to notification was granted with a memo to the VP dated October 28, 2008.

  Involuntary Resettlement (World Bank OP 4.12). The Involuntary Resettlement is now
triggered for the Project. Project activities include construction of village water supply
facilities including laying of pipes to common standpoints or individual taps. The pipe
network is likely to go through fields which will require temporary acquisition of land,
and compensation for standing crop, until the land is returned to its original condition.
The actual pumping station is usually on government land, but in some cases, where this
is not available or suitable, private land may need to be permanently acquired for main
intake and pumping station. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been finalized
and disclosed via Infoshop and in the Kyrgyz Republic, to serve as guidance for
resettlement and compensation purposes in the event of permanent or temporary land
acquisition. The RPF lays out the list of assets and entitlement matrix, details on the
procedure for Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs), Monitoring and Evaluation
requirements and a grievance mechanism. In the event that land needs to be acquired, a
RAP will be prepared and approved by the World Bank prior to the commencement of
any civil works. All documents will adhere to OP 4.12 and have been disclosed in
Infoshop and in the Kyrgyz Republic as per disclosure requirements.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
N/A

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
An Environmental Management Framework (EMF) for the project consistent with
Environmental Assessment (EA) requirements for both the Kyrgyz Republic and the
World Bank was prepared by DRWS/JPMU and reviewed and approved by both the
Kyrgyz Forestry and the Environment Preservation Agency and the World Bank. The
EMF provides a description of all necessary steps in conducting an EIA, including
screening procedure, potential impacts, mitigation measures, monitoring rules, as well as
procedures for EIAs review and approvals. The EMF also stipulates specific
Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) will be prepared for each individual sub-
project. A Russian-language version of the EMF was disclosed in-country on November
5, 2008. Specific Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) will be prepared for each
individual sub-project.

 ARIS has good institutional capacity to manage the preparation of EMPs for concrete
investments as well as to ensure EMPs implementation. This was proved during the
implementation of previous WB BOUIP and STICBP projects. A review of the status of
environmental safeguards under these projects implementation was done during last WB
supervision mission in February 2011. The mission concluded the project EMFs were
being implemented well overall and that ARIS has relevant capacities to ensure
environmental safeguards successful implementation.

 A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) is prepared and diclsoed to guide all issues
relating to land acquisition and compensation and the preparation of Resettlement Action
Plans. ARIS will implement the RPF and RAPs in partnership with local bodies as
detailed in the documents. The RPF was disclosed in the Infoshop and in country as
required. As implementing agency for multiple IDA funded projects, ARIS has
substantial experience and good capacity for implementing OP 4.12.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
During preparation of RWSSP 2, the JPMU conducted a public consultation in November
2008 with interested stakeholders to review and discuss the EMF for the project. ARIS
will also conduct at least one public consultation with groups affected by any particular
sub-project prior to completion of the individual EMPs. Usually, these groups consist of
people living near the sub-project site, and any local NGOs. Additionally, if needed,
broader consultation will be done involving radio or TV stations. The RPF has been
disclosed in country at the national level and in each locality where there is a sub-project.
All communities have been informed about the principles of the RPF and given a copy at
the preliminary and subsequent meetings when they discuss the sub-project. In the event
that a RAP is needed, this will be signed by the affected parties who will also receive a
copy along with ARIS and the local authority.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                 Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                 10/17/2008
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                             11/05/2008
 Date of submission to InfoShop                              12/18/2008
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 11/28/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             11/30/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              07/16/2012
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?            Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)        Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the        Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process            Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector      Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                       No
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification         Yes
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                      Yes
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's     Yes
Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                Name                       Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Anna Cestari                              08/16/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Arcadii Capcelea                          08/17/2012
Social Development Specialist       Ms Roxanne Hakim                             08/17/2012
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Sumila Gulyani                            09/18/2012
  Comments:
