                                                                                                  80640


                         INTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
                                  CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                            Report No.:
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:
: August 8, 2013
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 A. Basic Project Data
 Country:                        Kyrgyz Republic      Project ID:               P132577
 Project Name:                   SOCIAL COHESION THROUGH COMMUNITY-BASED
                                 DEVELOPMENT PROJECT
 Task Team Leader:               AlyRahim
 Estimated Appraisal Date: n/a (small grants          Estimated Board Date: n/a
                           processing)
 Managing Unit:                  ECSSO                Lending Instrument:       Recipient Executed
 Sector:                         Other social services (I 00%)
 Theme:                          Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (50%); Participation and
                                 civic engagement (50%)
 Financing (in USD Million)
    Financing Source                                                                                  Amount
 Borrower/recipient                                                                                         1.0
 State and PeacebU;ilding Fund                                                                              2.0
    Total                                                                                                   3.0
 Environmental Category          B- Partial assessment
 Is this a Repeater project? No

  B. Project Objectives
  The Project Development Objective is to identify, pilot, and build capacity for social cohesion
  mechanisms in CDD approaches.

  The approach the project takes to achieve the PDQ includes: (i) identification of potentially
  successful approaches to promote social cohesion in community driven development; (ii) the
  subsequent piloting of such approaches through community-driven social mobilization and
  investment micro-projects; (iii) the rigorous tracldng of the effectiveness of such approaches ·
  through an evidence-driven monitoring and evaluation framework; and (iv) the strengthening of
  in-country research/operational capacities to support future integration of social cohesion
  approaches into development projects.
C. Project Description
The project consists of two complementary and linked components: an identification research,
evaluative and capacity development component and an intervention component. The project will
aim to deliver interventions benefitting local communities as quickly as possible while maintaining
the methodological rigor necessary to achieve robust learning on how social cohesion objectives
can be most effectively integrated into community-driven development interventions. Therefore,
the project will first undertake preparatory research and a baseline study, consisting of quantitative
and qualitative assessment of social cohesion. The preparatory research intends to. identify
effective approaches for addressing social cohesion in Kyrgyzstan that the project can
subsequently integrate into the implementation of its CDD micro-projects for community defined
investments in infrastructure or services.

Component 1: Evidence-Driven Identification Research, Monitoring and Capacity Building
for Social Cohesion in Community Development. This component will first undertake
identification research through a survey and qualitative assessment to identify potentially
successful social cohesion approaches that can be integrated into micro-project interventions under
Component 2. The component will also set up a rigorous, evidence-driven monitoring and tracking
system to assess ongoing social cohesion impacts from the pilot intervention activities. Finally, the
component will strengthen in-country research capacities to sustain attention to social cohesion
and community development beyond the life of the project.

Component 2: Piloting of Social Cohesion Approaches in Community Driven Social
Mobilization and Investment Micro-Projects. (Budget: USD 1,500,000). This component will
pilot social cohesion interventions within the cycle of micro-projects for community-driven
investments in infrastructure and services, beginning in year one of implementation. The
identification research program will generate pilot approaches with the potential to address social
cohesion that would subsequently be integrated into social mobilization, investment prioritization,
and implementation that will become part of the micro-project cycle for the targeted communities
in Osh and Naryn Oblasts.

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
known)
Project expected locations include: In Osh oblast, the project will broadly target eight sub-districts
(45 villages) where 107,200 people live In Naryn oblast, 24,500 ethnic Kyrgyz (12,000 women)
living in seven sub-districts (15 villages) will be targeted. Specific sites for physical investments
and their types (through the counterpart funds only) will be determined through research and
participatory activities that are part of the project design and are not determined at this stage.

E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

The recipient (Aga Khan Foundation- USA) has undertaken environmental safeguards implementation for
other agencies (in particular USAID) but is new to Bank safeguards policies. They have environmental
specialists on staff who are fully equipped to undertake the necessary steps to follow and implement Bank
safeguards policies. The team will undertake further assessment on the recipient's capacity and determine
any capacity building needs that might be appropriate.
 F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
 Arcadie Capcelea ( ECSEN )
 Aly Zulficar Rahim ( ECSSO)



II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
 Safeguard Policies               Triggered?    Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/BP   Yes           The proposed grant would support micro-projects
 4.01                                           for     community-driven          investments      in
                                                infrastructure and services, including: water
                                                supply, sanitation, solid waste management, roads
                                                and bridges rehabilitation, rehabilitation of schools
                                                and kindergartens, as well as other demand driven
                                                and socially justifiable local investments in
                                                services delivery, which might generate
                                                environmental and social impacts. While the
                                                environmental issues associated with their
                                                implementation in most cases will be minor, short-
                                                lived, and primarily limited to the project sites
                                                (except for movement of equipment and materials
                                                to/from the site), it is possible they might be also
                                                significant and would affect the environment and
                                                health of population. These issues are primarily:
                                                dust, noise, water pollution, disposal of waste
                                                material and/or older equipment, some traffic
                                                disruption (depending upon specific location),
                                                worker safety (e.g. welding operations) etc. All
                                                these impacts can be addressed with good
                                                engineering and construction practices as well as
                                                with preparing and implementing adequate
                                                mitigation measures. The project will also bring
                                                positive social impacts as the proposed activities
                                                would improve social conditions for the
                                                population and would contribute to improving
                                                local population livelihoods.
                                                To address potential environmental and social
                                                issues the borrower will prepare an overall
                                                Environmental Management Plan Checklist which
                                                would guide the EA process. The document will
                                                cover typical preventive and mitigation
                                                approaches to common civil works contracts with
                                                localized impacts. For each selected subproject the
                                                implementing entities will fill out a site specific
                                                EMP Checklist which will be disclosed for public
                                                comments. The EMP Checklist will be part of the
                                                construction contracts.
 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04      No            No, as the project will be implemented within the
                                                                        localities' boundaries
 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                No                  No, as the project will be implemented within the
                                                                       localities' boundaries
 Pest Management OP 4.09                           No                   N/A
 Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP                 TBD                  All proposed investments will be screened out and
 4.11                                                                   if any such resources will be involved- they will
                                                                        be excluded.
 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                     No                   N/A
 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                No                  The grant will not support any subproject that
                                                                        might involve land acquisition or resettlement
                                                                        impacts.
 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                         No                   N/A
 Projects on International Waterways               No                   N/A
 OP/BP 7.50
 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP                  No
 7.60

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

 A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS:
     September 15,2013.
 B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The
    specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
     Before the completion of the Grant Funding Request the Project EMP Checklist will be
     disclosed in the country on the implementing entities websites to allow all interested parties to
     provide comments.
     The site specific EMP Checklists for approved subprojects will also be disclosed in the country
     (on implementing entities websites) as well as in selected localities by installing a notice plate
     placed at the construction/rehabilitation before any activities on the ground will start.

IV. APPROVALS
 Task Team Leader:                      Name: Aly Rahim
 Approved By:
 Regional Safeguards                    Name: Agi Kiss                                            Date: 08/15/2013
 Coordinator:
 Sector Manager:



 1
   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
 InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
 persons.
