                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 11/01/2011                                        Report No.: 65372
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P104994                   Original Project Name: Bishkek and Osh
                                               Urban Infrastructure Project
Country: Kyrgyz Republic                       Project ID: P122811
Project Name: AF - BISHKEK &OSH URBAN
Task Team Leader: Anna Cestari
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 26,        Estimated Board Date: January 24, 2012
2011
Managing Unit: ECSS6                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (80%);Urban Transport
(20%)
Theme: Urban services and housing for the poor (80%);Municipal governance and
institution building (10%);Participation and civic engagement (10%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             15.80
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               2.86
                                                                          2.86
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                     Yes [ ]    No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The original PDO of BOUIP will be modified as follows: To increase the availability of
basic urban services in semi-informal settlements known as new housing developments
(novostroiki) in the cities of Bishkek and Osh, as well as in selected small towns of the
Kyrgyz Republic, and to increase the availability of social infrastructures in the cities of
Bishkek and Osh and in both the selected small towns and other small towns.

3. Project Description
The proposed Additional Financing (AF) will help finance the costs associated with the
scaling up of project activities to enhance the impact of this well-performing project on
the living conditions in semi-informal settlements (novostroiki) in Bishkek and Osh, the
two largest cities in the Kyrgyz Republic. Building up on the results of the successful
implementation of the Small Town Infrastructure and Capacity Building Project STICBP,
P083377), which closed on September 30, 2011, the proposed AF will also continue
extending the benefits of the project to residents of the country's twenty-three small
towns.
  BOUIP AF will finance the same type of investments as of the original BOUIP and of
the closing STICBP; and, in particular: (a) road construction, water supply and sewerage
infrastructure works in selected novostroiki in Bishkek, Osh and in selected small towns
of the Kyrgyz Republic's; (b) small community social infrastructure investments in
novostroiki of Bishkek and Osh,(c)implementing agency operating expenditures.
  The proposed AF will dedicate a comparatively larger proportion of resources to
investments in community infrastructure with a view to help mitigate social tensions and
foster mutual cooperation among residents of urban areas, especially of those affected by
the violence of 2010.
  The main adjustments which will need to be made to the original BOUIP project are
summarized below:
  Component A of the Project:          Bishkek, Osh and Selected Small Towns
Infrastructure Development
  1.    Carrying out works and services to complete the rehabilitation of the Baskarasuu
Water Intake and Treatment Plant, including procuring and installing water pumps and
other technical equipment for the operation of said plant, constructing a power
transmission line and transformer stations, and constructing an aqueduct to connect the
plant with the Bishkek Vodokanal network.
  2.    Carrying out engineering and related designs studies for Project activities under
Part A of the Project.
  3.    Carrying out road rehabilitation and maintenance works, constructing and
repairing water supply and sewerage networks and installations, and providing equipment
for municipal services to the selected small towns in the Kyrgyz Republic.
  Component B of the Project:Community Investment Program
  Carrying out small-scale investments, in accordance with criteria and procedures
acceptable to the Association, in the new housing developments of the cities of Bishkek
and Osh, as well as both in the selected small towns and in other small towns of the
Kyrgyz Republic, to improve the living conditions of residents of said areas.
  Component C of the Project:Institutional Development
  No change in this component
  Component D of the Project:          Project Management, Coordination, Monitoring and
Evaluation

 Provision of technical assistance to ARIS in the implementation of the Project,
including the financing of Operating Costs and audits, for the purpose of managing and
monitoring Project activities, as well as provision of training and workshops for the
purposes of improving the capacity of ARIS to prepare, evaluate and develop
infrastructure investments.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Physical investments under the project will most likely be implemented on public land
and within existing rights of way.
 To the extent possible, basic infrastructure investments financed by the project will be
located on public land and will serve areas of so-called "novostroiki" settlements of
Bishkek and Osh. "Novostroiki" ( literally "areas containing new constructions") consist
of settlements established on the basis of plot lay out plans prepared by the municipal
authorities that include (respected) rights-of-way for streets and public facilities (schools,
etc.), but lack for the time being necessary basic infrastructure (water supply, roads, etc.).
 The project will be also implemented in small towns of the Kyrgyz Republic. Given that
sub-project designs will be finalized during implementation, there exists the possibility of
encroachment on private land.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Arcadii Capcelea (ECSS3)
   Mr Aly Zulficar Rahim (ECSS4)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                           X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                               X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                        X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                   X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                    X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                             X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                           X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                 X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                            X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                     X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project activities which include: upgrading and/or expansion of water supply, road
and other basic infrastructure as well as rehabilitation and/or upgrading of service
equipment required for improving the availability of basic services in selected
novostroiki settlements as well as small-scale investments in neighborhood infrastructure
and equipment, - if not adequately implemented, may cause some environmental risks
which are related to: damage to ecosystems and endangered plant species; pollution of
soil and surface water at construction site with oil and oil products; noise; dust;
generation of construction waste; soil erosion, water and air pollution; worker safety (e.g.
welding operations) and health hazards; traffic disruption. All these risks are minor and
can be mitigated by including into the work contracts specific measures to be taken by
contractors and close supervision of compliance by ARIS. The project will also bring
positive social impacts as the proposed activities would improve social conditions for the
population and would contribute to improving local population livelihoods.
 Since none of the project supported activities will take place on transboundary
waterways (i.e. in the basins of the Chui and Syr-Darya rivers, respectively), as defined in
OP 7.50, the project will not trigger this policy.
 The Project will trigger OP/BP 4.12. The completed pre-feasibility studies indicate that
the project will largely be limited to rehabilitation of existing structures such as pumping
stations, water transmission lines, and transformer stations. The planned new well field
in Bashkarasuu and water transmission mains, as well as the infrastructures in small
towns, will be built on public property, where there should be no commercial activities or
residences. However, sub-project designs will be completed during implementation,
meaning there is a possibility that some construction may exceed available land and may
have to take place on sites not yet identified. In particular, cases of temporary or
permanent encroachments on private land cannot be precluded during implementation,
especially in areas adjacent to public road right-of-ways, where water transmission mains
will be laid. Furthermore, an RPF is necessary to deal with cases of private encroachment
on public land or rights of way that may be identified during implementation.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The potential long term impacts are positive and related to improved livelihoods for the
Bishkek and Osh novostroiki population, as well as these in the small towns. Social and
conflict risks in the associated beneficiary areas of the project will be addressed through
application of the Conflict Filter as per the 2011-2013 ISN.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
An Environmental Impact Assessment acceptable by the Association and in line with the
Kyrgyz legislation was prepared and disclosed for the Bashkarasuu water intake. The
EMF of the original project was updated and disclosed. Specific Environmental
Management Plans (EMPs) will be prepared for each individual investment.
 ARIS has good institutional capacity to manage the preparation of EMPs, as it is already
implementing similar Bank-financed projects, where EMPs for investments are required.
The quality of EMPs under these projects is satisfactory.
 A review of the status of EMF implementation and of compliance of implemented
within the initial project activities with safeguards issues were done during last WB
supervision mission in February 2011. The mission concluded the EMF is being
implemented well overall and that the implementing agency ARIS has relevant capacities
to ensure EMF successful implementation.

 Since these detailed impacts will only be known once project implementation
commences, and the possibility of land acquisition and restrictions in access cannot be
ruled out at this stage, the borrower has developed an RPF. The RPF identifies the
possible impacts from project activities, describes the range of potential impacts
(temporary and permanent) to land use/access and structures and specifies the
compensation and resettlement assistance/procedures for the same. Capacity for RAP
review and approval will be built at ARIS. This will be through training and technical
assistance to ensure that all stakeholders involved discharge their different
responsibilities effectively.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
An Environmental Management Framework (EMF) was prepared by the borrower and
published in Kyrgyz newspapers on January 25, 2008. This document was updated, re-
disclosed and consulted upon in September, 2011 ahead of appraisal for this Additional
Financing. The Implementing Agency, ARIS, posted the EIA for Bashkarasuu water
intake, and the EMF on their website and made a public notice on a local newspaper at
the beginning of September 2011. They held public consultations on the EIA for
Bashkarasuu on September 13, 2011 and on the EMF on September 19, 2011. Both
documents with enclosed list of attendants and minutes of the public hearing were sent to
the Infoshop. Further, ARIS is to conduct at least one public consultation with groups
affected by the projsct's investments prior to completion of the individual EMPs. In
advance the EMPs are disclosed on the IRIS website. Usually, these groups consulted
consist of people living near the project sites, representatives from local public
administrations and local environmental inspectors, as well as local NGOs.

 The RPF has been disclosed by the Bank and ARIS as per guidelines. Should designs
necessitate the preparation of RAPs:

  1)     ARIS staff working on resettlement and compensation must submit the RAP to
ARIS Executive Director for approval. ARIS is to ensure compliance with the RPF, and
consistency in approach between different activities.
  2)     ARIS discloses the RAP on its website, disseminates and shares with local
authorities and interested NGOs, and the affected persons (especially the site specific
sections) in a place and language accessible for them, and allows two weeks for
comment,
  3)     Following incorporation of comments from disclosure, and ARIS management
approval, the RAP must also be formally sent to the World Bank for review to ensure
compliance with OP4.12 and any other relevant policies/ procedures.
  4)     Following confirmation that the RAP is of acceptable quality to the World Bank,
it will be disclosed on the World Bank#s info-shop website, re-disclosed on the ARIS
website and disseminated again to all interested parties.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?          Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                          09/12/2011
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                      09/13/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              09/23/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 10/26/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             10/27/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              10/27/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              No
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          No
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                          Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Anna Cestari                              10/28/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Arcadii Capcelea                          10/28/2011
Social Development Specialist       Mr Aly Zulficar Rahim                        10/28/2011
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Stephen George Karam                      10/31/2011
  Comments:
