                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET

                                         CONCEPT STAGE



                                                                             Report No.: 78737

Date ISDS
                         June 21, 2013
Prepared/Updated:

I. BASIC INFORMATION

 A. Basic Project Data

 Country:                     Kyrgyz Republic      Project ID:                 P133446

 Project Name:                Project Preparation Grant for the Electricity Supply Accountability and
                              Reliability Improvement Project

 Task Team Leader:            Ani Balabanyan

 Estimated Appraisal Date: April, 2014             Estimated Board Date: July, 2014

 Managing Unit:               ECSEG                Lending Instrument:         TF Grant (SIL for
                                                                               ESARIP)

 Sector:                      Energy and Mining

 Theme:                       Transmission and Distribution of Electricity

 Financing (in USD Million)

   Financing Source                                                                                Amount

   ECA Region Capacity Development Trust Fund                                                      470,000

   Total                                                                                           470,000

 Environmental Category       Category B (partial assessment)
Is this a Repeater project? No




B. Project Objectives
The development objectives of the proposed grant are to enhance the readiness of the Ministry of Energy
and Severelectro to implement the Electricity Supply Accountability and Reliability Improvement
Project (ESARIP), and to strengthen the capacity of Severelectro.


C. Project Description
The proposed grant will include the following main components:
(i) Scoping of investments, including identification of investments to be supported under the ESARIP,
     development of implementation schedule and preparation of technical specifications, bidding
     documents and detailed designs for the first year of the project implementation;

(ii) Preparation, discussion (through consultations) and disclosure of the Environmental Management
     Plan for proposed investments under the component 2 (see below point D) of the ESARIP, to
     ensure that project activities are screened to identify their likely social and environmental impacts
     and to document and mitigate these impacts, as needed. This component will also assist
     Severelectro in setting up and initiating systematic consumer feedback and social accountability
     during preparation and implementation of the ESARIP;

(iii) Scoping of technical assistance to be funded under the ESARIP in support of governance,
      transparency and accountability reforms, including identification of technical assistance needs that
      would be supported by the ESARIP and preparation of terms of reference for consultants to be
      procured during the first year of the project implementation;

(iv) Preparation of operational manual covering all key aspects of the ESARIP implementation and
     including, among other chapters, development of a Financial Management Manual and Results
     Monitoring and Evaluation section. Additionally, training would be offered to Severelectro in
     various implementation areas, including financial management, procurement, M&E;

(v)   Financial audit of the grant and incremental operating costs of Project Implementation Unit.


D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
known)
Based on the identification mission of the Bank (April 2013), the following two components have been
identified for the ESARIP (the components and scope would be refined and finalized through the project
preparation Grant): (i) establishment of a new Commercial Management System and related procedures
for the execution of the commercial processes and activities; and (ii) replacement of conductors,
transformers, switchgear and similar distribution assets for select section of distribution infrastructure in
Bishkek. The proposed activities will be implemented in service area of Severelectro (including capital
 city of Bishkek and surroundings).




 E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies

 Severelectro has some safeguards capacity built through the implementation of donor-funded projects
 that have involved rehabilitation works. Particularly, the company has implemented the Word Bank
 financed Power and District Heating Rehabilitation Project (environmental category B) in the past.
 Detailed assessment of safeguards capacity of Severelectro will be conducted during the Grant
 implementation. The Grant will also help build the safeguards capacity of the company and will support
 preparation, discussion and disclosure of the EMP for the ESARIP.



 F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

 Arcadii Carcelea, Sr. Environmental Specialist

 Aly Zulficar Rahim, Social Development Specialist




II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

 Safeguard Policies                     Triggered ?     Explanation (Optional)

 Environmental Assessment OP/BP         Yes              This OP is triggered. The Grant will support
 4.01                                                   preparation of an EMP for the ESARIP that would
                                                        address replacement of conductors, transformers,
                                                        switchgear and similar distribution assets for select
                                                        section of distribution infrastructure in Bishkek. The
                                                        EMP will be focused on the potential health and
                                                        safety risks while implementing these activities,
                                                        including risks associated with PCB contaminated
                                                        transformer oils. The EMP will be consulted and
                                                        disclosed in the country and in the Infoshop. Before
                                                        the Grant implementation commences, the TOR for
                                                        the EMP will be disclosed in the country and
                                                        consulted with all key stakeholders, in particular with
                                                        environmental and energy authorities and specialists.

 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04            No
 Forests OP/BP 4.36                      No

 Pest Management OP 4.09                 No

 Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP       No
 4.11

 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10           No

 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12     No

 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37               No

 Projects on International Waterways     No
 OP/BP 7.50

 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP        No
 7.60




III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN



 A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS:

    May, 2013



 B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
    The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.

    Before the Grant implementation commences, the TOR for the EMP will be disclosed in the country
    and consulted with all key stakeholders, in particular with environmental and energy authorities and
    specialists.
IV. APPROVALS

 Task Team Leader:     Name: Ani Balabanyan

 Approved By:

 Regional Safeguards   Name: Agi Kiss         Date: May 23, 2013
 Coordinator:

 Sector Manager:       Name: Ranjit Lamech    Date: May 25, 2013
