                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 05/15/2012                                   Report No.: AC6688
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P102398                  Original Project Name: Road Sector
                                              Project
Country: Lao People's Democratic              Project ID: P129347
Republic
Project Name: LA - Additional Financing Road Sector Project
Task Team Leader: Sombath Southivong
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 10, 2012        Estimated Board Date: July 31, 2012
Managing Unit: EASTS                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
Sector: Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (95%);Public administration-
Transportation (5%)
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (34%);Regional
integration (34%);Natural disaster management (32%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):             21
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             0.00
                                                                        0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                         Simple []          Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
are (a) to improve road services on two main national corridors and the provincial road
network, (b) to rehabilitate roads damaged by Typhoon Ketsana, and (c) to establish and
operationalize a contingency fund for quick disaster response in the road sector.

3. Project Description
This additional financing (AF) would help finance the costs associated with cost overruns
caused by: (i) cost increases for additional civil works needed to strengthen the disaster
resilience of National Road 6A and 1B; (ii) cost increases for provincial road
maintenance following severe damages caused by Typhoons Haima and Nok Ten in
2011; (iii) steady price increases for fuel and construction materials; and (iv) fund
shortage due to cost reallocation from project components to the contingency fund to
finance emergency repair of roads damaged by Typhoon Haima. The AF will (i) scale up
the impact and development effectiveness of the project through further strengthening
institutional capacities for good governance, public private partnerships, traffic safety,
and safeguard capacity building; and (ii) top up the emergency contingency fund,
depleted following rehabilitation efforts after Typhoon Haima.

 Specifically, the AF activities will be implemented through the on-going three
components as follows:

 Component A: Road Network Improvement and Preservation (about US$15.6 million):
The proposed AF would finance cost overrun of the physical works for the upgrading of
two national road links- NR 1 B in Phongsaly Province and NR 6 A in Houaphan
Province- including the construction of a 180 meters bridge over the River Ma to replace
an inefficient ferry currently operating only for 6 to 8 months a year on NR 6A and the
periodic maintenance of the provincial road network in all 17 provinces , and road safety
improvements.

 Component B: Institutional Strengthening (about US$3.6 million): The proposed AF
would provide continuous technical assistance to both the Ministry of Public Works and
Transport (MPWT) and the Provincial Departments of Public Works and Transport
(DPWT) in the areas of sector strategic management, local road management, country
systems for environmental safeguards, fiduciary management, ICT and internal controls.

  Component C: Disaster Recovery and Contingency (about US$1.8 million): The AF
would be used for (a) topping-up the emergency contingency fund, and (b) providing
technical assistance to strengthen the management of this emergency facility through the
development and establishment of standard operating procedures for planning,
procurement, implementation, safeguards, disbursement, and monitoring and reporting;
and subsequent training.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project location will be nationwide similar to the original project.

 Pilot Use of Country System for Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.00) is triggered
instead of Environment Asssesment (OP/BP 4.01)

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Satoshi Ishihara (EASTS)
   Mr Bunlong Leng (EASTS)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                             Yes        No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                  X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                          X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                   X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                              X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                               X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                              X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                        X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                             X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                        X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                 X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Under the original project, the upgrading of two national roads (6A and 1B) and the
periodic maintenance of provincial road network have been implemented under
Component A, while under Component C, emergency rehabilitation has been conducted
to 49 road sections. No major environmental or social impacts have occurred so far.
Minor environmental issues such as the improper dumping of waste materials along the
riverbank, and the weak integration of safeguard planning, implementation, and
monitoring/reporting in the overall project implementation, have been addressed through
safeguard trainings and the intensive supervision and implementation support by the task
team. Limited land acquisition and loss of assets occurred under the improvement of
national roads which are being addressed and compensated as per the respective
Resettlement Action Plans. No land acquisition occurred under the periodic maintenance
of provincial roads or emergency road rehabilitation. Ethnic Groups Development Plans
have been prepared as per the project Ethnic Groups Development Framework, and
affected ethnic minorities have been consulted in a free, prior and informed manner, and
their broad community support established. Supervision conducted during the
implementation found no major outstanding environmental or social issues.

 This AF would finance the cost overruns of the on-going improvement of the national
road 6A and 1B and the periodic maintenance of provincial road network, and top up the
emergency contingency fund, depleted following rehabilitation efforts after Typhoon
Haima. The types and scale of impact under the AF would be similar to those which
occurred under the original project and which have been addressed with existing
safeguard instruments. No potential large scale, significant, and/or irreversible
environmental or social impacts are anticipated. The potential negative impact of the
construction of a new bridge over the River Ma (10 meters wide, 180 meters long, and 3
spans) would be limited to minor disturbance of bottom sediment and construction site
which will be temporary, localized, and can be mitigated through the application of good
construction management practices and close supervision by field engineers. The River
Ma is originated from Vietnam, passing through Lao PDR approximately 70 km and
returning to Vietnam again and the construction of the new bridge would not cause a
significant adverse impact on environment, hydrology and natural habitat. The access
road to the bridge would be constructed on public lands and no loss of private land, assets
or access is anticipated. Consultation with LEGEN confirmed that the policy on
international waterways (OP/BP 7.50) will not be triggered.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The new bridge over the River Ma, by replacing the existing inefficient ferry that cannot
operate over 4 to 6 months during the day season due to low water levels, will
significantly increase the trade with Vietnam and positively contribute to local economy.
Road improvement and increased traffic, however, would also increase the risk of dust
generation from passing traffic, road safety, and other social issues related to the
transport sector. Road safety including installation of speed limit will continue to be
supported under the AF.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The OP 4.00 was triggered in the original project. The Safeguard Diagnostic Review
(SDR) was conducted during the preparation of the original project which found that the
Environmental and Social Operational Manual (ESOM) was equivalent to OP 4.01, 4.04
and 4.11. As for the potential impacts on involuntary resettlement and indigenous
peoples, it was decided that such impacts be addressed through conventional safeguard
policies, namely, the OP 4.10 and OP4.12, due to the uncertainty regarding the precise
circumstances under which such impacts would emerge and the differences in the
approaches of the Government and the Bank in dealing with these impacts.

  As described above, ESOM has been applied satisfactorily to all civil works financed
under the original project, albeit some gaps which are being addressed. The knowledge
and understanding of ESOM among the MPWT staff, both at the central and provincial
level, has been improved and continue to be strengthened under the AF through a series
of trainings and workshops. The ESOM technical guidelines that provide more detailed
guidance to MPWT engineers are also under development.

 During the implementation of the original project, the new EIA Decree was adopted and
the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment (MoNRE) was newly established in
2011. The task team reviewed the new EIA decree and is of the opinion that it does not
contradict ESOM or provide any new requirements or provisions that may make it
incompatible with the Bank environmental safeguard policies - the new EIA decree
primarily clarified the processes and procedures for the review and approval of
environmental assessment and the issuance of environmental certificates.
 While the adoption of the EIA Decree and the establishment of MoNRE would
positively impact the environmental management under the original project and the AF,
the ESOM has also to be updated in order to make it fully compatible with the new
national arrangements. It was decided that: (i) the AF will support the updating of
ESOM. For this purpose, $320,000 is allocated under the AF; and (ii) in the mean time,
ESOM will continue to apply to all civil works that will be supported under the AF,
including the construction of the bridge over the river Ma, and the environmental
certificate would be issued if the site specific EIAs are prepared according to ESOM.
 The SDR identified several gaps that have to be filled to make ESOM fully equivalent
with the OP 4.01, 4.04 and 4.11, which have been addressed in the revised final ESOM.

 The Environment and Social Division (ESD) of the Public Works and Transport
Institute (PTI) has eight staff with broad experience in safeguards and, under the support
of one environmental consultant and one social consultant, is conducting the training of
MPWT staff at the central and provincial level to strengthen their knowledge and
understanding of ESOM. The Technical and Environmental Department (TED) of the
Department of Roads (DOR) has 3 staff responsible for safeguard compliance, whose
capacity has been significantly strengthened through the implementation of the original
project. Further capacity development will be provided under the AF. ESOM training
has also been initiated and this will be continued under AF but the training approach will
be modified to ensure that the activities will also serve the monitoring of safeguard
performance at the subproject level.

 On the social side, the existing Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and Ethnic Group
Development Framework (EGDF) which were prepared under the original project have
been updated and disclosed locally and at the InfoShop. Since the AF will finance same
project activities as the original project in the similar scale, the existing RPF and EGDF,
through the Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) and Ethnic Group Development Plan
(EGDP) prepared as per RPF and EGDF, are considered to remain valid under AF. In
case new impacts are found to occur that are not addressed under the existing RAPs, or
ethnic minorities are found to be present in or have collective attachment to project areas
that were not supported under the original project, a separate RAP or EGDP will be
developed in line with RPF or EGDF. For this purpose, safeguard screening, including
ethnic screening, will continue to be conducted for the provincial road maintenance and
emergency rehabilitation programs as works are identified.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders are the ESD of the PTI, the TED of DOR, DESIA, the local
governments, and local communities located along the roads. Under the original project
consultations with DESIA were conducted through meetings with key officials in
Vientiane while consultation meetings with local governments and communities along
project roads were conducted during the preparation. The ESOM, RPF and EGDF have
been updated for AF and disclosed in Lao and English languages at both the Infoshop as
well as the MPWT offices in Vientiane and district offices in the project areas. The
simple project booklet that describes the nature of the project, expected impacts,
compensation strategies, entitlements and grievance mechanisms would continue to be
available to local population. For the maintenance of provincial roads and disaster
recovery works that have not been identified so far, ethnic screening would be conducted
and where ethnic minorities are present, they will be consulted in a free, prior and
informed manner and their broad community support will be established.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
   Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
   Date of receipt by the Bank
   Date of "in-country" disclosure
   Date of submission to InfoShop
   For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
   Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
   Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
   Date of receipt by the Bank                                  04/09/2012
   Date of "in-country" disclosure                              04/09/2012
   Date of submission to InfoShop                               04/11/2012
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
   Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
   Date of receipt by the Bank                                  04/09/2012
   Date of "in-country" disclosure                              04/09/2012
   Date of submission to InfoShop                               04/11/2012
Pest Management Plan:
   Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
   Date of receipt by the Bank
   Date of "in-country" disclosure
   Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
Pilot Use of Country System for Environmental Assessment (OP/BP4.00)has been
triggered instead of Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01). Environmental and Social
Operation Manual (ESOM) was redisclosed in the country on April 9, 2012 and sent to
infoshop for disclosure on April 11, 2012. Safeguard Diagnostic Review (Equivalence
and Acceptability Report)was disclosed in the country on April 20 and sent inforshop for
disclosure on April 23, 2012.
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                  Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed   Yes
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                 Name              Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Sombath Southivong                04/26/2012
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Bunlong Leng                      04/26/2012
Social Development Specialist       Mr Satoshi Ishihara                  04/26/2012
Additional Environmental and/or     Ms Manida Unkulvasapaul              04/26/2012
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan   05/08/2012
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Julia M. Fraser                   04/27/2012
  Comments:
