                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 06/21/2012                                    Report No.: 71331

1. Basic Project Data
Country: Lao PDR                         Project ID: P113860
Project Name: Developing and Demonstrating Replicable Protected Area Management
Models at Nam Et -Phou Louey National Protected Area
Task Team Leader: Viengkeo Phetnavongxay
Estimated Appraisal Date:                Estimated CMU Approval Date: July 31, 2012
Managing Unit: EASSD                     Lending Instrument: SIL
Sector: Environment
GEF Amount (US$m.):             $0.879
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                         Simple [X]         Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]    No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives

This project aims to test, in selected areas of the Nam Et-Phou Louey National Protected
Area (NE-PL NPA), targeted activities for sustainable natural resource use and protection
of selected species threatened by human interaction.

3. Project Description

The project will finance the Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS) to provide the NE-PL
NPA goods, small works (checkpoint to control access at the two ends of Phathi road,
ranger’s substations, and ecotourism camp) and technical assistance. WCS will be the
beneficiary as well as the executing agency of the project. The project activity includes
the implementation of Phathi Road Co-Management Plan as a working model of
managing anticipated impacts from road infrastructure development inside the NPA. The
following components will be implemented to achieve the project objective:

Component 1: Management and conservation working models, within NE-PL NPA
            including implementation of co-management of infrastructure in
            sensitive habitats. (US$ 678,000).

Under this component, the project will strengthen Protected Area Management Unit
(PAMU) capacity to monitor and manage harvests of managed species for sustainable use
in the Controlled Use Zone within the NE-PL NPA. Activity includes a) Community
Awareness Raising in 30 NPA villages aimed to raise community awareness and
understanding of, and ultimately their compliance with, NPA regulations; b) Village
Natural Resource Agreements with approximately 20 communities including those in

                                                                                       1
the controlled use zone near the Phathi Road to map village use areas and ratify village
agreements with the NPA for wildlife and land-use management; c) Monitor Change in
Harvest of Wild Foods and Estimate Sustainability of Wildlife Off-take. Results of
monitoring will be incorporated into campaign messages and used to adapt agreements
for PA zoning and wildlife use; and d) Expand patrolling effort and ranger
substations to secure Totally Protected Zone, reduce illegal/unsustainable wildlife trade,
and encourage villages to graze their livestock at their village’s area rather than in the
core zone. These activities will allow the Protected Area Management Unit, WCS, the
Province and District to work together to ensure that access to the core zone along Phathi
Road is managed and monitored.

Furthermore, this component will demonstrate best practices to mitigate anticipated
impacts from the use of Phathi Road through supporting the implementation of the Co-
Management Plan which includes awareness raising on the use of Phathi road;
establishing a lock gate and check point at the two ends of the road; establishing one
substation along the road and financing permanent staff at the two check points and
substation to carry out patrolling activity; establishing access monitoring system;
conducting training staff on patrolling along the road; supporting land use planning in the
villages near to the road; and supporting the development of long term Phathi road
management plan.

This component will include developing alternative community livelihoods within and
near the NE-PL NPA to help local villagers including ethnic minorities minimize their
dependency on wild meat consumption and collection of NTFPs and mitigate potential
short-term negative impact following the introduction of restricted access to natural and
forest resources under the GEF project. Two co-financiers will provide parallel financing
to the development of alternative community livelihood. KfW/GiZ funded Climate
Protection through Avoided Deforestation Project (CliPAD) will support the
Participatory Land Use Planning (PLUP) in all 30 target villages, and develop alternative
community livelihood in 15 of them through providing training and demonstration as
well as the provision of in-kind inputs. PLUP will help target villagers demarcate various
categories of land based on the existing land use patterns. Based on the results, villagers
will be assisted identifying and developing alternative community livelihoods. Initial
expectation is that the livelihood support would center around increasing small and large
livestock productivity within the allocated areas.

The World Bank financed Poverty Reduction Fund (PRF), through its Livelihood
Opportunity and Nutrition Gain (LONG) component, will support alternative community
livelihoods in the other 15 target villages where CliPAD will conducts PLUP but will not
provide subsequent livelihood support. Specifically, LONG will provide training,
technical support and block grant for groups of affected villagers to start up and
implement their livelihood activities that will be identified through participatory
processes. All these livelihood priorities, and the implementation arrangement and
timeframes jointly identified between PRF and villagers, will be documented in the
Village Development Plan (VDP) and are formalized in the Village Natural Resource
Agreement (VNRA).

                                                                                         2
Component 2: Working models of ecotourism for community engagement and
            sustainable financing. (US$130,000)

Under Component 2, project will build capacity of the NPA MU and local communities
to diversify revenue for forest and wildlife management by generating alternative income
through ecotourism-based activity. It aims to Operationalize Feasible Ecotourism
Products in NE-PL NPA and Establish Mechanisms for Making the Revenues
Directly Available for the Management of the PA. Activity includes a) development
of guidelines and regulations on the development of ecotourism activity in NE-PL NPA;
b) organize village structure to manage and run ecotourism activity in their village area;
c) support the establishment of ecotourism based facility such as tourism camping station
and trekking route etc.

Component 3: Dissemination and replication working models of NE-PL NPA within
             Lao PDR. (US$33,795)

Under the Component 3, a NE-PL NPA management model will be produced, and
disseminated to practitioners from the protected areas in Lao. Activity includes a) TA to
Synthesize the lessons from NE-PL NPA, on: (i) sustainable natural resource use by
villages inside a protected area; (ii) tiger conservation; (iii) ecotourism based livelihoods
for local communities; and (iv) management of infrastructure, particularly roads in
sensitive habitats in multiple use protected areas; and b) Incorporation of the protected
area management model into a curriculum to train at the National University of Lao
(NUOL) and disseminate it through workshops with DFRM and related agencies.

Component 4: Project management. (US$37,205)

This component will support the implementation of entire project components. Activities
will include the management of staff; implementation of activities under the three core
components; the management of stakeholder relations; the management of project
finances and procurement; and support for the needs of WCS to work with the NE-PL
PAMU and NE-PL PAMAC.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis

The project area is the Nam Et-Phou Louey National Protected Area (NE-PL NPA)
which is located at the conjunction of three Northern provinces (Houaphanh,
Luangphrabang and Xiengkhouang). The NPA covers 497,749 ha and makes up 80% of
the Viengthong District in Houaphan Province. In addition, about 64 km of the NE-PL
NPA boundary directly borders Vietnam. There are 98 communities living within or
closely surrounding the NE-PL NPA. Communities belong to three ethno-linguistic
families namely Lao Tai (majority Lao including Tai Dam, Tai Deng), Mon-khmer
(including Khmu), Hmong-Mien (Hmong and Iu-mien). The latter two ethnic groups,
Mon-khmer and Hmong-mien, are considered to be vulnerable groups of ethnic
minorities meeting the World Bank’s definition of Indigenous People (OP/BP 4.10).

                                                                                           3
These ethnic groups live in rural remote areas and rely heavily on natural resources for
their subsistence livelihood. NE-PL NPA is known as a nationally and globally
significant location for biodiversity conservation, which includes the only remaining
breeding population of Indochinese Tiger in Lao PDR.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

   Mr. James Monday (Senior Environmental Engineer, EASTS)
   Mr. Sybounheung Phandanouvong, Social Development Specialist (EASTS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                 X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                          X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                               X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

Activities that may have impact on natural habitat/ forest:

Project activities under the component 1 and 2 include a) Community Awareness
Raising; b) Village Natural Resource Agreements; c) Expand patrolling effort and ranger
substations; d) development of guidelines and regulations on the development of
ecotourism activity in NE-PL NPA; and e) support the establishment of ecotourism based
facility such as tourism camping station and trekking route will have safeguard
implication.

Above mentioned activities will not involve any major or significant civil works and
therefore is not expected to generate negative impacts on the local environment and on
people. Project activity will rather provide a positive impact on the natural habitat and
key wildlife species. Village awareness raising and patrolling activities aim at managing
the over harvesting of forest resources and wildlife by villager and outsider. The activity
will help to reduce the encroachment into the core zone for an agriculture activity and
livestock grazing, thus will help improve natural habitat and preserve the key species in
the area such as tiger and its prey. However, minor civil works will be financed under this
project, which will include the following:

                                                                                            4
   Patrolling substations: there will be three patrolling substations built under the project
    support, using high standards of minimal environmental impact. The planned
    substation is a one room structure, twenty four square meters in size, with a detached
    kitchen and toilet. The structures are constructed from wood, metal roofing and
    concrete posts sourced from outside the NPA from local vendors (Figure 3 in the EA
    report). The project will finance metal roofing; nails; and local labour. All
    substations will be built in strategic locations – already cleared areas (old village land
    or agricultural land). Thus, there is no land and forest clearing involved. This would
    maximize enforcement effectiveness while minimizing environmental impacts on the
    TPZ and the CUZ.

   Eco-tourism activities: will be limited to provision of tourist camps and lodgings to
    house tourists (no more than approx. 600 tourists per year) who come into the NE-PL
    NPA. The eco-camp consists of simple wooden structures, including guest huts for
    sleeping, a staff house, a sala (small open hut) for meals, a detached kitchen, toilet
    and showers. All structures are made from materials that are sourced locally from
    outside of the NPA. The facility can house up to six guests at any one time.
    Ecotourism facilities are built in strategic locations to maximize ecotourism appeal
    while minimizing environmental impacts on the NPA. It is anticipated that during the
    GEF project two more eco-camps will be built. Only technical assistance, materials
    and local labour cost will be supported under this project. Again, minimal
    environmental impacts will be ensured. Minor disturbance of natural habitats and
    wildlife may occur as a result of the above activities such as lighting or setting fires in
    the forests, and noise generated from the construction of patrolling substations and
    tourism lodges.

   The development of Phathi road (the government funded activities) within NE-PL
    NPA. About 61 km section of the so-called Phathi Road is under rehabilitation inside
    the NPA, including a 31 km section that cuts through the Totally Protected Zone.
    Notwithstanding that the Phathi Road is not financed by the project, it is likely to
    have some adverse impacts in the NE-PL NPA. The 31 km road section runs east-
    west through the critical habitat for the last known breeding tiger population in
    Indochina (Lao, Vietnam and Cambodia). In December 2010, construction began on
    an old four-wheel vehicular road inside the NE-PL NPA, which had by then been
    degraded and no longer traversable by motorized cars. The road development
    included the widening of the existing road to four-meters. Construction of the road
    has brought about concerns regarding increased access to the core zone of the
    protected area, including the key tiger habitat. The developer is the Ministry of
    Defense who will hand over the upgraded road to the Province one year after
    completion of the civil work. The World Bank Task Team and WCS have worked

                                                                                             5
   with the Government to bring these parties together with the Province and the
   Ministry of Defense to discuss potential impacts from the road, and solutions to
   address its adverse effects. Project will demonstrate the practices to mitigate
   anticipated impacts from the use of Phathi Road through support of the
   implementation of the Co-Management Plan. The activity includes awareness raising
   on the use of Phathi road; establishing a lock gate and check point at the two ends of
   the road; establishing one substation along the road and financing permanent staff at
   the two check points and substation to carryout patrolling activity; establishing assess
   monitoring system; conducting training staff on patrolling along the road; supporting
   land use planning in the villages near to the road; and supporting the development of
   long term Phathi road management plan.

Activities that may have impact on livelihood of the local ethnic minorities and
require land acquisition:

Ethnic minorities (Hmong, Khmu, Iu-Mien) living in and around the NPA are the
primary targeted beneficiaries of the project. These are considered to be vulnerable ethnic
groups in Lao PDR, meeting the Bank’s definition of Indigenous People (OP/BP 4.10).
Their culture is unique with their own customs and languages. These group’s livelihoods
are heavily based on subsistence, upland agriculture and forestry. These ethnic villages
have their own village cemeteries and some, especially the Khmu ethnic group, have
spirit forests (the inhabitant of the village ancestor’s spirit) located adjacent to their
villages. Extraction of timbers and hunting are usually prohibited in the spirit forest areas.
The project will enhance the protection of spirit forests, and will avoid routing any
ecotourism treks in this community-managed area. The project will not involve any
physical relocation. The project will ensure that local villagers are aware of and conserve
their forest use areas, so that project-affected people have an improved, long term
resource access. However, especially within the Totally Protected Zone, a new, more
sustainable use of forest resources that will be introduced under the project may mean
that the livelihood of local population may be negatively impacted, at least in a short run.

Project activity including boundary demarcation; awareness raising on National laws and
regulations; village agreement on natural resources management; forest patrolling may
have restriction local ethnic communities from their traditional access to natural
resources including wild meat and NTFs for their own consumption.

The livelihood support activities which will be undertaken by PRF and CliPAD may need
minor land acquisition if infrastructure construction activity is choosing by local
community, namely school; health care center; and irrigation scheme in the village areas.

As mentioned, the most impacts as a result of project activities are expected to be positive
for natural habitat and key wildlife species in the NE-PL NPA, the activity will help to
reduce the encroachment into the core zone and improve forest area and protect the key
species such as tiger and its prey. The negative impacts from the activities described
above will be local and for the most part site specific as they will be mostly be associated

                                                                                            6
with managing relatively small volumes of solid waste and waste water, and materials
used for construction will be sourced from outside the NPA. Mitigation measures have
been incorporated into the EA report; IPP/EPP; and RPF developed for the project.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:

As the NE-PL NPA is the only NPA within in Lao PDR that has a breeding population of
Indochinese Tiger, success of the project could lead to the increase or stabilization of the
tiger population and the resultant dissemination of best practices in NPA management
throughout the country.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts. N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

To address the impacts from the project financed activities, the WCS and NE-PL NPA
Management Unit have developed an Environmental Assessment Report/Environmental
Management Plan which includes tangible mitigation measures to address the impacts
associated with the patrolling substations and eco-tourism activities. The project
implementing agencies have developed Ethnic People Plan (EPP) and Resettlement
Process Framework (RPF) to address the social safeguard related issues. The EPP aims to
enhance ethnic community benefits and their participation in the project and to establish
their broad-based and informed support and ownership in order to increase the likelihood
of project sustainability. The RPF and CliPAD are intended to address potential
livelihood impacts that may result from restriction of access to the natural resources and
provide/ measures to address such impacts.

As a measure to address the potential impacts possibly resulting from the Phathi Road
improvement, a Co-Management Plan has been developed that would support NPA MU
to identify and manage emerging impacts from Phathi Road in partnership with local
population and all other key stakeholders. The Co-Management Plan was discussed in a
meeting held on March 16, 2012 at the national level, attended by all concerned parties
including the province and Ministry of Defense. Roles and responsibilities of each party
including the government agencies at the central and provincial levels, development
partners, local communities and International and Local NGOs in Lao PDR have been
agreed upon. Measures include installing check points at the two ends of the road and
building a monitoring system to monitor access along Phathi Road.

As mentioned above, there will be two co-financiers to the project, besides in-kind
contribution from the NE-PL PAMU. The NE-PL Protected Area Management Unit
(PAMU) will ensure that all activities in or near the NE-PL NPA including but not
limited to those financed under the two co-financiers will follow with Bank safeguard
policies.

                                                                                          7
As part of project preparation process, social assessment that consists of various socio-
economic and biodiversity surveys, participatory land and forest use planning, outreach
activities and inclusive consultations, has been undertaken in all target villages within
and adjacent to the NEPL NPA by WCS and PAMU. Process of free, prior, and informed
consultation (FPIC) with local communities have been and will be an important part of this
EPP and the Process Framework and were conducted in 56 villages including four out of
the eight villages affected by the rehabilitation of the Phathi road. The field visit
conducted under the appraisal mission, jointly conducted by the Bank task team and
WCS, also found that villagers in the NEPL NPA are well aware of and knowledgeable
about the project and support the activities planned under the project, indicating that the
consultations had been conducted properly. Community support activities have been
confirmed by PRF and CliPAD projects.

The project will not support involuntary resettlement of local people or dispossession of
their assets in and near the NE-PL NPA as a result of any possible development projects
even if they are not related to and financed through Bank.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

Key stakeholders are the WCS, NE-PL NPA management unit, local population and the
concerned provincial and district sectors. These agencies were extensively consulted
during the preparation of the project. Annex 1 of the EA provides the record of these
consultations. Free, prior and informed consultations with local multi-ethnic communities
on the project activity has been conducted throughout project preparation since April
2008, and continues to be conducted into the implementation stage to establish their
support and cooperation with the project with assistance from the above agencies. EA,
EPP and RPF may be updated during implementation based on the comments and
feedback received.

B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal? Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                                       May 28, 2012
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                   June 1, 2012
Date of submission to InfoShop                                    July 5, 2012
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal? Yes
                                                                  May 28, 2012
Date of receipt by the Bank
                                                                  June 1, 2012
Date of "in-country" disclosure
                                                                  July 5, 2012
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal? Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                                         May 28, 2012

                                                                                         8
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  June 1, 2012
Date of submission to InfoShop                                   July 5, 2012
Pest Management Plan:
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal? N/A
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:

C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?

OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        Yes
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   Yes
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                   Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector         Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed    Yes
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?             No
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential           No
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process               Yes
framework * (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector         Yes
Manager review the plan?
*Included in the ESSF

                                                                                       9
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's        Yes,
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a        Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities     Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project    Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project includes the
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?     Yes
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the              Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?

  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                        Name                                 Date
Task Team Leader:               Mr. Viengkeo Phetnavongxay                       June 21, 2012
Environmental Specialist:       Mr. James Monday                                 June 22, 2012
Social Development Specialist   Mr. Sybounheung Phandanouvong                    June 22, 2012
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development
Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards                Mr. Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan           June 28, 2012
Coordinator:
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                    Ms. Julia Fraser                              June 22, 2012
  Comments:




                                                                                         10
