                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 11/15/2011                                  Report No.: AC6549
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P087716                 Original Project Name: LA-Khammouane
                                             Development Project
Country: Lao People's Democratic             Project ID: P127176
Republic
Project Name: LA-Khammouane Development-Additional Financing Project
Task Team Leader: Toru Konishi
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 18,       Estimated Board Date: January 26, 2012
2011
Managing Unit: EASTS                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Sub-national government administration (55%);Irrigation and drainage
(30%);Agricultural extension and research (15%)
Theme: Decentralization (40%);Rural services and infrastructure (40%);Other rural
development (20%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):December 30, 1899
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                            0.50
                                                                       0.50
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Repeater [X]
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The specific Project Development Objective of Khammouane Development Project
Additional Financing (AF) remains unchanged i.e. to strengthen the planning process and
public financial management associated with the decentralized delivery of public services
and infrastructure, including irrigation development, in Khammouane Province.

3. Project Description
The proposed AF would scale up the activities of the original project, and will be
implemented through the following three components: (a) Component 1: Local
Development and Provincial Capacity Building, (b) Component 2: Support for Irrigation
Development along the NT2 Downstream Channel and the Lower XBF River, and (c)
Component 3 (new component): Support for Rural Livelihood and Agricultural
Development. Component 3 would implement the same activities as have been
implemented under the Component 1 of the original project. The new Component has
been established in order to facilitate the Provincial Agriculture and Forestry Office
(PAFO), the provincial agency that is now newly assigned to implement the activities, to
adequately implement project activities and clearly delineate their responsibilities from
those of Department of Planning and Investment (DPI), the implementation agency of the
Component 1. The activities under each component are summarized below.

 Component 1: Local Development and Provincial Capacity Building. The proposed AF
would be used to re-capitalize the District Development Fund (DDF) to continue the
same types of activities in the same districts as in the original project, including: (a)
extension of the current DDF scheme by two years (until 2015), (b) increasing annual
allocations to the poorer districts in the Province to address acute rural poverty more
proactively, (c) through a DDF mechanism, providing additional resources for facilitating
reconstruction of infrastructure for the districts hit by the recent Typhoon Nokten in
August 2011. DDF would mainly invest in rural infrastructure at the villages and khum
ban (cluster of villages) levels such as schools, clinics, bore holes, and access roads.

 Component 2: Support for Irrigation Development along the NT2 Downstream Channel
and the Lower XBF River. The proposed AF would be used for scaling up the continued
rehabilitation works for the 15 existing village based irrigation schemes (typically 50-100
hectares) located along the Xe Bang Fai River. Rehabilitation works would include: (a)
repairs to the pump facilities, (b) rehabilitation of canal conveyance structure, and (c)
technical assistance to water user groups regarding irrigation management,
administration, and agriculture.

 Component 3: Support for Rural Livelihood and Agricultural Development.
 The activities under this new component are currently being implemented under
Component 1 of the original project. However, as explained above, under the proposed
AF, the responsibilities for implementing these same activities would be that of the
PAFO. These activities would be; (a) upscaling the current Agricultural Livelihood
Grants (ALG) to additional 33 poorest villages and (b) pilot a competitive grant scheme
for agriculture entrepreneurs, (c) Institutional Strengthening for PAFO, including: (i)
continued support for the Xe Bang Fai Agriculture Extension Center; (ii) Strengthening
Planning, Implementing, and Monitoring of the PAFO, and (iii) strengthening technical
capacity of PAFO and DAFO staff to support effective demonstration and extension
activities for villagers.

 With the proposed AF, the original project scope remains the same as the original
project, in terms of the PDO, the project area (Khammouane Province) and the types and
scale of activities. The proposed AF would be extended for two years, and the new
closing date of both the original IDA financing and AF would be March 31, 2016.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Similar to the original project, AF will be implemented in the Khammouane province and
will also cover the same nine districts of the province. The population of Khammouane
province is ethnically heterogeneous, with almost of 40 percent of the total population
being made up of ethnic minorities.

 The exact location of the investments under Component 1 (DDF) would be determined
during the project implementation through consultation and prioritization with the
villages carried out by the respective districts. AF will increase the target villages for the
DDF investment from 70 to approximately 115.

  Component 2 would also continue rehabilitation of the village based irrigation schemes
in the same area covered by the original project, namely the areas along the Xe Bang Fai
River, spreading over the following districts: Xe Bang Fai, Mahaxay, and Nongbok. The
Xe Bang Fai River flows from the mountainous area adjacent to the Vietnamese border
(Boualapa) and discharge a large amount of water into the Mekong River. The lower Xe
Bang Fai is a flat area and is subject to annual flood during wet season (July-October).
The proposed AF would support rehabilitation of village (small scale) irrigation schemes
covering an additional cumulative total area of about 1,000 hectares from what was
financed under the original project, with the average size of an individual scheme being
less than 150 hectares.

 With respect to Component 3, the proposed AF will also continue to support the same
areas as in the original project, mainly in Boualapha, Mahaxay and Hinboun districts,
which are considered to be poorer. The proposed AF will increase the number of the
target villages from 27 to 60 in the same districts.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Satoshi Ishihara (EASTS)
   Mr Viengkeo Phetnavongxay (EASTS)
   Mr Sybounheung Phandanouvong (EASTS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                           X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                               X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                        X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                       X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                    X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                 X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                           X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                 X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                     X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Similar to the original project, the proposed activities to be carried out under the
proposed AF will involve only small scale civil works for: (a) rehabilitation of small
existing irrigation schemes (typically 50-150 hectares per scheme), along the Xe Bang
Fai River and (b) construction/repair of small infrastructure (roads, water supply, schools,
health center etc.), including repair to the rural infrastructure (mainly roads) damaged by
the recent typhoon. In this context, given that the potential adverse impacts under the
proposed AF will continue to be small scale, local and can either be avoided, minimized
or otherwise acceptable managed through the application of readily available mitigation
measures, the EA Category of #B# and the triggered safeguards policies for the proposed
AF will remain the same as that of the original project and these are as the original
project: Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01); Pest Management (OP 4.09); Indigenous
Peoples (OP 4.10); Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12), and International Waterways
(OP 7.50).

 Therefore, in line with these WB safeguard polices and Government#s regulations, no
new additional project level safeguards documents are required for the proposed AF and
as such the same documents prepared for and used by the original project will be used for
the proposed AF and these are; (i) For compliance with OP4.01, Environmental and
Social Management Framework (ESMF), (ii) For compliance with OP4.12, a
Compensation and Resettlement Policy Framework (CRPF), (iii) For compliance with
OP4.10, an Ethnic Group Policy Framework (EGPF), and (iv) for compliance with
OP4.09, a simplified Pest Management Plan (PMP). Notwithstanding, to reflect the
lessons learned during the implementation of the original project, these documents have
been reviewed, revised and updated. These revised documents have been reviewed and
cleared by the Task Team and have been re-disclosed locally in Lao PDR in the local
language and at the World Bank Infoshop.

 Key safeguard issues, implementation experience, and proposed mitigation measures for
KDP additional financing are described below.

 Safeguard screening and risks: During the implementation of the original project, a
safeguard manual was prepared, staff trained, and the safeguard screening process has
been applied to the subprojects. In the safeguard manual, specific guidelines on
mitigation measures have been provided including, but not limited to, the following: the
safeguard screening process (and forms); preparation of environmental management plan;
an entitlement for compensation and allowance for losses (if any); grievance procedures;
contents of an abbreviated RAP (Resettlement Action Plan); a preliminary screening of
ethnic minorities; sample public consultation and disclosure framework; and key
indicators for monitoring. Under AF the safeguard training will be conducted to improve
the monitoring and reporting performance and a safeguard focal point for each
component will be assigned for each component to be responsible for this task. The
overall safeguard risk is considered to be low, however, risks due to UXO remain high
especially in the upland area (Boualapa District). In this context, the current procedure
on UXO clearance will be continued and this requirement has been included in the
ESMF.

 Potential impacts due to civil works. Little if any adverse impacts have been observed
so far on local environment and local people due to the activities implemented under the
original project. Civil works under Component 1 (Local Development and Provincial
Capacity Building) have been limited to construction of village water supply
(groundwater wells) and rehabilitation of kum ban (cluster of villages) roads, village
schools, health care centers, with negligible social and environmental impacts.
Investment under Component 2 (Support for Irrigation Development in Lower Xe Bang
Fai River) have focused on the rehabilitation of existing Tha Thot irrigation scheme and
the rehabilitation of five irrigation pumps and canals along lower Xe Bang Fai River, of
which the latter was mainly conducted by farmers and water user groups (WUGs). No
major environmental and social impacts have been observed, and mitigation measures
have been applied as per project safeguard instruments. Given similar nature of the
activities to be carried out under the proposed AF, the environmental and social impacts
would also be minor, and can be effectively addressed under the existing mitigation
measures. However, to facilitate effective implementation of mitigation measures for
small civil works, additional criteria and technical guidelines on safeguard measures for
small civil works, including a standard environmental code of practice, have been
developed under the ESMF.

  Potential increase in chemical uses: Similar to the original project, increasing use of
chemical fertilizer and pesticides could be an issue and the potential negative impacts
will be mitigated through proper training on various options to reduce the use of chemical
fertilizer and pesticides and increasing knowledge on Government/MAF regulations on
the control of pesticides as well as potential health and environmental impacts in line
with the integrated pest management principles and practical experience that have been
applied to other WB funding projects (especially PRF project). Under the original
project, trainings on integrated pest management options were carried out as part of the
training on organic rice cultivation and key activities include demonstration activity for
selected villages on System of Rice Intensification (SRI) and educational training on
organic farming. More on-the-job training and pilot activities related to the promotion of
non-chemical fertilizers and the limited use of pesticides will be continued for agriculture
activity under Component 2 during AF. Specific training plan and information on
government regulations have been included in the simplified PMP.

  Land Acquisition and Resettlement: No major land acquisition and/or adverse social
impacts have been observed so far for the original project, although its Component 2-1
(Rehabilitation of Tha Thot Irrigation Schemes) would affect eight (8) households whose
land (about 100-500 square meters for each household) will be partially acquired for the
reconstruction of the secondary canal. No physical relocation will be necessary. A
socio-economic survey on the affected households was conducted and the detailed
inventory of impacts developed in April 2011, which found that none of the affected
households would lose more than 10 percent of their lands. Based on these surveys, an
abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan has been prepared and submitted to the Bank. An
abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan to address this impact on eight households has
been developed, which the Bank task team reviewed and considered is in line with the
Bank OP 4.12. Compensation will be fully paid to the affected households before actual
civil works start.

  Given that most of the investments to be carried out under AF would be the construction
of small-scale infrastructure and/or rehabilitation of existing infrastructure, these
investments would not require major land acquisition or involuntary resettlement. Since
specific investment locations and detailed information on the land acquisition would be
identified during implementation, the CRPF, which was prepared for the original project,
has been updated as a standalone document and it will be applied to all investment under
the AF. Where affected households agree to donate assets, efforts would be made to
confirm that it is done on a voluntary basis, that the impacts are minor and that no
adverse effect would result on the livelihood. Proper records would also be kept that
document the evidence of free, prior and informed consent by the affected people to
voluntarily donating private assets and which confirm the absence of adverse impact on
livelihood. The safeguard manual will be updated in line with the CRPF and applied to
all activities under AF.

 Ethnic Minority: To date, there are no ethnic minority groups affected by the
implementation of all activities under the original project. The population of
Khammouane province is ethnically heterogeneous, with almost 40 percent of the total
population being made up of ethnic minorities. For the most part, ethnic minority
populations inhabit the upland and eastern part of the province whilst the majority Lao
Tai population is generally located in the Mekong valley. In general, ethnic minorities
involved in the project are expected to benefit from investment activities. The project
Ethnic Groups Policy Framework (EGPF) has been updated in line with the Bank#s OP
4.10, as a standalone document, and it will be applied to all project activities. The EGPF
sets out processes and procedures to ensure that free, prior and informed consultations
will be conducted if project activities are implemented where ethnic groups are present,
and that their broad community support to the investments would be ascertained.
Measures to ensure so any negative impacts that may occur to ethnic minority households
are adequately addressed are also included in the EGPF. Consultations will be conducted
in the Lao language, to be translated by the village representatives of the Lao Front for
National Construction (LFNC) who are themselves ethnic minorities and self-selected by
ethnic villagers. In the event that ethnic villagers prefer consultations done in their
languages, the project would work with the NFNC regional offices to mobilize
facilitators of village consultations. Ethnic minority groups in the project area do not
have their own written languages and they use Lao instead. IEC materials applied by the
project include various visual presentations including drawings and pictures to help the
ethnic villagers understand the messages. Ethnic Minority Development Plans will be
prepared for all subprojects that will include consultation processes conducted, opinions
expressed by participating ethnic minorities and measures that will be taken to ensure so
ethnic villagers would receive project benefits in a culturally appropriate manner and
address negative impacts that may arise due to the implementation of the project. Where
a broad community support is not established, project activities will not be conducted.
The EMDP will be disclosed locally.

 Transparency and Participatory Planning: Consultation with stakeholders and enhancing
their capacity building will be the key elements of AF implementation since KDP has
been designed to apply a community-driven and participatory assessment approach
during the planning and implementation stages. To enhance the effectiveness of
investments and the transparency of decision making processes, a feedback mechanism
has been adopted from the recently approved Lao Poverty Reduction Fund II (PRFII) and
incorporated into ESMF. It will be applied to subproject planning and implementation
processes, especially those for the PDF, DDF, and Agriculture and Livelihood Grant
(ALG). It is expected that this mechanism would also provide opportunities to promote
active participation of women and other disadvantage groups in project implementation
and monitoring, which in turn could contribute to improved governance, transparency
and accountability.

 The Lao Front for National Construction (LFNC) and Lao Women#s Union (LWU),
government-mass organizations, are playing increasingly important roles in mobilizing
and facilitating ethnic groups and women to participate in the whole project cycle. The
main objective of LFNC is to advocate and protect the interest of ethnic groups in the
country and they have representatives in all villages. Their village representatives are
usually self selected by ethnic villagers themselves. They are often ethnic or spiritual
leaders who are respected by the ethnic communities at large and can speak both the
ethnic language and Lao fluently. Under the KDP additional financing as well as other
Bank-financed projects, the existing village mediation committees, in which the
representatives of LFNC already played an important roles, would be strengthened into
the Village Feedback and Resolution Committee (VFRC). The village representatives of
the LFNC would chair the VFRC, and receive training from the project, so they are able
to better handle possible complaints ethnic groups may have. They would also play an
important role during the consultations and participatory rapid assessment by serving as
the translator, explaining and clarifying project concepts and activities to ethnic villagers
and conveying their voices to the project. In addition to the strengthened complaint
handling mechanisms, ethnic villagers with complaints will also be able to approach the
project component managers directly and raise concerns, which will be recorded and
addressed accordingly.

  International Waterways. The irrigation activities proposed under AF, including
rehabilitation of existing small pump irrigation schemes, and support for downstream
irrigation, would occur in the Xe Bang Fai river basin, a tributary of the Mekong River,
which is an international waterway for the purpose of OP. 7.50 (International
Waterways). The Government of Lao PDR is a member of the Mekong River
Commission (MRC). Under the MRC procedures, the proposed investments are not
considered to be significant; hence, they do not require notification of other MRC
member countries (Thailand, Cambodia, and Vietnam) through the MRC. Furthermore,
the Government of Lao PDR does not have any arrangement with China and Myanmar
for notification of the proposed investment. However, in compliance with OP7.50,
notification of Riparian countries is required and consistent with this policy, the
Government of Lao PDR, has asked the World Bank to notify on its behalf, the riparian
countries (China, Myanmar, Thailand, Cambodia and Vietnam) Therefore, on behalf of
the Government of Lao September 13, 2011, the Bank notified these countries on the
proposed activities, and on the impacts on water quality and quantity. None of these
countries have yet responded to the notification, either positively or negatively.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The proposed AF will not create any potential indirect or long term negative impacts as it
will only support financing of small-scale infrastructure mostly at district and community
levels.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Not applicable.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Similar to the original project, AF will be implemented by the Khammouane Province,
which has assigned the provincial Department of Planning and Investment (DPI) to be
responsible for overall project implementation, whereas the DPI has engaged the
Department of Irrigation, the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, and the Provincial
Agriculture and Forestry Office (PAFO) as implementing agency for Components 2 and
3 respectively.

 Through the implementation of the original project, the province has learned an
essential safeguards management to avoid and mitigate the potential negative impacts of
investment activities in line with the Bank#s safeguards policies and the Government
regulations. It was also found that the province has managed safeguards aspects in a
satisfactory manner. During the original project, two safeguard trainings on the
application of KDP safeguard instruments were conducted for the project staff
(consultants and officials at provincial and district levels) of Components 1 and 2, and
specific trainings on System of Rice Intensification (SRI), promoting organic rice
farming was carried out through demonstration activities for selected villages.

 The proposed AF would aim at further strengthening capacity of the province to plan
and implement the safeguard measures. Under the Proposed AF, training will be
provided to project staff to strengthen their knowledge and understanding of key
environmental and social issues and the application of safeguard instruments. For this
purpose, a budget of $30,000 has been allocated, particularly targeted at PAFO, which is
a new implementing agency. The environmental and social training will be designed to
ensure that: (a) the proposed project activities would be properly screened through the
ESMF; (b) the standard environment code of practices and specific safeguard
requirements are reflected in the Project Operations Manual and/or contract documents as
appropriate, (c) supervision and monitoring of the contractor performance is adequately
conducted; and (d) close consultation with local agencies and concerned communities
would be carried out throughout the implementation. A safeguard focal point will be
formally assigned for each component to be responsible for supervision and monitoring
of safeguard issues, including proper record keeping and reporting.

  On-the-job training and pilot activities related to the promotion of non-chemical
fertilizer and the limited use of pesticides will be continued under Component 2 while as
for Components 1 and 3, training and capacity building for local communities on
safeguard issues will be conducted through planning processes. TORs for the safeguard
training as well as other training activities will be prepared in consultation with the Bank.

 During the preparation of AF and with the assistance from international consultants, the
safeguards instruments, including an ESMF, a RPF, an IPPF, and a PMP, have been
updated based on the implementation experience of the original project as well as other
WB-funded projects with similar nature. These documents were translated into the local
language and disclosed locally. They will be disseminated and discussed with local
agencies and communities and the safeguard manual will be updated accordingly. These
documents were also sent to the World Bank for review and disclosure and they were
also submitted to the Institute of Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (IESIA)
of the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment (MoNRE) for an internal review
and approval.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The potentially affected population (positively and negatively) are those living in the
districts and villages where the activities will be carried out. Project would adopt the
following mechanisms for ensuring a free, prior, and informed consultation process to
ensure the full participation in decision making and implementation of the project, as
summarized below.

  For Component 1, DPI will cause the respective districts to undertake the participatory
planning and screening process in which the potential negative impacts of the proposed
investment activities will be identified and the appropriate mitigation measures will be
incorporated in the design and implementation of investments. The feedback mechanism
adopted from the on-going World Bank financed PRFII has been incorporated into the
planning process and detailed procedures will be provided in the safeguard manual.
Information on the safeguard policies, including feedback mechanism, and the specific
issues and mitigation measures, will be discussed and the agreement with the affected
population (if any) will be timely and appropriately disclosed in line with the agreed
procedures which will be updated in the safeguard manual. The results will be included
in the project progress report.

 For Component 2 and 3, DOI and PAFO will ensure that, through a free, prior and
informed consultation process that broad community support is documented and, (a) all
district and villages (particularly new additional villages to be covered by the AF) are
properly and timely consulted on the objective, design and the implementation
plan/schedule of the Project, including information on the potential negative impacts,
proposed mitigation measures, and the safeguard policies; (b) an opportunity is given to
affected people to express their concerns on the potential impacts; (c) mitigation
measures during construction will be included the contract documents; and (d) key
safeguard information are effectively disclosed, via public posting or by community
meetings, especially on the grievance and/or feedback procedure.

 Outcomes of the all the key stakeholder consultation would be documented and
recorded in the project office for possible reference. Procedures for feedback and
mediation mechanism has also been streamlined and incorporated in the ESMF, CRPF,
EGPF and PMP. These documents both in English and Lao languages have been
disclosed at DPI, PAFO, and the districts and MAF offices in Vientiane, and in the World
Bank#s Infoshop.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 10/27/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             10/31/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              10/28/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 10/27/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             10/31/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              10/28/2011
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 10/27/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             10/31/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              10/28/2011
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 10/27/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             10/31/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              10/28/2011
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                     Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                    Yes
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or   Yes
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                  Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed   N/A
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                         Yes
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification           N/A
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                        N/A
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       No
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       No
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the          Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the            Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                 Name                     Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Toru Konishi                             10/31/2011
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Viengkeo Phetnavongxay                   10/31/2011
Social Development Specialist       Mr Sybounheung Phandanouvong                10/31/2011
Additional Environmental and/or     Mr Satoshi Ishihara                         10/31/2011
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Julia M. Fraser                          11/15/2011
  Comments:
