                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 03/29/2013                                   Report No.: AC6894
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P101750                  Original Project Name: Lao PDR Customs
                                              and Trade Facilitation Project
Country: Lao People's Democratic              Project ID: P144992
Republic
Project Name: Lao PDR Customs and Trade Facilitation Project - Additional Financing
Task Team Leader: Richard James Lowden Record
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 12, 2013 Estimated Board Date: May 28, 2013
Managing Unit: EASPT                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Central government administration (100%)
Theme: Trade facilitation and market access (50%);Administrative and civil service
reform (25%);Other accountability/anti-corruption (25%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):              6.5
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                           0.50
                                                                      0.50
Environmental Category: C - Not Required
Simplified Processing                        Simple []          Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                 Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The objective of the Project is to facilitate trade by improving the efficiency and
effectiveness of customs administration and simplifying customs procedures to eliminate
duplication and redundancy, reduce transactions costs and time to clear goods, and
increase transparency and accountability.

3. Project Description
The proposed Additional Financing (AF) operation will focus on providing further
support in three key areas all designed to ensure full and effective implementation of the
new Customs Law and its translation into modern and business friendly systems and
procedures. The AF will continue to consist of two components, but with expanded scope
to reflect enhanced ambition and progress achieved to date. Component A will focus on
automation support (including implementation of the ASYCUDA World) and will
include three separate but closely interrelated subcomponents. Component B will focus
on organizational development (including customs modernization support) and will
include five subcomponents, four of which are focused on furthering the customs reform
agenda and one covering project management.

 Component A: Automation Support (including Implementation of ASYCUDA World).
The effective deployment of ICT has become a major component of customs reform and
modernization throughout the world and is critically important in supporting the
adoptionof international standards and meeting regional integration commitments. While
the ASYCUDA World system has been successfully implemented, the LCD's capacity to
effectively manage and maintain the system as well as its overall ICT infrastructure and
network needsto be further strengthened. Enhancing in-house capabilities will also
contribute to supporting the design, development and integration of complementary ICT
investments, such as those associated with the proposed Lao PDR National Single
Window system. Component A is therefore focused on progressively shifting
responsibility for the support and maintenance of the ASYCUDA system from the
currentcontractor (UNCTAD) to LCD's own personnel and on building a strong in-house
capacity to effectively manage current and future ICT systems and related infrastructure.

 Component B: Organizational Development (including Customs Modernization
Support). This component is designed to consolidate and further extend the
improvements achieved in customs work practices, procedures and organization that have
progressively been implemented by the LCD over the past five years. It is also designed
to finance a series of key activities that were initially planned to be conducted in the final
year of the CTFP but were deferred due to a reallocation of priorities toward additional
support for ASYCUDA and a funding shortfall resulting from depreciation of the value
of SDRs. Subcomponents willfinance the establishment of a comprehensive professional
development capability, assistance to develop the necessary enabling regulations and
working practices to ensure full implementation of the new Customs Law, further support
for the development of an in-house strategic planning and change management capacity,
and intensive support for the adoption of a suite of modern approaches to customs
administration in keeping with internationally agreed standards. A sub-component will
also finance the ongoing operation of the high quality project management infrastructure
established under the CTFP.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Not applicable.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   ()
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                    X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                          X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                    X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The Project does not have any safeguard issues since it will only finance consulting
services, goods, training and workshops. The project will not finance any civil works or
any other activities that will have environmental implications. Given the nature of the
project it also has no impact on social safeguards such as Involuntary Resettlement and
Indigenous Peoples.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
None foreseen.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Not applicable.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Not applicable.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Not applicable.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
 Date of receipt by the Bank
 Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
Not applicable.


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       N/A
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       N/A
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    N/A
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   N/A
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           N/A
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             N/A
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                            Name               Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Richard James Lowden Record   03/14/2013
Environmental Specialist:
Social Development Specialist
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Mathew A. Verghis             03/06/2013
  Comments:
